Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F LATTER , FASTER : SCALING MOMENTUM FOR OPTI -
MAL SPEEDUP OF SGD

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Commonly used optimization algorithms often show a trade-off between good
         generalization and fast training times. For instance, stochastic gradient descent
         (SGD) tends to have good generalization; however, adaptive gradient methods
         have faster training times. Momentum can accelerate training with SGD, but so
         far there has been no principled way to select the momentum hyperparameter.
         Here we study training dynamics arising from the interplay between SGD with
         label noise and momentum in the training of overparametrized neural networks.
         We find that scaling the momentum hyperparameter 1 − β with the learning rate
         to the power of 2/3 maximally accelerates training, without sacrificing general-
         ization. To analytically derive this result we develop an architecture-independent
         framework, where the main assumption is the existence of a degenerate manifold
         of global minimizers, as is natural in overparametrized models. Training dynam-
         ics display the emergence of two characteristic timescales that are well-separated
         for generic values of the hyperparameters. The maximum acceleration of training
         is reached when these two timescales meet, which in turn determines the scaling
         limit we propose. Our experiments in matrix-sensing, a 6-layer MLP on Fash-
         ionMNIST and ResNet-18 on CIFAR10 validate this scaling for the time to con-
         vergence, and additionally for the momentum hyperparameter which maximizes
         generalization.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The modern paradigm for optimization of deep neural networks has engineers working with vastly
overparametrized models and training to near perfect accuracy (Zhang et al., 2017). In this setting,
a model will typically have not just isolated minima in parameter space, but a continuous set of
minimizers, not all of which generalize well. Liu et al. (2020) demonstrate that depending on pa-
rameter initialization and hyperparameters, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is capable of finding
minima with wildly different test accuracies. Thus, the power of a particular optimization method
lies in its ability to select a minimum that generalizes amongst this vast set. In other words, good
generalization relies on the implicit bias or regularization of an optimization algorithm.
Training deep neural networks with SGD is known to favor generalization, with a preference for
flatter minima that ensure better generalization (Keskar et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018; Xie et al.,
2020; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). Recent studies, like Blanc et al. (2020) and Li et al.
(2022), showed rigorously that SGD with algorithmic label noise targets flatter minima, but this
process is slow compared to the initial convergence.
With the recent explosion in size of both models and datasets, training time has become an impor-
tant consideration in addition to asymptotic generalization error. In this context, adaptive gradient
methods such as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) are unilaterally preferred over variants of SGD, even
though they often yield worse generalization errors in practical settings (Keskar & Socher, 2017;
Wilson et al., 2017), though extensive hyperparameter tuning (Choi et al., 2019) or scheduling (Xie
et al., 2022) can potentially obviate this problem.
These two constraints motivate a careful analysis of how momentum accelerates SGD. Classic work
on acceleration methods, which we refer to generally as momentum, have found a provable benefit
in the deterministic setting, where gradient updates have no error. However, rigorous guarantees


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


have been harder to find in the stochastic setting, and remain limited by strict conditions on the
noise (Polyak, 1987; Kidambi et al., 2018) or model class and dataset structure Lee et al. (2022).
In this work, we show that there exists a scaling limit for SGD with momentum (SGDM) which
provably increases the rate of convergence.
Notation. In what follows, we denote by C n , for n = 0, 1, . . . the set of functions with con-
tinuous nth derivatives. For any function f , ∂f [u] and ∂ 2 f [u, v] will denote directional first and
second derivatives along directions defined by vectors u, v ∈ RD . We may occasionally also write
           PD
∂ 2 f [Σ] = i,j=1 ∂ 2 f [ei , ej ]Σij . Given a submanifold Γ ⊂ RD and w ∈ Γ, we denote by Tw Γ the
tangent space to Γ in w, and by PL (w) the projector onto Tw Γ (we will often omit the dependence
on w and simply write PL ), and PT = Id − PL . Given a matrix H ∈ RD × RD , we will denote by
H > the transpose, and H † the pseudoinverse of H. We will write the expectation of a quantity O
over noise as hOi.

1.1   Q UALITATIVE E XPLANATION FOR O PTIMAL M OMENTUM -BASED S PEEDUP

Deep overparametrized neural networks typically posses a manifold of parametrizations with zero
training error. Because the gradients of the loss function vanish along this manifold, the dynamics
of the weights is completely frozen under gradient descent. However, as appreciated by Wei &
Schwab (2019) and Blanc et al. (2020), noise can generate an average drift of the weights along
the manifold. In particular, SGD noise can drive the weights to a lower-curvature region which,
heuristically, explains the good generalization properties of SGD. Separately, it is well-known that
adding momentum typically leads to acceleration in training Sutskever et al. (2013). Below, we will
see that there is a nontrivial interplay between the drift induced by noise and momentum, and find
that acceleration along the zero-loss manifold is maximized by a particular hyperparameter choice
in the limit of small learning rate. In this section, through heuristic arguments, we present the main
intuition leading to this prediction.
We use the following formulation to model momentum SGD with label noise:
                                πk+1 = βπk − ∇L(wk ) +  σ(wk )ξk
                                                                                                      (1)
                                wk+1 = wk + ηπk+1 ,
where η is the learning rate, β is the (heavy-ball) momentum hyperparameter (as introduced by
Polyak (1964)), w ∈ RD denotes the weights and π ∈ RD denotes momentum (also called the
auxiliary variable). L : RD → R is the training loss, and σ : RD → RD×r is the noise function,
whose dependence on the weights allows to model the gradient noise due to SGD and label noise.
Specifically this admits modeling phenomena such as automatic variance reduction (Liu & Belkin,
2020), and expected smoothness, satisfying only very general assumptions such as those developed
by Khaled & Richtárik (2020). Finally, ξk ∈ Rr is sampled i.i.d. at every timestep k from a
distribution with zero mean and unit variance, and   > 0.
We now give a qualitative explanation for the origin of our proposed scaling limit. Let us assume
that the model has been trained for a sufficient number of epochs so that the weights wk lie in the
vicinity of the zero-loss manifold. Even though gradients are very small near this manifold, the
noise induces transverse fluctuations that drive a net longitudinal drift along the manifold. This is
represented in a diagram in Fig. 2. Importantly the drift leads towards flatter points of the manifold.
This attribute is beneficial, as flatter minima are known to typically possess better generalization
Keskar et al. (2017); Dziugaite & Roy (2017); Jiang et al. (2019). How efficient is this noise-
induced drift? Intuitively, its speed is controlled by the size of fluctuations that are transverse to the
zero-loss valley: the smaller the fluctuations, the slower the drift. The size of these fluctuations is
generally relatively small as it is controlled by noise and learning rate, resulting in a slow drift and
generalization. Our message is that momentum can significantly accelerate this process. Indeed,
as β → 1, the past gradients are remembered for a longer time in the training dynamics, making
the average direction of the gradient more persistent and, in turn, has the effect of increasing the
size of transverse fluctuations. Additionally because momentum averages gradients, it will have
a stronger effect on the longitudinal component, whose direction is constant in time, compared to
the transverse component whose direction changes with time. These mechanisms accelerate drift
along the manifold. On the other hand, as we increase β, again due to the long-time memory
of the gradients, the decay of the model weights towards the zero-loss manifold is progressively


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


slower. This may slow down the overall convergence for β very near 1 and thus the time it takes
to find a generalizing minimum. Putting together these considerations, we expect a non-monotonic
dependence on β of the time it takes to generalize. We will show that the optimal choice of β has a
simple dependence on the learning rate.
This is particularly useful in the late stage of training, where the learning rate is often taken to
decrease but β is kept fixed. Our proposal is thus that β should instead be tied to the learning rate
schedule.

1.2   H EURISTIC D ERIVATION OF THE S CALING L AW

We will now present a heuristic description of the drift dynamics that is induced by the noise along
a manifold of minimizers Γ = {w : L(w) = 0} ⊆ RD , in the limit   → 0. In practice, this limit
corresponds to choosing small strength of label noise and large minibatch size, so that weights re-
main close enough to the zero-loss landscape. Let us assume that the weights at initial time w0 are
already close to Γ, and π0 = 0 (note that we assume these initial conditions for simplicity: our main
result Theorem 3.4 applies upon the more general Assumption 3.2). Because of this condition, the
gradients of L at w0 are very small, and so only fluctuations transverse to the manifold will generate
systematic drifts. Denoting by δwk = w0 − wk the displacement of the weights after k timesteps, let
us Taylor expand the first equation in (1) to get πk+1 = βπk − ∇2 L(w0 )[δwk ] +  σ(w0 )ξk . By con-
struction, the Hessian ∇2 L(w0 ) vanishes along the directions tangent to Γ, while in the transverse di-
rection we have an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process. The number of time steps it takes to this pro-
cess to relax to the stationary state, i.e. the inverse of the smallest nonzero eigenvalue of the damping
term, is τ1 = Θ (1/(1 − β)) as β → 1, which can be anticipated from the first equation in (1) since
πk+1 − πk ∼ −(1 − β)πk . After this time, the variance of this linearized OU process becomes time-
independent, and can be estimated to be (see Appendix H): h(δwkT )> δwkT i = Θ  2 η/(1 − β) .


Now, the displacements in the longitudinal directions, δwkL , are driven by the third order term in the
Taylor expansion of L(w0 + δwk ), i.e. ∂ 2 (∇L)[δwk , δwk ]. Taking the noise average, the tangential
gradient of the loss is then PL h∇L(wj )i = ∂ 2 (PL ∇L)[h(δwj )> δwj i] = Θ( 2 η/(1 − β)), where
PL is the projector onto the tangent space to Γ. The expectation value of momentum, upon applying
                                                           Pk
the longitudinal projector, is then PL hπk+1 i = −PL j=0 β k−j h∇L(wj )i. Assuming the gradient
                                                                                           Pk
of the loss to be approximately constant, we then find PL hπk+1 i = Θ( 2 η/(1 − β)) j=0 β k−j =
Θ( 2 η/(1 − β)2 ). The variance of the transverse displacements therefore activates longitudinal
motion. Using the second equation in (1), we see that PL (hδwk+1 i − hδwk i) = ηPL h πk+1 i. De-
fine τ2 to be the number of time steps it takes so that the displacement of wk along Γ becomes
a finite number as we take   → 0 first, and η → 0 afterward. From the above considerations,
PL (hδwτ2 i − hδw0 i) = τ2 Θ( 2 η 2 /(1 − β)2 ) = C, where C is a finite constant. We then find that
τ2 = Θ (1 − β)2 / 2 η 2 . For a rigorous definition of τ2 , see Appendix B.
The key observation now is that, near the zero-loss valley, the convergence time is controlled by
the largest timescale among τ1 and τ2 . Therefore, the optimal speedup of training is achieved when
these two timescales intersect τ1 = τ2 , which happens for 1 − β = Cη 2/3 , for some constant C that
is independent of the learning rate. Motivated by this relationship, we will occasionally parameterize
β as
                                           β = 1 − Cη γ ,                                          (2)
and study the dependence of τ1 and τ2 as a function of γ to derive theoretically and confirm empiri-
cally our proposed scaling.

1.3   L IMIT D RIFT-D IFFUSION

We now describe the rationale for obtaining the limiting drift-diffusion on the zero-loss manifold, for
a process of the form (1) which foreshadows the rigorous results presented in Sec. 3. As discussed
above, the motion along the manifold is slow, as it takes Θ( −2 ) time steps to have a finite amount of
longitudinal drift. We want to extract this slow longitudinal sector of the dynamics by projecting out
the fast-moving components of the weights. If the noiseless optimization ( 2 = 0) is stable, eq. (1)
will map a generic pair (π, w), as k → ∞, to (0, w∞ ), where w∞ ∈ Γ. Define Φ : RD×D → RD
to be this mapping, i.e. Φ(π, w) = w∞ . As we now show, when   > 0, Φ can be used precisely
to project onto the slow, noise-induced longitudinal dynamics. Let us collectively denote xk =

                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(πk , wk ) and write eq. (1) as xk+1 = xk + F (xk ) +  σ̃(xk )ξk . We can perform a Taylor expansion
in   to obtain
                                                        1
             Φ(xk+1 ) − Φ(xk ) =∂Φ(xk )[ σ̃(xk )ξk ] + ∂ 2 Φ(xk )[ σ̃(xk )ξk ,  σ̃(xk )ξk ] .
                                                        2
Here we neglected the contributions coming from F : ∂Φ(xk )[F (xk )]+ 21 ∂ 2 Φ(xk )[F (xk ), F (xk )]+
∂ 2 Φ(xk )[F (xk ),  σ̃(xk )ξk ]. The first two terms can be shown to vanish by exploiting the Taylor
expansion of the relation Φ(x + F (x)) − Φ(x) = 0. The third term averages to zero and is Θ( 2 ),
since gradients are small near the valley, F = Θ( ), and thus this term can be neglected. Denoting
Y (t =  2 k) = Φ(xk ), the limit dynamics as   → 0 is then well-approximated by the continuous
time equation
                                                      1
                         dY = ∂Φ(Y )[σ̃(Y )dW ] + ∂ 2 Φ(Y )[σ̃(Y )σ̃(Y )> ]dt ,                     (3)
                                                      2
where we interpreted the time increment dt =  2 , and introduced a rescaled noise satisfying
hdW 2 i = dt. In the arguments of the functions on the right-hand side, we replaced xk with Y (t) as
intuitively, for xk very close to Γ, i.e. d(xk , Γ) → 0 for any k > 0 as   → 0, we have Φ(xk ) ≈ xk .
Also, we assumed that dW 2 = dt up to corrections that are subleading in dt. Note that until here we
have not taken a small learning rate limit. The learning rate can be finite, as far as the map Φ(π, x)
exists. The small noise limit is sufficient to allow a continuous-time description of the limit dynam-
ics, this is because the noise-induced drift-diffusion along the valley requires Θ( −2 ) timesteps to
lead to appreciable longitudinal displacements.
A similar approach to what we just described was used in Li et al. (2022), although in our case
the limit drift-diffusion is obtained at small noise, rather than at small learning rate. The reason
for this choice is that, since we scale 1 − β as a positive power of η, the deterministic part of
eq. (1) becomes degenerate as we take η → 0, in which case it would not be possible to apply
the mathematical framework of Katzenberger (1991) on which our results below rely. To further
simplify our analysis, particularly the statement of Theorem 3.4, we will further take η → 0 after
taking   → 0, and retain only leading order contributions in η. While the formalism of Katzenberger
(1991) provides an elegant framework to obtain the limit-drift-diffusion at small noise   → 0, it
does not provide a rigorous estimate of the deviation from this  √ scaling law at finite noise. The
deviation will be caused by higher-order contributions in   (or dt) in the Taylor expansion in eq.
(3). Additionally, in a given training task, the average weights may not exactly lie on the zero-
loss manifold, which will also induce a correction to the proposed scaling. Addressing these issues
requires developing a framework beyond that of Katzenberger (1991), which is outside the scope
of this paper. Nevertheless, in Sec. 4 we observe strong empirical signature of the scaling law
in realistic settings, which gives clear evidence that the scaling law we found is robust to these
deviations.
The main contributions of this paper are:

      1. We develop a general formalism to study SGD with (heavy-ball) momentum in Sec. 3,
         extending the framework of Li et al. (2022) to study convergence rates and generalization
         with momentum.
      2. We find a novel scaling regime of the momentum hyperparameter 1 − β ∼ η γ , and demon-
         strate a qualitative change in the noise-induced training dynamics as γ is varied.
      3. We identify a special scaling limit, 1 − β ∼ η 2/3 , where training achieves a maximal
         speedup at fixed learning rate η.
      4. In Sec. 4, we demonstrate the relevance of our theory with experiments on toy models
         (2-layer neural networks, and matrix sensing) as well as realistic models and datasets (deep
         MLP on FashionMNIST, and ResNet-18 on CIFAR10).

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Loss Landscape in Overparametrized Networks The geometry of the loss landscape is very
hard to understand for real-world models. Choromanska et al. (2015) conjectured, based on em-
pirical observations and on an idealized model, that most local minima have similar loss function
values. Subsequent literature has shown in wider generality the existence of a manifold connecting


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


degenerate minima of the loss function, particularly in overparametrized models. This was sup-
ported by work on mode connectivity (Freeman & Bruna, 2017; Garipov et al., 2018; Draxler et al.,
2018; Kuditipudi et al., 2019), as well as on empirical observations that the loss Hessian possesses a
large set of (nearly) vanishing eigenvalues (Sagun et al., 2016; 2017). In particular, Nguyen (2019)
showed that for overparametrized networks with piecewise linear activations, all global minima are
connected within a unique valley.

The Implicit Regularization of SGD Wei & Schwab (2019), assuming the existence of a zero-
loss valley, observed that SGD noise leads to a decrease in the trace of the Hessian. Blanc et al.
(2020) demonstrated that SGD with label noise in the overparametrized regime induces a regularized
loss that accounts for the decrease in the trace of the Hessian. Damian et al. (2021) extend this
analysis to finite learning rate. HaoChen et al. (2021) study the effect of non-isotropic label noise
in SGD and find a theoretical advantage in a quadratic overparametrized model. Wu et al. (2022)
show that only minima with small enough Hessians (in Frobenius norm) are stable under SGD. The
specific regularization induced by SGD was found in quadratic models (Pillaud-Vivien et al., 2022),
2-layer Relu networks (Blanc et al., 2020), linear models (Li et al., 2022), diagonal networks (Pesme
et al., 2021). Additionally, Kunin et al. (2021) and Xie et al. (2021) studied the diffusive dynamics
induced by SGD both empirically and in a simple theoretical model.

Momentum in SGD and Adaptive Algorithms Popular implementations of momentum include
Nesterov (Nesterov, 1983) and Heavy Ball (HB) or Polyak (Polyak, 1964). We focus on the latter
in this paper, which we refer to simply as momentum. Momentum provably improves convergence
time in the deterministic setting. Less is known rigorously when stochastic gradient updates are
used. Indeed, Polyak (1987) suggests the benefits of acceleration with momentum disappear with
stochastic optimization unless certain conditions are placed on the properties of the noise. See
also (Jain et al., 2018; Kidambi et al., 2018) for more discussion and background on this issue.
Nevertheless, in practice it is widely appreciated that momentum is important for convergence and
generalization (Sutskever et al., 2013), and widely used in modern adaptive gradient algorithms
Kingma & Ba (2015). Some limited results have been obtained showing speedup in the mean-field
approximation (Mannelli & Urbani, 2021) and linear regression Jain et al. (2018). Modifications to
Nesterov momentum to make it more amenable to stochasticity (Liu & Belkin, 2020; Allen-Zhu,
2017), and near saddle points (Xie et al., 2022) have also been considered.

3     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
3.1   G ENERAL SETUP

Following the outline presented in Sec. 1.3, in this and the following section we will rigorously
derive the limiting drift-diffusion equation for the weights on the zero-loss manifold Γ, and extract
the timescale τ2 associated to this noise-induced motion. In Sec. 3.3 we will then compare τ2 to the
timescale τ1 associated to the noiseless dynamics and evaluate the optimal scaling of β discussed
in Sec. 1.1. We will use Eq. (1) to model momentum SGD. As illustrated in Sec. 1.1, the drift is
controlled by the second moment of fluctuations, and we thus expect the drift timescale to be Θ( 2 ).
We will then rescale time k = t/ 2 , so that the motion in the units of t is O(1) as   → 0.
Assumption 3.1. The loss function L : RD → R is a C 3 function whose first 3 derivatives are
locally Lipschitz, σ is continuous, and Γ = {w ∈ RD : L(w) = 0} is a C 2 -submanifold of RD of
dimension M , with 0 ≤ M ≤ D. Additionally, for w ∈ Γ, rank(∇2 L(w)) = D − M .
Assumption 3.2. There exists an open neighborhood U of {0} × Γ ⊆ RD × RD such that the
gradient descent starting in U converges to a point x = (π, w) ∈ {0} × Γ. More explicitly, for
x ∈ U , let ψ(x, 0) = x and ψ(x, k + 1) = ψ(x, k) + F (ψ(x, k)), i.e. ψ(x, k) is the k th iteration
of x + F (x). Then Φ(x) ≡ limk→∞ ψ(x, k) exists and is in Γ. As a consequence, Φ ∈ C 2 on U
(Falconer, 1983).

3.2   L IMITING DRIFT- DIFFUSION IN MOMENTUM SGD

In this section we shall obtain the explicit expression for the limiting drift-diffusion. The general
framework is based on Katzenberger (1991) (reviewed in Appendix C). Before stating the result, we
will need to introduce a few objects.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 3.3. For a symmetric matrix H ∈ RD × RD , and WH = {Σ ∈ RD × RD : Σ =
Σ> , HH † Σ = H † HΣ = σ}, we define the operator L̃H : WH → WH with L̃H S ≡ {H, S} +
1 −2 1−2γ
2C    η     [[S, H], H], with [S, H] = SH −HS. It can be shown that the operator L̃H is invertible
(see Lemma D.3).
Theorem 3.4 (Informal). Suppose the loss function L, the noise function σ, the manifold of mini-
mizers Γ and the neighborhood U satisfy assumptions (3.1) and (3.2), and that Xn (0) = X(0) ∈ U .
Set β = 1 − Cη γ . Then, as  n → 0, and subsequently taking η → 0, Yn (t) converges to Y (t), where
the latter satisfies the limiting drift-diffusion equation
      dY =( C1 η 1−γ + η)PL σdW − 2C1 2 η 2−2γ (∇2 L)† ∂ 2 (∇L)[ΣLL ]dt
                                                                                                      (4)
             − C12 η 2−2γ PL ∂ 2 (∇L)[(∇2 L)† ΣT L ]dt − 2C1 2 η 2−2γ PL ∂ 2 (∇L)[L̃−1
                                                                                    ∇2 L ΣT T ]dt ,

where Σ ≡ σσ > , ΣLL = PL ΣPL , ΣT L = PT ΣPL , ΣT T = PT ΣPT , and W (t) is a Wiener
process.

A rigorous version of this theorem is given in Sec. C (and the assumption X  (0) ∈ Γ is relaxed to
X  (0) ∈ U ). The first term in Eq. (4) induces diffusion in the longitudinal direction. The second
term is of geometrical nature, and is necessary to guarantee that Y (t) remains on Γ. The second line
describes the drift induced by the transverse fluctuations.
Eq. (4) resembles in form that found in Li et al. (2022), although there are two crucial differences.
First, time has been rescaled using the strength of the noise  , rather than the learning rate. The
different rescaling was necessary as the deterministic part of eq. (1) (i.e., the forcing term F in
Eq. (20)) depends non-homogeneously on η, and thus the theory of Katzenberger (1991) would
not be directly applied had we taken the small learning rate limit. Second, and more crucially, the
drift terms in Eq. (4) are proportional to η 2−2γ , which is a key ingredient leading to the change in
hierarchy of the timescales discussed in Sec. 1.1. One final difference, is that the last term involves
the operator L̃H instead of the Lyapunov operator. For γ < 21 , L̃H reduces to the Lyapunov operator
LH at leading order in η, with LH S ≡ {H, S}. For γ > 12 , however, we cannot neglect the
η-dependent term in L̃H (see discussion at the end of Appendix D).
Corollary 3.5. In the case of label noise, i.e. when, for w ∈ Γ, Σ = c∇2 L , for some constant
c > 0, Eq. (4) reduces to
                                           2 η 2−2γ
                                dY = −              PL ∇ Tr(c∇2 L)dt ,                                (5)
                                            4C 2
where we have rescaled time back to t = k, i.e. we performed t → t 2 .

3.3   S EPARATION OF TIMESCALES AND OPTIMAL MOMENTUM SCALING

The above results provide the estimate for the timescale τ2 of the drift along the zero-loss valley. As
discussed in Sec. 1.1, training along the zero-loss manifold Γ is maximally accelerated if this time
scale is equal to the timescale τ1 for relaxation of off-valley perturbations. As we take   → 0, this
relaxation is governed by the deterministic gradient descent dynamics, i.e. τ1 will be determined
by the nonzero eigenvalues of the Hessian as well as by the learning rate η and momentum β.
Therefore we expect τ1 = Θ( 0 ), as will be confirmed by the analysis below. Since we are working
in the regime of small noise, we will obtain the leading order expression of τ1 by focusing on the
noiseless   = 0 dynamics. Additionally, since we are interested in local relaxation, it will suffice to
look at the linearized dynamics around Γ.
Working in the extended phase space xk = (πk , wk ), and linearizing Eq. (1) around a fixed point
x∗ = (0, w∗ ), with w∗ ∈ Γ, the linearized update rule is δxk+1 = J(x∗ )δxk , where δxk = xk − x∗
and J(x∗ ) is the Jacobian evaluated at the fixed point (with the explicit form given in Eq. (131)).
Denote by q i the eigenvector and λi the corresponding eigenvalue of the Hessian.       We show in
                                                                  i
Appendix G that the Jacobian is diagonalized by the eigenvectors k± = µi± q i , q i with eigenvalues
                             1                   p
                       κi± =     1 + β − ηλi ± (1 + β − ηλi )2 − 4β ,                            (6)
                             2


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and µi± = βηκi± −1−ηλi . We proceed to study the decay rate of the different modes of the Jacobian
to draw conclusions about the characteristic timescales of fluctuations around the valley.
Longitudinal motion: On the valley, the Hessian will have a number of “zero modes” with λi = 1.
These lead to two distinct modes in the present setting with momentum, which we distinguish as
pure and mixed. The first pure longitudinal mode is an exact zero mode which has κi+ = 1 with
  i
k+   = (0, q i ), corresponding to translations of the parameters along the manifold, and keeping
π = 0 at its fixed point value. The second mode is a mixed longitudinal mode with κi− = β with
  i
k−  = (−(1 − β)/(2βη)q i , q i ). This mode has a component of π along the valley, which must
subsequently decay because the equilibrium is a single point π = 0. Therefore, this mode decays at
the characteristic rate β for π, gleaned directly from Eq. (1).
Transverse motion: When the w and π are perturbed along the transverse directions q i with positive
λi , the relaxation behavior exhibits a qualitative change depending on β. Using the parameterization
of β as in Theorem 3.4, β = 1−Cη γ , for small learning rate, the spectrum is purely real for γ < 1/2,
and comes in complex conjugate pairs for γ > 1/2. This leads to two distinct scaling behaviors for
the set of timescales. Defining a positive c1 ≤ min{λi |λi > 0}, we find: 1) For γ < 1/2, transverse
modes are purely decaying as (1 − Cη γ )k ≤ |δxTk | ≤ (1 − (c1 /C)η 1−γ )k , with the lower bound
set by the mixed longitudinal mode. For γ > 1/2, the transverse modes are oscillatory but with an
                                                     k/2
envelope that decays like |δxT,env
                               k     | ≈ (1 − Cη γ ) .
We leave the derivation of these results to Appendix (G).
Collecting these results, we can describe the hierarchy of timescales τ1 in the deterministic regime
as a function of γ (excluding the pure longitudinal zero mode and neglecting multiplicites):

                                    τ1−1     γ < 1/2      γ > 1/2
                                   Long.         ηγ          ηγ
                                               1−γ
                                   Transv.   η     , ηγ    η , ηγ
                                                            γ



These are illustrated schematically in Fig. 1(a), where the finite timescales are shown as a function
of γ. We compare these “equilibration” timescales τ1 , i.e. characteristic timescales associated with
relaxation back to the zero-loss manifold, with the timescale τ2 ∼ η 2(γ−1) associated with drift-
diffusion of the noise-driven motion along the zero-loss manifold Eq. (4). For small γ, the timescale
associated with the drift-diffusion along the valley is much faster than that associated with the re-
laxation of the dynamics toward steady state. Transverse and mixed longitudinal fluctuations relax
much faster than the motion along the valley, and produce an effective drift toward the minimizer
of the implicit regularizer. However, the timescales collide at γ = 2/3, suggesting a transition to
a qualitatively different transport above this value, where the transverse and the mixed longitudi-
nal dynamics, having a long timescale, will disrupt the longitudinal drift Eq. (4). This leads us to
propose γ = 23 as the optimal choice for SGD training. We consistently find evidence for such a
qualitative transition in our experiments below. In addition, we see that speedup of SGD with label
noise is in fact maximal at this value where the timescales meet.


4     E XPERIMENTAL VALIDATION

4.1   2- LAYER MLP WITH L INEAR AND N ON -L INEAR ACTIVATIONS

We first consider 2-layer linear models parametrized as f (x) = √1n U · σ(V x), where x ∈ R, and
U, V ∈ Rn are the trainable parameters, and σ is an activation function. We used linear, tanh and
ReLU activation acting on the first layer and the corresponding timescales are shown in Fig. 1(b,c,d).
The timescale power α is defined through the relation Tc = T0 η −α , where Tc is the number of time
steps it takes to the weights U, V to reach a small threshold distance from the widest minimum
(see App. A.1 for details), and T0 is an overall scale independent of η. The optimal scaling value,
corresponding to the minimum α, happens at γ = 32 , consistently with our predictions. Additionally,
we find that the optimal prefactor C defined in Eq. (2) is approximately 0.2 for all activations. We
obtained an analytical estimate of C for the linear activation case in App. E.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Timescale of training as a function of γ. a): theoretical prediction with blue line repre-
senting the timescale for equilibration while the black line shows the timescale of the drift along Γ.
The maximum of these two gives the overall timescale. In b), c), and d) we demonstrate this result
with the vector U V model with linear, tanh and Relu activations respectively.


4.2   MLP ON FASHION MNIST

We also demonstrate agreement with theory on another model-dataset pairing. In this case we train
a 6-layer fully connected MLP to classify images in FashionMNIST (full model details given in
Appendix A.4). As before, we train from an interpolating solution on the zero-loss manifold with
various values of the momentum hyperparameter at each learning rate and extract the optimal β∗ (η).
We estimate the exponent γ = 0.64 ± 0.05 which again agrees tightly with our theoretical expecta-
tion. These experiments show that a range of models support the specific valley structure in which
our analysis holds for realistic hyperparameters.

4.3   R ES N ET-18 ON CIFAR10

We now verify our predictions on larger scale experiments, which will demonstrate the robustness
of our analysis. We focus on ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016), specifically implemented by Liu (2021),
classifier trained on CIFAR10 Krizhevsky & Hinton (2009). We aim to extrapolate the theory by
showing optimal acceleration with our hyperparameter choice once training reaches an interpolating
solution. To this purpose, we initialize the network on the valley, obtained starting from a random
weight values and training the network using full batch gradient descent without label noise and
with a fixed value β = 0.9 until it reaches perfect training accuracy. With this initialization, we then
train with SGD and label noise for a fixed number of epochs multiple times for various values the
momentum hyperparameter β. Finally, we project the weights back onto the valley before recording
the final test accuracy. This last step can be viewed as noise annealing and allows us to compare the
performance of training the drift phase for the different values of β. From this procedure we extract
the optimal momentum parameter β∗ (η) that maximizes the best test accuracy during training as a
function of the learning rate, which we can then compare with the theoretical prediction. A diagram
of this procedure is shown in Fig. 2.
As shown in Fig. 2(b), 1 − β∗ follows the power law we predicted almost exactly with an exponent
γ = 0.66 ± .06. The optimal choice for speedup does not have to coincide with the optimal choice
for generalization. Strikingly, this optimal choice of scaling also leads to the best generalization in
a realistic setting! This can be easily interpreted if we assume that as the Hessian decreases more
the better the model generalizes better and by applying the fact that our scaling leads to the fastest
transport along the manifold towards a smaller Hessian. The second important point is the value


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Optimal scaling in various experiments. Top left: illustration of the training protocol
for the FashionMNIST and CIFAR10 experiments of Secs. 4.2 and 4.3. We first use noiseless
gradient descent (black) to reach the zero-loss manifold, then train with SGD label noise with various
(blue, red) values of η and β before finally projecting onto the valley (green) and measuring the test
accuracy. Top right and bottom left: scaling of the optimal momentum, β∗ , as a function of η on
CIFAR10 (FashionMNIST), giving exponents γ∗ = 0.64 ± 0.05 and γ∗ = 0.66 ± 0.06 respectively
(one standard deviation), which closely match the value predicted by theory γ = 32 . Bottom right:
the CIFAR10 experiment of Sec. 4.3.1 with standard initialization and with only SGD noise also
displays scaling behavior with exponent 0.66 ± 0.05. Across all experiments, the constant C is in
the range 0.1 − 0.5.


of the constant C ≈ 0.1 found as the coefficient of the power-law fit. Curiously, if we set η = 1
this corresponds to setting β∗ = 0.9 which is the traditionally recommended value. The result here,
can therefore be viewed as a modification of this common wisdom when training near a manifold of
minimizers. For more experiments, we refer the reader to Appendices A.2 and A.4.

4.3.1   A S TANDARD T RAINING S ETUP

In experiments using a standard setup with random initialization, away from any valley, and SGD
noise instead of label noise, we observed that the optimal value of β still follows a power law, and
with the same exponent (γ = 23 ) as in previous experiments. This result, while going beyond the
assumptions of our theoretical framework, suggests that scaling relationships can be beneficial even
in practical settings outside our theory’s strict regime. This robustness might be partly due to the
model’s weights being near a zero-loss valley during significant portions of training, despite the
random initialization.


5   C ONCLUSION

In our study of SGD’s implicit regularization with label noise and momentum, we discovered that
momentum’s speedup and the diffusion from SGD noise interact, generating two characteristic train-
ing timescales. Optimal training and generalization occur when these timescales have similar length,
which leads to identifying an optimal hyperparameter scaling relationship. It will be interesting to
extend our study to adaptive algorithms like Adam and its variants, which we expect to lead to novel
scaling relationships between various hyperparameters, as well as to hyperparameter schedule. It
will also be interesting to study the interplay of this scaling with modern insights on initialization
and normalization (Jacot et al., 2018; Roberts et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022).


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu. Katyusha: The first direct acceleration of stochastic gradient methods. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):8194–8244, 2017.
Guy Blanc, Neha Gupta, Gregory Valiant, and Paul Valiant. Implicit regularization for deep neural
  networks driven by an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck like process. In Conference on learning theory, pp.
  483–513. PMLR, 2020.
Dami Choi, Christopher J Shallue, Zachary Nado, Jaehoon Lee, Chris J Maddison, and
  George E Dahl. On empirical comparisons of optimizers for deep learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.05446, 2019.
Anna Choromanska, Mikael Henaff, Michael Mathieu, Gérard Ben Arous, and Yann LeCun. The
  loss surfaces of multilayer networks. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 192–204. PMLR,
  2015.
Alex Damian, Tengyu Ma, and Jason D Lee. Label noise SGD provably prefers flat global minimiz-
  ers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27449–27461, 2021.
Felix Draxler, Kambis Veschgini, Manfred Salmhofer, and Fred Hamprecht. Essentially no barriers
  in neural network energy landscape. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1309–
  1318. PMLR, 2018.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M Roy. Computing nonvacuous generalization bounds for
  deep (stochastic) neural networks with many more parameters than training data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1703.11008, 2017.
KJ Falconer. Differentiation of the limit mapping in a dynamical system. Journal of the London
  Mathematical Society, 2(2):356–372, 1983.
C Daniel Freeman and Joan Bruna. Topology and geometry of half-rectified network optimization.
  ICLR, 2017.
Timur Garipov, Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Dmitry P Vetrov, and Andrew G Wilson. Loss
  surfaces, mode connectivity, and fast ensembling of DNNs. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.
Jeff Z. HaoChen, Colin Wei, Jason Lee, and Tengyu Ma. Shape matters: Understanding the implicit
   bias of the noise covariance. In Conference on Learning Theory, volume 134 of Proceedings of
   Machine Learning Research, pp. 2315–2357. PMLR, 15–19 Aug 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Flat minima. Neural computation, 9(1):1–42, 1997.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Prateek Jain, Sham M Kakade, Rahul Kidambi, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Aaron Sidford. Accelerat-
  ing stochastic gradient descent for least squares regression. In Conference On Learning Theory,
  pp. 545–604. PMLR, 2018.
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantastic
  generalization measures and where to find them. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02178, 2019.
Gary Shon Katzenberger. Solutions of a stochastic differential equation forced onto a manifold by a
  large drift. The Annals of Probability, 19(4):1587–1628, 1991.
Nitish Shirish Keskar and Richard Socher. Improving generalization performance by switching from
  Adam to SGD. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07628, 2017.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Pe-
  ter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. ICLR,
  2017.
Ahmed Khaled and Peter Richtárik. Better theory for sgd in the nonconvex world. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.03329, 2020.
Rahul Kidambi, Praneeth Netrapalli, Prateek Jain, and Sham Kakade. On the insufficiency of ex-
  isting momentum schemes for stochastic optimization. In Information Theory and Applications
  Workshop (ITA), pp. 1–9. IEEE, 2018.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. ICLR, 2015.
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Toronto, ON, Canada, 2009.
Rohith Kuditipudi, Xiang Wang, Holden Lee, Yi Zhang, Zhiyuan Li, Wei Hu, Rong Ge, and Sanjeev
  Arora. Explaining landscape connectivity of low-cost solutions for multilayer nets. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Daniel Kunin, Javier Sagastuy-Brena, Lauren Gillespie, Eshed Margalit, Hidenori Tanaka, Surya
  Ganguli, and Daniel LK Yamins. Limiting dynamics of sgd: Modified loss, phase space oscilla-
  tions, and anomalous diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.09133, 2021.
Kiwon Lee, Andrew N Cheng, Courtney Paquette, and Elliot Paquette. Trajectory of mini-
  batch momentum: Batch size saturation and convergence in high dimensions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.01029, 2022.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Guy Gur-Ari. The large
  learning rate phase of deep learning: the catapult mechanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02218,
  2020.
Yuanzhi Li, Tengyu Ma, and Hongyang Zhang. Algorithmic regularization in over-parameterized
  matrix sensing and neural networks with quadratic activations. In Conference On Learning
  Theory, pp. 2–47. PMLR, 2018.
Zhiyuan Li, Tianhao Wang, and Sanjeev Arora. What happens after SGD reaches zero loss?–a
  mathematical framework. ICLR, 2022.
Chaoyue Liu and Mikhail Belkin. Accelerating SGD with momentum for over-parameterized learn-
  ing. ICLR, 2020.
Kuang Liu. Train cifar10 with pytorch. https://github.com/kuangliu/pytorch-cifar/, February 2021.
  commit/49b7aa97b0c12fe0d4054e670403a16b6b834ddd.
Shengchao Liu, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Dimitris Achlioptas. Bad global minima exist and sgd
  can reach them. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:8543–8552, 2020.
Stefano Sarao Mannelli and Pierfrancesco Urbani. Just a momentum: Analytical study of
  momentum-based acceleration methods in paradigmatic high-dimensional non-convex problems.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11755, 2021.
Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak, and Ilya Sutskever. Deep
  double descent: Where bigger models and more data hurt. ICLR, 2020.
Yurii E Nesterov. A method for solving the convex programming problem with convergence rate
  o(1/k 2 ). In Dokl. akad. nauk Sssr, volume 269, pp. 543–547, 1983.
Quynh Nguyen. On connected sublevel sets in deep learning. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 4790–4799. PMLR, 2019.
Scott Pesme, Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, and Nicolas Flammarion. Implicit bias of sgd for diagonal
  linear networks: a provable benefit of stochasticity. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:29218–29230, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, Julien Reygner, and Nicolas Flammarion. Label noise (stochastic)
  gradient descent implicitly solves the lasso for quadratic parametrisation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.09841, 2022.

Boris T Polyak. Some methods of speeding up the convergence of iteration methods.           Ussr
  computational mathematics and mathematical physics, 4(5):1–17, 1964.

Boris T Polyak. Introduction to optimization. optimization software. Inc., Publications Division,
  New York, 1:32, 1987.

Jasson DM Rennie and Nathan Srebro. Fast maximum margin matrix factorization for collaborative
  prediction. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning, pp. 713–
  719, 2005.

Daniel A Roberts, Sho Yaida, and Boris Hanin. The principles of deep learning theory. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.10165, 2021.

Levent Sagun, Leon Bottou, and Yann LeCun. Eigenvalues of the hessian in deep learning: Singu-
  larity and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07476, 2016.

Levent Sagun, Utku Evci, V Ugur Guney, Yann Dauphin, and Leon Bottou. Empirical analysis of
  the hessian of over-parametrized neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04454, 2017.

Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynam-
  ics of learning in deep linear neural networks. ICLR, 2014.

Daniel Soudry, Elad Hoffer, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nathan Srebro. The
  implicit bias of gradient descent on separable data. arxiv e-prints, art. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1710.10345, 2017.

Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, George Dahl, and Geoffrey Hinton. On the importance of initial-
   ization and momentum in deep learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
   1139–1147. PMLR, 2013.

Mingwei Wei and David J Schwab. How noise affects the hessian spectrum in overparameterized
 neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00195, 2019.

Ashia C Wilson, Rebecca Roelofs, Mitchell Stern, Nati Srebro, and Benjamin Recht. The marginal
  value of adaptive gradient methods in machine learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30, 2017.

Lei Wu, Chao Ma, et al. How sgd selects the global minima in over-parameterized learning: A
  dynamical stability perspective. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Lei Wu, Mingze Wang, and Weijie Su. When does sgd favor flat minima? a quantitative characteri-
  zation via linear stability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02628, 2022.

Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.

Zeke Xie, Issei Sato, and Masashi Sugiyama. A diffusion theory for deep learning dynamics:
  Stochastic gradient descent exponentially favors flat minima. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03495,
  2020.

Zeke Xie, Issei Sato, and Masashi Sugiyama. A diffusion theory for deep learning dynamics:
  Stochastic gradient descent exponentially favors flat minima. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=wXgk_
  iCiYGo.

Zeke Xie, Xinrui Wang, Huishuai Zhang, Issei Sato, and Masashi Sugiyama. Adaptive inertia:
  Disentangling the effects of adaptive learning rate and momentum. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 24430–24459. PMLR, 2022.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Greg Yang, Edward J Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ry-
  der, Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural
  networks via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03466, 2022.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. corr abs/1611.03530. ICLR, 2017.


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN

A.1    UV M ODEL

The first experiment we consider is a 2-layer linear model parametrized as f (x) = √1n U ·V x, where
x ∈ R, and U, V ∈ Rn are the trainable parameters. This model is studied analytically in App. E.
Our goal with this experiment is to analyze a simple model, and show quantitative agreement with
theoretical expectations. Though simple, this model shows almost all of the important features in
our analysis: the 2(1 − γ) exponent below γ = 23 , the γ exponent above 32 , and the constant C
theoretically evaluated in App. E.
We train on an artificially generated dataset D = {(xa , y a )} with x ∼ N (0, 1) and y = 0. We
initialize with Ui , Vi ∼ N (0, 1) and keep this initialization constant over all our experiments to
reduce noise associated with the specific initialization. We use the full dataset to train. The loss of
this model is
                                           5                       2
                                       1 X              1
                                 L=              yi − √ U · V x i                                   (7)
                                      2P i=1             n


From Eq.(122) we know that the norm of the weights follows an approximately exponential tra-
jectory as it approaches the widest minimum (U = V = 0). We therefore measure convergence
timescale, Tc , by fitting an exponential ae−t/Tc to the squared distance from the origin, |U |2 + |V |2 .
To extract the scaling of Tc with γ we perform SGD label noise with learning rates η ∈ [10−3 , 10−1 ]
and corresponding momentum parameters β = 1 − Cη γ . We fit the timescale to a power-law in the
learning rate Tc (η, γ) = T0 η −α(γ) (see Fig. 1(b)). Imposing that T0 be independent of γ, as
predicted by theory, we found the numerical value C ≈ 0.2, which is consistent with the theoretical
estimate of C = 0.17 from Sec. E. We find consistency with prediction across all the values of γ
we simulated. Note that, for γ > 32 the timescale estimate fluctuates more which is a consequence
of having a slower timescale for the transverse modes. As discussed at the end of Sec. 3.3, such
slowness disrupts the drift motion along the manifold. γ = 23 is clearly the optimal scaling. A
similar setup was implemented for tanh and ReLU activations.


A.2    M ATRIX S ENSING

We also explore speedup for a well understood problem: matrix sensing. The goal is to find a
low-rank matrix X ∗ given the measurements along random matrices Ai : yi = TrAi X ∗ . Here
X ∗ ∈ Rd×d is a matrix of rank r (Soudry et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018).
Blanc et al. (2020) analyze the problem of matrix sensing using SGD with label noise and show that
if X ∗ is symmetric with the hypothesis X = U U > for some matrix U , then gradient descent with
label noise corresponds not only to satisfying the constraints yi = TrAi X, but also to minimizing
an implicit regularizer, the Frobenius norm of U , which eventually leads to the ground truth.
In the analogous U V matrix model (where X ∗ is an asymmetric matrix of low rank r), we
demonstrate a considerable learning speedup by adding momentum, and show that this speedup
is not monotonic with increasing β; there is a value β ∗ at which the acceleration appears op-
timal. This non-monotonicity with an optimal β ∗ is observed for both the Hessian trace and
the expected test error. Assuming that in this setting we also have γ = 2/3, we can extract
C ∗ = (1 − β ∗ )/η 2/3 ≈ 0.24 P −1/3 , which compares favorably to the upper bound we may ex-
tract from Appendix F of ≈ 0.12 P −1/3 .
In the experiments with matrix sensing we aim to demonstrate the benefit of momentum in a popular
setting. Matrix sensing corresponds to the following problem: Given a target matrix X ∗ ∈ Rd×d of
low rank r   d and measurements {yi = TrAi X ∗ }P                                     ∗
                                                      i=1 how can we reconstruct X ? One way to
solve this problem is to write our guess X = U V the product of two other matrices, and do stochastic
gradient descent on them, hoping that the implicit regularization induced by this parametrization and
the learning algorithm will converge to a good low rank X.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: The expected test error, a), and Hessian of the training loss, b), in matrix sensing (with
d = 100, r = 5, and 5rd = 2500 samples) as a function of training epoch plotted for different
values of β at η = 0.1. The label noise variance is 0.1. Each curve represents a different value of
β. The inset shows that the orange curve crosses below the blue curve before convergence of the
Hessian. Therefore, the same value of β is optimal for both the Hessian and the expected test error
— increasing or decreasing β from this value slows down generalization.


A.2.1    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
In our experiments we study the d = 100, r = 5, P = 5rd = 2500 case. We draw (Ai )ij ∼ N (0, 1)
as standard Gaussians and choose X ∗ by drawing first (X0 )ij ∼ N (0, 1) and then performing
SVD and projecting onto the top r singular values by zeroing out the smaller singular values in
the diagonal matrix. We intitalize U = V = Id . We perform SGD with momentum on the time
dependent loss (with label noise depending on time)
                                         P
                                     1 X                                   2
                           L(t) =          (  · ξi (t) + yi − Tr(Ai U V ))                         (8)
                                    dP i=1

where  2 = 0.1, ξi (t) ∼ N (0, 1). We choose η = 0.1 for all of our experiments.
The hessian of the loss is defined to be the Hessian averaged over the noise. Equivalently we may
just set ξi (t) = 0 when we calculate the Hessian because averaging over the noise decouples the
noise. Similarly when we define the expected test loss we define it as an average over all Ai setting
ξi (t) = 0 in order to decouple the noise. Averaging over ξi (t) and Ai would simply lead to an
additional term hξi (t)2 i which would simply contribute a constant. We remove this constant for
clarity. As a result, the expected test that we plot is proportional to the squared Frobenius norm of
the difference between the model U V and the target X ∗ ,
                                              1
                                      hLi =     ||U V − X ∗ ||2F .                                 (9)
                                              d

It is also interesting to note that we observe epoch-wise double descent Nakkiran et al. (2020) in this
problem. In particular, we observe that the peak in the test error can be controlled by the momentum
hyperparameter, and becomes especially pronounced for β → 1.

A.3     R ES N ET-18 ON CIFAR10

We train our model in three steps: full batch without label noise until 100% train accuracy, SGD
with label noise and momentum, and then a final projection onto the interpolating manifold. The
model we use is the ResNet-18 and we train on the CIFAR10 training set.
The first step is full batch gradient descent on the full CIFAR10 training set of 50,000 samples. We
train with a learning rate η = 0.1 and momentum β = 0.9 and a learning rate schedule with linearly
increases from 0 to η over 600 epochs, after which it undergoes a cosine learning rate schedule for


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: A sample of the curves with different momentum hyperparameters β with η = 0.001 with
Resnet on CIRAR10. The speed of increase in accuracy is non-monotonic in β: the best performance
is obtained by an intermediate value of β, consistent with our predictions.


1400 more epochs stopping the first time the network reaches 100% train accuracy which happened
on epoch 1119 in our run. This model is saved and the same one is used for all future runs.
The loss function we use is cross cross entropy loss. Because we will choose a label noise level of
p = 0.2 which corresponds to a uniformly wrong label 20% of the time, during this phase of training
we train with the expected loss over this randomness. Notice that this loss is actually linear in the
labels so taking the expectation is easy.
The second step involves starting from the initialization in step 1 and training with a different learn-
ing rate and momentum parameter. In this step we choose the same level of label noise p = 0.2
but take it to be stochastic. Additionally we use SGD instead of gradient descent with a batch size
of 512. This necessitates decreasing the learning rate because noise is greatly increased as demon-
strated in the main text. In this step we train for a fixed 200 epochs for any learning rate momentum
combination. We only compare runs with the same learning rate value. We show an example of the
test accuracy as we train in phase 2 for η = 0.001 in figure 4.
Notice that for both too-small and too-large momentum values that the convergence to a good test
accuracy value is slower. The initial transient with the decreased test accuracy happens as we start
on the valley and adding noise coupled with momentum causes the weights to approach their equi-
librium distribution about the valley. For wider distributions the network is farther from the optimal
point on the valley. As training proceeds we see that the test accuracy actually increases over the
baseline as the hessian decreases and the generalization capacity of the network increases. This
happens most quickly for the momentum which matches our scaling law.
The final step is a projection onto the zero loss manifold. This step is necessary because the total
                                                                         1
width of the distribution around the zero loss manifold scales with 1−β     , and this will distort the
results systematically at larger momentum, making them look worse than they are. We perform this
projection to correct for this effect and put all momenta on an equal footing. This projection is done
by training on the full batch with Adam and a learning rate of η = 0.0001 in order to accelerate
training. We do not expect any significant systematic distortion by using Adam for the projection
instead of gradient descent.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To determine the optimal value of β we sweep several values of β and observe the test accuracy after
the previously described procedure. To get a more precise value of β instead of simply selecting the
one with the highest test accuracy we fit the accuracy A(β) to

                                                 a1 (β − β∗ ) if β ≤ β∗
                             A(β) = amax +                                                      (10)
                                                 a2 (β − β∗ ) if β ≥ β∗
to the parameters amax , a1 , a2 , and β∗ , thereby extracting β∗ for each η.
We performed a similar analysis in Sec. 4.3.1. The difference is that, instead of dividing training into
three phases, we only used one phase where we implemented SGD with constant hyperparameters,
where we implemented the same sweep of β as above and eq. (10) to determine the optimal β
for a given η. We used Kaiming initialization, and the minibatch size 512. We maintained a label
smoothing of 0.2, the same value used in the paragraphs above.

A.4    MLP ON FASHION MNIST

We perform a similar experiment as in Sec. A.3 but with different model and dataset: a 6-layer MLP
trained on FashionMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017) as our dataset. We perform the experiment with a 6
layer MLP with Relu activation after the first 4 layers, tanh activation after the fifth layer, and a
linear mapping to logits. The hidden layers have size 378, 183, 88, 42, and 20 with the input and
output dimension being 282 and 10 respectively. We use cross entropy loss with label noise p = 0.2
as before, and always start training from a reference point initialized on the zero loss manifold. This
point was obtained by gradient descent on the expected loss from a random initialized point with
learning rate η = 0.002 and without momentum.
After this we sweep η ∈ [10−5 , 10−4 ] and β ∈ [0.95, 1 − 2η] and train for 600 epochs with label
noise and 400 without label noise. This allows us to obtain a test accuracy as a function of η and β
and therefore we can obtain the best momentum hyperparameter, β∗ , as a function of η as in A.3.
We extract the scaling exponent by doing a linear fit between log(1 − β∗ ) and log η. The scaling
analysis is shown in Fig. 2, and shows that the exponent is consistent with our theory.

B     D EFINITION OF τ2

We here provide the definition of τ2 :
Definition B.1. Let wk denote the weights of a neural network at time step k. Assume that the
training algorithm is in particular defined, among other hyperparameters, by noise strength   and a
learning rate η. For a given constant M independent of   and η, define TM as the number of time
steps it takes for the longitudinal displacement in the weights along the valley to grow larger than
M , i.e. PL (hδwk=TM i − hδwk=0 i) ≥ M . TM is a function of η,  , and M . We define τ2 as the
leading order contribution to TM in the limit as   → 0 followed by η → 0.

We note that M should be sufficiently small so that TM is finite. The precise value of M will not
matter as in our theoretical discussion we are interested in the scaling dependence on η and  , not in
overall numerical factors, as far as these is well-defined and finite.

C     R EVIEW OF R ELEVANT R ESULTS FROM K ATZENBERGER (1991)

In this Appendix we summarize the relevant conditions and theorems from Katzenberger (1991) that
we use to prove our result on the limiting drift-diffusion. We refer to Katzenberger (1991) for part of
the definitions and conditions cited throughout the below. In what follows, (Ωn , F n , {Ftn }t≥0 , P )
will denote a filtered probability space, Zn an Rr -valued cadlag {Ftn }-semimartingale with
Zn (0) = 0, An a real-valued cadlag {Ftn }-adapted nondecreasing process with An (0) = 0, and
σ̃ : U → RD×r a continuous function, where U is a neighborhood of {0} × Γ as defined in the main
text. Also, Xn is an RD valued cadlag {Ftn }-semimartingale satisfying
                                            Z t                 Z t
                       Xn (t) = Xn (0) +        σn (Xn )dZn +       F (Xn )dAn                    (11)
                                              0                   0


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all t ≤ λn (K) and all compact K ⊂ U , where
                         λn (K) = inf{t ≥ 0|Xn (t−) 6= K̊orXn (t) 6= K̊}                                  (12)

be the stopping time of Xn (t) to leave K̊, the interior of K. For cadlag real-valued seimimartingales
X, Y let [X, Y ](t) be defined as the limit of sums
                               n−1
                               X
                                      (X(ti+1 ) − X(ti ))(Y (ti+1 − Y (ti ))                              (13)
                                i=0

where 0 = t0 < t1 < · · · < tn = t and the limit is in probability as the mesh size goes to zero. If
X is an RD -valued semimartingale, we write
                                                            D
                                                            X
                                                 [X] =            [Xi , Xi ].                             (14)
                                                            i=1

Condition C.1. For every T >   > 0 and compact K ⊂ U
                                       inf                (An (t +  ) − An (t)) → ∞                       (15)
                            0≤t≤T ∧λn (K)− )

as n → ∞ where the infimum of the empty set is taken to be ∞.
                                                                  λ (K)
Condition C.2. For every compact K ⊂ U {Zn n } satisfies the following: For n ≥ 1 let
Zn be a {Ftn }−semimartingale with sample paths in DRd [0, ∞). Assume that for some δ > 0
allowing δ = ∞ and every n ≥ 1, there exist stopping times {τnk |k ≥ 1} and a decomposition of
Zn − Jδ (Zn ) into a local martingale Mn plus a finite variation process Fn such that P [τnk ≤ k] ≤
1/k, {[Mn ](t ∧ τnk ) + Tt∧τnk (Fn )|n ≥ 1} is uniformly integrable for every t ≥ 0 and k ≥ 1 and

                        lim lim sup P sup (Tt+γ (Fn ) − Tt (Fn )) >   = 0                       (16)
                      γ→0 n→∞                0≤t≤T

for every   > 0 and T > 0. Also as n → ∞ and for any T > 0
                                                  sup         |∆Zn (t)| → 0                               (17)
                                        0<t≤T ∧λn (K)

Condition C.3. The process
                                                      X
                                      Z̄n (t) =               ∆Zn (s)∆An (s)                              (18)
                                                     0<s≤t

                                                                                                      λ (K)
exists, is an {Ftn }−semimartingale, and for every compact K ⊂ U , the sequence {Z̄n n                        } is
relatively compact and satisfies Condition 4.1 in Katzenberger (1991).

C.1   A N ALTERNATIVE NOTATION FOR EQ . (1)

Here we show that Eq. (1), i.e.
                 πk+1 = βπk − ∇L(wk ) +  σ(wk )ξk ,                             wk+1 = wk + ηπk+1 ,       (19)
can be rewritten in the form
                                                    Z t                         Z t
                       Xn (t) = Xn (0) +                   σ̃(Xn )dZn +               F (Xn )dAn ,        (20)
                                                      0                          0
                                                                                  An (t)
                                                  t                                  X
                               An (t) =                ,       Zn (t) =  n                 ξk .           (21)
                                                  2n
                                                                                     k=1
This is how the stochastic process we are interested in is presented in Katzenberger (1991), on which
our theory is based. Here Xn t =  2n k = (πk , wk ), with the correspondence t = k 2n , where k
denotes the SGD time step. Also, σ̃(X) = (σ, ησ) and F (X) = ((β − 1)π − ∇L(w), η(βπ −
∇L(w))). bxc denotes the integer part of a real number x.


                                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Before we begin the proof, we will need the following fact (see Sec. 2 of Katzenberger (1991)):
                           Z t        Z t           X
                               f dg =     f dg c +       f (r−)∆g(r) ,                        (22)
                               s               s               s<r≤t

where f and g are càdlàg functions, in particular they are right-continuous and have left limits
everywhere. The integral above is done with respect to the measure dg, the differential of a function
g. The sum is taken over all r ∈ (s, t] where g is discontinuous and the notation ∆g(r) = g(r) −
g(r−) indicates the discontinuity of g at r, where g(r−) ≡ limu→r− g(u) indicates the left limit of
g at r. Finally g c denotes the continuous part of g
                                                 X
                                g c (t) = g(t) −     ∆g(s),     t ≥ 0.                           (23)
                                                       0<s≤t


We now show by induction that Xn (t = k 2n ) solves the first equation above. Note that
                              ∞
                              X                                              ∞
                                                                             X
                dAn (t) =            δ(t −  2n k),         dZn (t) =  n           ξk δ(t −  2n k) .   (24)
                             k=−∞                                           k=∞


For brevity we will drop the subscript n and let k 2 = t. Consider
                       Z t+ 2                     Z t+ 2
          X(t +  2 ) =         σ̃(X(s))dZ(s) +           F (X(s))dA(s)                                (25)
                         0                                 0
                                   Z t+ 2                          Z t+ 2
                     = X(t) +               σ̃(X(s))dZ(s) +                 F (X(s))dA(s)             (26)
                                    t                                  t
                                        X                                   X
                     = X(t) +                  σ̃(X(s−))∆Z(s) +                   F (X(s−))∆A(s)      (27)
                                   t<s≤t+ 2                                t<s≤t+ 2

where in the last step we use eq. (22) as A, Z, σ̃ and F are càdlàg, and that dAc = dZ c = 0. The
sums are taken over all s ∈ (k 2 , (k + 1) 2 ] where Z(s) and A(s) are discontinuous. The only point
of discontinuity of A and Z in this interval is at s = t +  2 , so
                X(t +  2 ) = X(t) +  σ̃(X((t +  2 )−))ξk+1 + F (X((t +  2 )−))                        (28)
                                                   2
because the jumps of Z and A at s = t +   are  ξk+1 and 1, respectively. Now we must determine
the left limit of X at t +  2 . Notice that for 0 < δ <
                                     X                        X
           X(t + δ 2 ) = X(t) +              σ̃(X(s−))∆Z(s) +        F (X(s−))∆A(s)       (29)
                                   t<s≤t+δ 2                               t<s≤t+δ 2
                     = X(t)                                                                           (30)
because A and Z are continuous on (t, t + δ 2 ]. Hence the left limit of X((t +  2 )−) = X(t). Putting
these equations together we find that
             X((k + 1) 2 ) = X(t +  2 ) = X(k 2 ) +  σ̃(X(k 2 ))ξk+1 + F (X(k 2 ))                    (31)
which, using the definition of X(k 2 ) = (πk , wk ), is eq. (19), thus proving equivalence.

C.2   M AIN THEOREM FROM K ATZENBERGER (1991)

Consider the process in Eq. (20). Note that, while at initialization we can have Xn (0) ∈  / Γ, the
solution Xn (t) → Γ as n → ∞, i.e. it becomes discontinuous. This is an effect of the speed-up
of time t =  2n k introduced below Eq. (20). To overcome this issue, it is convenient to introduce
Yn (t) ≡ Xn (t) − ψ(Xn (0), An (t)) + Φ(Xn (0)), so that Yn (0) ∈ Γ is initialized on the manifold.
Theorem C.4 (Theorem 7.3 in Katzenberger (1991)). Assume that Γ is C 2 and for every y ∈ Γ, the
matrix ∂F (y) has D − M eigenvalues in D(1). Assume (C.1),(C.2) and (C.3) hold, Φ is C 2 (or F
is LC 2 ) and Xn (0) ⇒ X(0) ∈ U . Let
                             Yn (t) = Xn (t) − ψ(X(0), A(t)) + Φ(X(0))                                (32)


                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and, for a compact K ⊂ U , let
                          µn (K) = inf{t ≥ 0|Yn (t−) ∈
                                                     / K̊ or Yn (t) ∈
                                                                    / K̊} .                           (33)
                                                               µ (K)   µ (K)
Then for every compact K ⊂ U , the sequence {(Yn n , Zn n , µn (K))} is relatively compact
in DR2D×r [0, ∞) × [0, ∞] (see Katzenberger (1991) for details about the topology). If (Y, Z, µ) is
a limit of this sequence then (Y, Z) is a continuous semimartingale, Y (t) ∈ Γ for every t almost
surely, µ ≥ inf{t ≥ 0|Y (t) ∈
                            / K̊} almost surely, and
                     Z t∧µ
                                             1 X t∧µ
                                                   Z
    Y (t) = Y (0) +        ∂Φ(Y )σ̃(Y )dZ +              ∂ij Φ(Y )σ̃ ik (Y )σ̃ jl (Y )d[Z k , Z l ] . (34)
                      0                      2       0  ijkl


C.3   A PPLYING T HEOREM C.4

Recall the equations of motion of stochastic gradient descent
               (n)       (n)           (n)                 (n)             (n)         (n)   (n)
             πk+1 = βπk        − ∇L(wk ) +  n σ(wk )ξk ,                 wk+1 = wk + ηπk+1 ,          (35)

where σ(w) ∈ RD×r is the noise function evaluated at w ∈ RD , and ξk ∈ Rr is a noise vector
drawn i.i.d. at every timestep k with zero mean and unit variance. We now show that this equation
satisfies all the properties required by Theorem C.4.
The manifold Γ is the fixed point manifold of (non-stochastic) gradient descent. {0} × Γ is
a C 2 manifold because Γ is C 2 , which follows from assumption 3.1. The flow F (w, π) =
(η(βπ − ∇L(w)), βπ − ∇L(w)). As shown in Appendix G, dF has exactly M zero eigenvalues
on Γ ∩ K. F inherits the differentiable and locally Lipschitz properties from ∇L, and therefore
satisfies the conditions of C.4.
Next, notice that the noise function σ̃ : R2D → R2D×r is continuous because σ is.
Now we define An and Zn (as in the main text) so that Xn reproduces the dynamics in equation
(35), except with a new time parameter t = k 2n .
                                                                         An (t)
                                               t                         X
                               An (t) =             ,      Zn (t) =  n            ξk                  (36)
                                               2n
                                                                         k=1


So that, with these choices, Eq. (11) precisely corresponds to (35), up to the rescaling t = k 2n .
Now we show that An , Zn satisfy the conditions of C.4. Clearly An (0) = Zn (0) by definition. Then

                                     t+ε         t      t+ε−t             ε
          An (t + ε) − An (t) =             − 2 ≥                 −2= 2 −2→∞                    (37)
                                       2n        n          2n            n
when we take  n → 0, thus recoverying condition C.1.
By definition Zn is a martingale. Notice also by the definition of Zn , because ξk is i.i.d. with
variance 1, that Zn (t) has variance An (t) 2n ≤ t which is uniformly bounded and hence Zn (t) is
uniformly integrable for stopping times τnk = 2k > k. Also note that ∆Zn (k 2n ) = | n ξk | which
goes to zero in probability as   becomes small because ξk has bounded variance, and ∆Zn (t) is zero
otherwise. This shows that Zn satisfies condition C.2. Because Zn and An are discontinuous at the
same time we automatically satisfy condition C.3 as pointed out by Katzenberger.
This shows that we satisfy the conditions of Theorem C.4, therefore we have the following
Lemma C.5. The SGD equations formulated as in (35) satisfy all the conditions of Theorem C.4.

D     E XPLICIT EXPRESSION OF LIMITING DIFFUSION IN MOMENTUM SGD
In this section we provide the proof of Theorem 3.4. Recall that Φ satisfies
                                          Φ(x + F (x)) = Φ(x) ,                                       (38)


                                                         20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where x = (π, w), and F given in (130). To obtain the explicit expression of the limiting drift-
diffusion, according to Theorem (C.4), and keeping into account Assumption (3.2), we need to
determine Φ up to its second derivatives. To this aim, we shall expand Eq. (38) up to second order
in the series expansion in F . In components, this reads:
                                                           1
        η∂wi Φj (π i − g i ) + ∂πi Φj (−Cη γ π i − g i ) + η 2 ∂wi ∂wk Φj (π i − g i )(π k − g k )
                                                           2
        1                                                1
     + η∂wi ∂πk Φ (π − g )(−Cη π − g ) + η∂πi ∂wk Φj (−Cη γ π i − g i )(π k − g k )
                     j   i     i         γ k     k                                                   (39)
        2                                                2
                           1
                       + ∂πi ∂πk Φ (−Cη π − g )(−Cη γ π k − g k ) = 0
                                       j     γ i        i
                           2
subject to the boundary condition
                                         Φ(π, w)|w∈Γ,π=0 = w .                                       (40)

Here, g i = ∂i L. In Eq. (39), we already substituted β = 1 − Cη γ . In what follows, we shall find Φ
to leading order in η as η → 0. We will solve the above problem by performing a series expansion
in Φ around a point w̄ ∈ Γ and π = 0 up to second order:
                                            1                        1 ij i j
 Φ(π, w̄ + δw) = Φ00 + Φi01 δwi + Φi10 π i + Φij δwi δwj + Φij  i  j
                                                            11 π δw + Φ20 π π + · · · . (41)
                                            2 02                     2
For example, we have
                              ∂Φ          ij      ∂2Φ            ij      ∂2Φ
                       Φi01 =     ,     Φ 11 =           ,     Φ 20 =            .               (42)
                              ∂wi               ∂π i ∂wj               ∂π i ∂π j
More precisely, we regard this as an expansion in powers of δw and π: Φ00 is zeroth order, Φ10 , Φ01
are first order, and the remaining terms are second order. We will occasionally write explicitly the
                             ∂Φk
index of Φ, e.g. Φk,ij
                     02 = ∂wi ∂wj . It will be useful to introduce the longitudinal projector onto Γ,
PL (w) : RD → Tw Γ, defined such that for any vector v ∈ Tw Γ: PL v = v. The transverse projector
is then PT = Id − PL . We will also decompose various tensors using these projectors, e.g.
                             Φij    ij      ij      ij       ij
                              11 = Φ11LL + Φ11LT + Φ11T L + Φ11T T ,                                 (43)

with Φij       kl ik jl
      11LT = Φ11 PL PT . Note that the Hessian H = ∇g ∈ R
                                                          D×D
                                                              satisfies HH † = PT , where
  †
H denotes the pseudoinverse.
At zeroth order, we obviously have Φ00 (w) = w.
Lemma D.1. The first order terms in the series expansion (41) are given by
                  Φ01T = Φ10T = 0,            Φ01L = PL ,         Φ10L = C −1 η 1−γ PL .             (44)

Proof. Suppose ŵ(s) ∈ RD is a curve lying on Γ. Then due to the boundary condition (40),
∂s Φ(π = 0, ŵ) = Φi01 ∂s ŵi = ∂s ŵi . This means that Φ01L = PL . Now from (39),
                       ηΦi01 (π i − ∂j g i δwj ) + Φi10 (−Cη γ π i − ∂j g i δwj ) = 0 .              (45)
This condition should hold for any π and δw, therefore we arrive at
                                          Φ10 = C −1 η 1−γ Φ01                                       (46)
and
                                  (ηΦi01 + Φi10 )∂k g i = 0 .                            (47)
Decomposing into longitudinal and transverse components, and noting that the Hessian satisfies
PL H = 0, the above equation becomes
                                           ηΦi01T + Φi10T = 0 ,                                      (48)
which together with (46) and the above discussion gives
                  Φ01T = Φ10T = 0,            Φ01L = PL ,         Φ10L = C −1 η 1−γ PL ,             (49)
which concludes the first order analysis.


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We now need a Lemma, which requires Definition (3.3) in the main text. We report it here for
convenience:
Definition D.2. For a symmetric matrix H ∈ RD × RD , and WH = {Σ ∈ RD × RD : Σ =
Σ> , HH † Σ = H † HΣ = σ}, we define the operator L̃H : WH → WH with L̃H S ≡ {H, S} +
1 −2 1−2γ
2C    η     [[S, H], H], with [S, H] = SH − HS.
Lemma D.3. The inverse of the operator L̃H is unique.

Proof. Let us go to a basis where H is diagonal, with eigenvalues λi . In components, the equation
L̃H S = M reads
                                  1
                (λi + λj )Sij + C −2 η 1−2γ (λi − λj )2 Sij + C −1 η 1−γ Mij = 0                (50)
                                  2
which has a unique solution, with
                                                                         −1
                           −1 1−γ              1 −2 1−2γ              2
                Sij = −C η            λi + λj + C η         (λi − λj )      Mij .               (51)
                                               2


Lemma D.4. The second order terms in the series expansion (41) are given by

 Φj,ik      † jl L ln nk
  02LL = −(H ) ∂i H PL ,              Φj,ik     jl L ln  † nk
                                       02LT = −PL ∂i H (H ) ,            Φj,ik
                                                                          02T T = O η
                                                                                      min{0,1−2γ}

                                                                                                (52)
     Φj,ik
      11LL = −C
                −1 1−γ
                  η    (H † )jl ∂iL H ln PLnk ,     Φj,ik
                                                     11T L = −C
                                                                −1 1−γ jl L ln
                                                                  η   PL ∂k H (H † )ni          (53)
                                                  1
                Φj,ik
                 11T T = −C   η   L̃H (M (j) )ik − C −3 η 2−3γ [H, L̃−1
                            −1 1−γ −1
                                                                     H M
                                                                         (j)
                                                                             ]ik                (54)
                                                          2
                          1 −2 2−2γ
                Φj,ik                  (H † )jl ∂iL H ln PLnk + (H † )jl ∂kL H ln PLni

                 20LL = − C      η                                                              (55)
                          2
                          1 −2 2−2γ   jl L ln † ni
                Φj,ik
                 20T L = − C     η     PL ∂k H (H ) + PLjl ∂iL H ln (H † )nk                    (56)
                          2
                          Φj,ik
                            20T T = −C
                                       −2 2−2γ −1
                                         η        L̃H (PT ∂jL HPT )ik                           (57)
where
                                      (M (j) )kl = PTki ∂jL Hni PTnl                            (58)

Proof. Consider a path ŵ(s) lying on Γ. From PT H = H we have
                                 dPT                dH      dH
                                     H = (Id − PT )    = PL    ,                                (59)
                                  ds                ds      ds
and thus, using HH † = PT , we find
                          dPT         dH †            dPT         dH
                              PT = PL    H ,       PT       = H†      PL ,                    (60)
                           ds         ds               ds          ds
where the second equation is obtained from the first by taking the transpose. Putting the last two
relations together, we find
             dPL       dPT        dPT   dPT           dH         dH †
                   =−       = −PT     −     PT = −H †    PL − PL    H .                         (61)
              ds        ds         ds    ds           ds         ds
From (44) we can then write
                       ∂iL Φj,k     † jl L ln nk  jl L ln  † nk
                            01 = −(H ) ∂i H PL − PL ∂i H (H )   ,                               (62)

where ∂iL = PLij ∂j . This leads to

                            Φj,ik    kl L j,l      † jl L ln nk
                             02LL = PL ∂i Φ01 = −(H ) ∂i H PL                                   (63)
                            Φj,ik    kl L j,l     jl L ln  † nk
                             02LT = PT ∂i Φ01 = −PL ∂i H (H )   .                               (64)


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Also note that Φj,ik    j,ki
                02LT = Φ02T L , so the only component still to be determined in Φ02 is Φ02T T .

The next step is to expand Eq. (39) to second order:
 π i π k η(1 + Cη γ )Φki         γ       1  γ    ik    1 2 ik

                        11 − Cη (1 − 2 Cη )Φ20 + 2 η Φ02

                             ji                                           (ij)
+δwk π i ηΦik02 −  η 2
                       H   Φ
                         kj 02  −  ηΦ il
                                         H
                                      11 kl − Cη   γ ik
                                                    Φ 11 −  η(1−Cη  γ
                                                                      )Φ  11   Hkj − (1−Cη γ
                                                                                             )Φ li
                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                20 kl

                          1 2 ji                            ji
−δwk δwl ηΦik                                 ik
               02 Hli + 2 η Φ02 Hlj Hki + Φ11 Hli + ηΦ11 Hkj Hli

                                                     + 12 (ηΦi01 + Φi10 )∂k Hli + 12 Φji
                                                                                      20 lj ki = 0 ,
                                                                                         H H
                                                                                                  (65)

where A(ij) = 12 (Aij + Aji ) denotes the symmetric part. Neglecting various terms that are sublead-
ing at small η, gives
            π i π k ηΦki        γ ik    1 2 ik

                        11 − Cη Φ20 + 2 η Φ02

          +δwk π i ηΦik          γ ik      li

                          02 − Cη Φ11 − Φ20 Hkl                                                 (66)

                 k   l      ik       ik            i     i               ji
          −δw δw ηΦ02 Hli + Φ11 Hli + 12 (ηΦ01 + Φ10 )∂k Hli + 12 Φ20 Hlj Hki = 0 ,

The first line immediately gives
                                       −1 1−γ (ij) 1
                               Φij
                                20 = C   η   Φ11 + C −1 η 2−γ Φij
                                                               02 .                               (67)
                                                   2
Taking the second line of (66) and projecting onto the longitudinal part the index k gives
                                      ηβΦik       γ ik
                                         02LL − Cη Φ11LL = 0                                      (68)
                                     ηβΦik        γ ik
                                        02T L − Cη Φ11T L = 0                                     (69)
and using (63),(64),

                      Φj,ik
                       11LL = C
                                −1 1−γ j,ik
                                  η   Φ02LL = −C −1 η 1−γ (H † )jl ∂iL H ln PLnk                  (70)
                      Φj,ik
                       11T L = C
                                 −1 1−γ j,ik
                                   η   Φ02T L = −C −1 η 1−γ PLjl ∂kL H ln (H † )ni                (71)
Projecting the second line of (66) on the transverse part of the index k we have

                               ηΦj,ik     γ j,ik    j,li
                                 02LT − Cη Φ11LT − Φ20T L Hkl = 0                                 (72)
                               ηΦj,ik      γ j,ik     j,li
                                 02T T − Cη Φ11T T − Φ20T T Hkl = 0                               (73)
Using (67) and keeping (64) into account, Eq. (72) becomes, neglecting subleading terms in η,
                                          1 −1 1−γ li         1
   −ηPLjl ∂iL H ln (H † )nk − Cη γ Φik
                                    11LT − C  η   Φ11T L Hkl − C −1 η 1−γ Φil
                                                                           11LT Hkl = 0 .
                                          2                   2
                                                                                        (74)
Using (71) in (74),

                                     −ηPLjl ∂iL H ln (H † )nk − Cη γ Φik
                                                                      11LT
                1 −2 2−2γ jp L pn † nl        1 −1 1−γ il                                         (75)
               + C η     PL ∂i H (H ) Hkl − C η            Φ11LT Hkl = 0 ,
                2                             2
and simplifying,

                                        −ηPLjl ∂iL H ln (H † )nk − Cη γ Φik
                                                                         11LT
                       1 −2 2−2γ jl L ln nk 1 −1 1−γ il                                           (76)
                      + C η     PL ∂i H PT − C η              Φ11LT Hkl = 0 .
                       2                         2
which determines Φ11LT in close form. Indeed, the above has the form, in matrix notation
                               1
                              − C −1 η 1−γ Φ11LT H − Cη γ Φ11LT = M ,                             (77)
                               2

                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and can be immediately inverted to solve for Φ11LT . The only two undetermined components now
are Φ11T T and Φ02T T . One condition is obtained from (73) which gives, keeping (67) into account,
                                                                      j,(li)
                             ηΦj,ik      γ j,ik
                               02T T − Cη Φ11T T − C
                                                     −1 1−γ
                                                       η    Φ11T T Hkl = 0 ,                                 (78)
and thus
                                                                         j,(ni)
                              Φj,ik
                               02T T = Cη
                                          γ−1 j,ik
                                             Φ11T T + C −1 η −γ Φ11T T Hkn .                                 (79)
Further taking symmetric and antisymmetric part in ik of the above gives
                          γ−1 j,(ik)  1           j,(ni)     1           j,(nk)
              Φj,ik
               02T T =Cη      Φ11T T + C −1 η −γ Φ11T T Hkn + C −1 η −γ Φ11T T Hin                           (80)
                                      2                      2
                               j,[ik] 1           j,(ni)     1           j,(nk)
                    0 =Cη γ−1 Φ11T T + C −1 η −γ Φ11T T Hkn − C −1 η −γ Φ11T T Hin .                         (81)
                                      2                      2

The other condition comes from the third line of (66) which, using (44) and (67), and neglecting
subleading terms in η, gives

              ηΦj,ik       j,il      j,ik      j,il
                02 Hli + ηΦ02 Hki + Φ11 Hli + Φ11 Hki + C
                                                          −1 1−γ ji
                                                            η   PL ∂k Hli = 0                                (82)

Projecting the k and l indices on the longitudinal part, gives PLji ∂kL Hli PLln = 0, which is an identity
that can be checked from (59). Projecting k on the longitudinal part and l on the transverse part
gives
                     ηΦj,ik            j,ik
                         02T L Hli + Φ11T L Hli + C
                                                    −1 1−γ ji L
                                                       η     PL ∂k Hni PTnl = 0 ,                    (83)
which is implied by (71), indeed

  (ηΦj,ik     j,ik
     02T L + Φ11T L )Hli = C
                             −1 1−γ j,ik
                               η   Φ02T L Hli
                                                                                                             (84)
                               = −C −1 η 1−γ PLjl ∂kL H ln (H † )ni Hli = −C −1 η 1−γ PLjl ∂kL H ln PTnl ,
therefore (83) does not give a new condition. The only new condition comes from projecting the k
and l indices of (82) on the transverse direction, giving

    ηΦj,ik          j,il         j,ik         j,il
      02T T Hli + ηΦ02T T Hki + Φ11T T Hli + Φ11T T Hki + C
                                                            −1 1−γ ji T
                                                              η   PL ∂k Hni PTnl = 0 .                       (85)
Plugging in (79),
                                      j,(in)                                              j,(in)
   Cη γ Φj,ik
         11T T Hli + C
                       −1 1−γ
                         η    Φ11T T Hkn Hli + Cη γ Φj,il
                                                     11T T Hki + C
                                                                   −1 1−γ
                                                                     η    Φ11T T Hln Hki
                                                                                                             (86)
                    +Φj,ik         j,il
                      11T T Hli + Φ11T T Hki + C
                                                 −1 1−γ ji T
                                                   η   PL ∂k Hni PTnl = 0 .
Neglecting subleading terms in η this can be rewritten as
                    j,(in)
    2C −1 η 1−γ Φ11T T Hkn Hli + Φj,ik         j,il
                                  11T T Hli + Φ11T T Hki + C
                                                             −1 1−γ L
                                                               η   ∂j Hni PTki PTnl = 0 .                    (87)

where we recall that the last term is symmetric in k and l. In matrix notation this reads
           C −1 η 1−γ H(Φj11T T + Φjt           j        jt
                                   11T T )H + HΦ11T T + Φ11T T H + C
                                                                     −1 1−γ
                                                                       η    M (j) = 0 ,                      (88)
where
                                         (M (j) )kl = PTki ∂jL Hni PTnl                                      (89)
is the longitudinal derivative of the Hessian, projected on the transverse directions. Decomposing
Φj11T T into symmetric and antisymmetric parts Φj11T T = S (j) + A(j) , Eq. (88) reads (suppressing
the index j)
                 2C −1 η 1−γ HSH + HS + SH + HA − AH + C −1 η 1−γ M = 0 .                                    (90)
The first term is subleading in η, therefore we have
                               HS + SH + HA − AH + C −1 η 1−γ M = 0 .                                        (91)
This equation together with (81), which in matrix form reads
                                  C −1 η −γ (SH − HS) + 2Cη γ−1 A = 0 ,                                      (92)


                                                       24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


determine S and A, and thus Φ11T T . Note that M j has only a longitudinal component in the index
j, therefore the transverse parts of S and A vanish, i.e.
                                          PTpj Φj,ik
                                                11T T = 0 .                                       (93)
Eq. (93) is natural as the slow degrees of freedom are the longitudinal coordinates.
Note that these two equations admit a unique solution. Indeed, solving (92) for A gives
                                            1 −2 1−2γ
                                      A=      C η     [H, S]                                      (94)
                                            2
Plugging in (91), we find
                                      L̃H S = −C −1 η 1−γ M ,                                     (95)
where L̃H S ≡ {H, S} + 12 C −2 η 1−2γ [[S, H], H] is introduced in definition D.2. By Lemma D.3,
(95) admits a unique solution.
Then
                                                     1
                Φj11T T = −C −1 η 1−γ L̃−1
                                         H M
                                               (j)
                                                   − C −3 η 2−3γ [H, L̃−1
                                                                       H M
                                                                           (j)
                                                                               ].                 (96)
                                                     2
The other components are (see eqs. (63),(64),(70),(71),(79),(67))
                Φj,ik      † jl L ln nk
                 02LL = −(H ) ∂i H PL                                                             (97)
                Φj,ik       jl L ln
                 02LT = −PL ∂i H (H )
                                        † nk
                                                                                                  (98)
                Φj,ik
                 11LL = −C
                            −1 1−γ
                               η   (H † )jl ∂iL H ln PLnk                                         (99)
                Φj,ik
                 11T L = −C
                            −1 1−γ jl L ln
                               η   PL ∂k H (H † )ni                                              (100)

                                                       j,(ni)
               Φj,ik
                02T T = Cη
                           γ−1 j,ik
                              Φ11T T + C −1 η −γ Φ11T T Hkn = O η min{0,1−2γ}                    (101)
                             −1 1−γ (ij)    1                     −1 1−γ (ij)
                   Φij20 = C    η    Φ11 + C −1 η 2−γ Φij  02 = C     η    Φ11 .                  (102)
                                            2
The only contributing term at leading order in η to the limiting diffusion equation is (102). Splitting
it into longitudinal and transverse components, we find:
                −1 1−γ j,(ik)        1
    Φj,ik                Φ11LL = − C −2 η 2−2γ (H † )jl ∂iL H ln PLnk + (H † )jl ∂kL H ln PLni

      20LL = C     η                                                                              (103)
                                     2
                −1 1−γ j,(ik)        1
    Φj,ik
      20T L = C    η     Φ11T L = − C −2 η 2−2γ PLjl ∂kL H ln (H † )ni + PLjl ∂iL H ln (H † )nk   (104)
                                     2
and, using (96) and (89) we have, in matrix notation,
                   1 −1 1−γ j
       Φj20T T =     C η   (Φ11T T + (Φj11T T )T ) = −C −2 η 2−2γ L̃−1     L
                                                                    H (PT ∂j HPT ) .             (105)
                   2



To write things more compactly, the following Lemma will be useful:
Lemma D.5. For any transverse symmetric matrix T :
                                             1
                             Φj20T T [T ] = − C −2 η 2−2γ M (j) [L̃−1
                                                                   H T],                         (106)
                                             2

Proof. From (57), Φ20T T is proportional to the symmetric part of Φ11T T which was denoted by S
below Eq. (89) and satisfies Eq. (95). Therefore Φ20T T also satisfies Eq. (95), up to an overall
factor:
                                                  1
                               L̃H Φj20T T = − C −2 η 2−2γ M (j) .                         (107)
                                                  2
Then, for any T :
                                                   1
                           (L̃H Φj20T T )[T ] = − C −2 η 2−2γ M (j) [T ] .                 (108)
                                                   2
Moreover,
                                (L̃H Φj20T T )[T ] = Φj20T T [L̃H T ] .                    (109)


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since the two above equations hold for any T and L̃H is invertible, this implies
                                             1
                             Φj20T T [T ] = − C −2 η 2−2γ M (j) [L̃−1
                                                                   H T],                            (110)
                                             2
which is the statement of the lemma.

                                                                                 PD       ˜˜
To leading order in η we then have, for a symmetric matrix V , ∂ 2 Φ[V ] =          i,j=1 ∂i ∂j ΦVij , and
thus
                  1 2−2γ 2 † 2                     1
   ∂ 2 Φ[V ] = −      η  (∇ L) ∂ (∇L)[VLL ]dt − 2 η 2−2γ PL ∂ 2 (∇L)[(H † )VT L ]dt
                 2C 2                             C                                                 (111)
                  1 2−2γ
               −      η  PL ∂ 2 (∇L)[L̃−1
                                       H VT T ] ,
                 2C 2
where VLL = PL V PL , VT L = PT V PL , and VT T = PT V PT are transverse and longitudinal
projections of V .
We also have, using (44), and to leading order in η,
                   ∂Φσ̃dZ = Φ10 σdZ + ηΦ01 σdZ = (C −1 η 1−γ + η)PL σdW ,                           (112)
where dW is a Wiener process. Applying Theorem C.4, and keeping into account that, to leading
order in dt, d[Z i , Z j ] = δ ij dt, we find
                                      1 2−2γ 2 † 2
     dY =(C −1 η 1−γ + η)PL σdZ −         η      (∇ L) ∂ (∇L)[ΣLL ]dt
                                     2C 2                                                           (113)
              1                                      1 2−2γ
            − 2 η 2−2γ PL ∂ 2 (∇L)[(H † )ΣT L ]dt −      η  PL ∂ 2 (∇L)[L̃−1
                                                                          H ΣT T ]dt ,
             C                                      2C 2
where Σ = σσ T .
For γ < 21 , L̃H reduces to the Lyapunov operator at leading order in η, i.e. L̃H S = {H, S}. For
γ > 12 , from (51), it is easy to see that the role of the divergent term proportional to η 1−2γ , when
acting L̃−1
         H on S, is to set to zero the off-diagonal entries of Sij at O(η
                                                                          1−γ
                                                                              ), i.e.

                             Sii = −2C −1 η 1−γ λi Mii ,       Si6=j = 0, .                         (114)

Using Lemma C.5, we finally conclude the following Corollary, which is the formal version of
Theorem 3.4 in the main text:
Corollary D.6. Consider the stochastic process defined in Eq. (35) parametrized by  n , with initial
conditions (π0 , w0 ) ∈ U , under assumptions 3.1 and 3.2. Fix a compact K ⊂ U , and that Xn (0) =
X(0) ∈ U . Then the conclusions of Theorem C.4 apply, and Y (t) satisfies the limiting diffusion
equation

   dY =( C1 η 1−γ + η)PL σdW − 2C1 2 η 2−2γ (∇2 L)† ∂ 2 (∇L)[ΣLL ]dt
                                                                                                    (115)
          − C12 η 2−2γ PL ∂ 2 (∇L)[(∇2 L)† ΣT L ]dt − 2C1 2 η 2−2γ PL ∂ 2 (∇L)[L̃−1
                                                                                 ∇2 L ΣT T ]dt ,

where W (t) is a Wiener process.

Let us now see the special case of label noise. In this case Σ = cH, so that Σ is only transverse.
Moreover, using (51),
                                                    1
                                         L̃−1
                                           H H = PT ,                                       (116)
                                                    2
and
                       1 2−2γ                         1
             dY = −      2
                           η  PL ∂ 2 (∇L)[cPT ]dt = − 2 η 2−2γ PL ∇Tr(c∂ 2 L)dt .                   (117)
                      4C                             4C
This proves Corollary 3.5 in the main text.


                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    A SOLVABLE EXAMPLE

In this section we analyse a model that will allow us to determine, on top of the optimal exponent γ =
2
3 , also the prefactor C. We will specify to a 2-layer linear MLP, which is sufficient to describe the
transition in the hierarchy of timescales described above, and is simple enough to exactly compute
C. We will show in Sec. 4.1 that C depends only mildly on the activation function. We apply a
simple matching principle to determine C, by asking that the deterministic timescale τ1 is equal to
the drift-diffusion timescale τ2 . In the previous section, we found the critical γ = 2/3 by requiring
these timescales have the same scaling in η. In order to determine C, we need more details of the
model architecture.
Definition E.1 (UV model). We define the UV model as a 2-layer linear network parametrized by
f (x) = √1n U V x ∈ Rm , where x ∈ Rd , V ∈ Rn×d , and U ∈ Rm×n . For d = m = 1, we refer to
this as the vector UV model (Rennie & Srebro, 2005; Saxe et al., 2014; Lewkowycz et al., 2020).

For a training dataset D = {(xa , y a ) a = 1, ..., P }, the dataset covariance matrix is Σij =
 1
   PP       a a
P     a=1 xi xj , and the dataset variance is µ2 = trΣ. For mean-squared error loss, it is possible
to explicitly determine the trace of the Hessian (see Appendix F). SGD with label noise introduces
y a → y a +  ξt where hξt2 i = 1, from which we identify σµ,ja = P −1 ∇µ fj (xa ), where µ runs over
all parameter indices, j ∈ [m], and a ∈ [P ]. With this choice, the SGD noise covariance satisfies
σσ T = P −1 ∇2 L. Equipped with this, we may use Corollary 3.5 with c = P −1 to determine the
effective drift (presented in Appendix F). For the vector UV model, the expression simplifies to
dY = −τ2−1 Y dt, with
                                                 η 2−2γ  2 µ2
                                         τ2−1 =               .                                (118)
                                                   2nP C 2

The timescale of the fast initial phase τ1−1 = (C/2)η γ follows from the previous section. Then
requiring τ1 = τ2 implies not only γ = 2/3, but
                                               2  1/3
                                                 µ2
                                         C=              .                                 (119)
                                                Pn

One particular feature to note here is that C will be small for overparametrized models and/or train-
ing with large datasets.

F    E FFECTIVE D RIFT IN UV MODEL

We start with mean-square loss
                                                P
                                            1 X
                                   L=             ||f (xa ) − y a ||2 ,                             (120)
                                           2P a=1

with the data covariance matrix Σ as defined in the text. The trace of the Hessian on the zero loss
manifold (L(w∗ ) = 0) is given explicitly by


                                   1
                                     mTr (ΣV > V ) + Tr Σ Tr (U U > ) .

                           trH =                                                                    (121)
                                   n
Taking gradients of this and plugging into Corollary 3.5, repeated in Eq. (117) leads to an explicit
expression for the drift-diffusion along the manifold


                    2 η 2−2γ 2                            TrΣ 1n

                                                                    0
            dY = −             ŜL Y dt,      Ŝ =                            ,   ŜL = PL ŜPL ,   (122)
                    4P C 2 n                                0      mΣ
The simplification we cite in App. E is due to the fact that for input and output dimension d = m =
1, we have that Σ = TrΣ = µ2 , and Ŝ is proportional to the identity.


                                                     27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For matrix sensing, in order to compute the trace of the Hessian, we use (8) with ξt = 0 and with
slightly different notation (V > instead of V ). The loss is then


                                              P
                                          1 X                       2
                                    L=           yi − Tr(Ai U V > ) ,                              (123)
                                         P d i=1

and define the data covariance matrices
                                P                                     P
                           1 X                                      1 X >
                   Σ̂1 =         Ai A>
                                     i ∈R
                                          d×d
                                              ,           Σ̂2 =          A Ai ∈ Rd×d .             (124)
                           P i=1                                    P i=1 i

Then the trace of the Hessian is


                                            2   2
                                    TrH =     Tr Σ̂ U U > + Σ̂1 V V > .                            (125)
                                            d

We find the noise function is
                                               2                4
                                      σµi =      ∇µ f (Ai ) ∈ Rd ×P                                (126)
                                              Pd
                             >
   P f (A) = Tr(U V A). Since Tthe Hessian on the zero loss manifold is Hµν
where
 2
                                                                                                      =
Pd    i ∇µ f (Ai )∇ν f (Ai ), we see that σσ = (2/P d)H. Therefore, we get



                        η 2−2γ 4 2

                                                              Σ̂2     0
               dY = −              ŜL Y dt,      Ŝ =                         ,   ŜL = PL ŜPL   (127)
                         4C 2 P d2                             0     Σ̂1

To get a crude estimate of the coefficient C in the main text, we approximate the top eigenvalue of
Ŝ with d1 TrΣ̂1 . With this, we get for


                                           P
                                  2     1 X                   2                 2
             η −2+2γ τ2−1 =                   TrA i A >
                                                      i ≈          dha2
                                                                      ij i =       ha2 i.          (128)
                              C 2 P d2 dP i=1             C 2 P d2           C 2 dP ij

Here we have denoted by aij an arbitrary element of the data matrices A, with brackets signifying
an average over the distribution of these elements. Assuming the fast initial phase remains the same,
so that τ1−1 ≈ (C/2)η γ , we get


                                                     2 2 2
                                              C3 =      ha i                                       (129)
                                                     dP ij

For the values used in our experiments, this gives C ≈ 0.12 × P −1/3 .

G    L INEARIZATION A NALYSIS OF M OMENTUM G RADIENT D ESCENT IN THE
     SCALING LIMIT

Here we elaborate on the discussion in Sec. 3.3, providing derivations of various results. We take
a straightforward linearization of the deterministic (noise-free) gradient descent with momentum.
Working in the extended phase space x = (π, w), the dynamical updates are of the form


                                                               (β − 1)πt − ∇L(wt )
                    xt+1 = xt + F (xt ),       F (xt ) =                             .             (130)
                                                                η(βπt − ∇L(wt ))


                                                     28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The fixed point of the evolution x∗ = (0, w∗ ) will have the momentum variable π = 0, and the
coordinate satisfying ∇L(w∗ ) = 0. Linearizing the update (130) around this point


                                                                    −∇2 L(w∗ )

                                                             β
                    δxt+1 = J(x∗ )δxt ,       J(x∗ ) =                                 .          (131)
                                                             ηβ   1 − η∇2 L(w∗ )

Note ∇2 L(w∗ ) is the Hessian of the loss function at the fixed point. The spectrum of the Jacobian
can be written in terms of the eigenvalues of the Hessian λi . This is accomplished by using a
straightforward ansatz for the (unnormalized) eigenvectors of the Jacobian k i = (µi q i , q i ), where
q i are eigenvectors of the Hessian with eigenvalue λi . Solving the resulting coupled eigenvalue
equations for eigenvalue κi :

                            1 − ηλi + ηβµi = κi ,        −λi + µi β = µi κi .                     (132)

For a fixed λi , there will be two solutions given by


                     1                p
                 κi± =  1 + β − ηλi ± (1 + β − ηλi )2 − 4β , i = 1, ..., D                        (133)
                     2
                 i     1                p
                µ± =       β − 1 + ηλi ± (1 + β − ηλi )2 − 4β .                                   (134)
                     2βη

For the set of zero modes λi = 0, we get the following modes: κ+ = 1, corresponding to motion
only along w, with eigenvector k i = (0, q i ). In addition, there is a mixed longitudinal mode which
includes a component of π along the zero manifold k i = (µ− q i , q i ), and has an eigenvalue κ− = β.
On the zero loss manifold, we can assume the Hessian is positive semi-definite, and that the positive
eigenvalues satisfy

                                             0 < c1 ≤ λi ≤ c2 .                                   (135)

for constants c1 , c2 independent of η, β.
We now analyze the spectrum of the Jacobian one eigenvalue at a time, and then use these results to
informally control the relaxation rate of off-manifold perturbations. It is useful first to consider the
conditions for stability, i.e. |κi | < 1, which are stated in (136,137) below:



                                 β)2 , then κi± ∈ R and |κi± | < 1 iff 0 < ηλi < 2(1 + β).
                             p
   Case 1 : If ηλi < (1 −                                                                         (136)
                                 β)2 , then κi± ∈ C and |κi± | = β < 1.
                             p                                   p
   Case 2 : If ηλi > (1 −                                                                         (137)

                                             √
Proof of Case 1: The condition ηλi < (1 − β)2 implies A2 > 4β, where A = 1 + β − ηλi . The
condition for stability then requires −1 < κi < +1. We satisfy both sides of this inequality:
If 1 + β − ηλi = A > 0, then |κi− | < 1,and κi+ > 0, so we simply require κi+ < 1, i.e.

                              κi < +1                                                             (138)
                              1     p
                                (A + A2 − 4β) < 1                                                 (139)
                              2 p
                              + A2 − 4β < 2 − A                                                   (140)
                                 2                       2
                              A − 4β < 4 − 4A + A                                                 (141)
                              A = 1 + β − ηλi < 1 + β             ⇒ ηλi > 0                       (142)


                                                    29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If 1 + β − ηλi < 0, then |κi+ | < 1, and κi− < 1, so we only require κi− > −1
                           − 1 < κi−                                                         (143)
                                  1      p
                           − 1 < (−|A| − A2 − 4β)                                            (144)
                                  2 p
                          |A| − 2 < − A2 − 4β                                                (145)
                                     p
                          2 − |A| > A2 − 4β                                                  (146)
                           2                   2
                          A − 4|A| + 4 > A − 4β                                              (147)
                          |A| = −1 − β + ηλi < 1 + β           ⇒ ηλi < 2(1 + β)              (148)
                                           √
Proof of Case 2: the condition ηλi > (1 − β)2 implies A2 < 4β, where A = (1    p + β − ηλi ).
                                                               ±
The corresponding  eigenvalues of the Jacobian can be written κi =   (1/2)(A ±   A2 − 4β) =
                                                                 ± 2
           p
(1/2)(A ± i 4β − A ). Computing the absolute value then gives |κi | = (1/4)(A + 4β − A2 ) =
                     2                                                         2

β
These results show us when the GD+momentum is stable. Next, assuming stability, we want to
estimate the rate of convergence to the fixed point. More precisely, we would like to determine the
fastest mode as well as the slowest mode. To this end, we define two quantities
                               ρ1 = max{|κi± | i = 1, ..., D, |κi± | < 1}.                   (149)
                               ρ2 = min{|κi± |     i = 1, ..., D,   |κi± | < 1}.             (150)

Using the explicit scaling for momentum, and in the limit of small learning rate, we prove the
following for ρ1 :
Lemma G.1. Let β = 1 − Cη γ , and η sufficiently small:
For γ < 1/2, the condition for Case 1 (136) holds,
                                          ρ1 ≈ 1 − (c1 /C)η 1−γ ,                            (151)
                                          ρ2 ≈ 1 − Cη γ .                                    (152)
.
For γ > 1/2, the condition for Case 2 (137), and
                                         p
                                   ρ1 = β ≈ 1 − (C/2)η γ ,                                   (153)
                                   ρ2 = β = 1 − Cη γ .                                       (154)
.

Proof: For small η, we find that
                                   p                      2
                      η −1 (1 −
                                                p
                                       β)2 = 1 − 1 − Cη γ ≈ C 2 η 2γ−1 /4.                   (155)

When γ > 1/2, this expression tends to zero as η → 0.                                   √ η, the
                                                        √ Therefore, for sufficiently small
              Case 2 (137) will be satisfied and |κi | = β for all λi > 0. Since β < β, this
condition for √
implies ρ1 = β and ρ2 = β. The scaling behavior in the Lemma follows by substitution.
For γ < 1/2, (155) diverges as η → 0, which means Case 1 (136) will obtain for all λi . Next, since
for small η, 1 + β − ηλi > 1 + β − ηc2 = 2 − Cη γ − ηc2 > 0, since C and c2 are order one
constants, and η → 0. In this case, the largest contribution from the nonzero eigenvalues λi will
come from κi+ . In particular, we find


                      1               p
               |κi+ | ≤  1 + β − ηc1 + (1 + β − ηc1 )2 − 4β ,                                (156)
                      2
                      1
                                        q
                                γ           2 2γ             γ 2 2
                    =    2 − Cη − ηc1 + C η − 2(2 − Cη )ηc1 + η c1 .                         (157)
                      2


                                                      30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For γ < 1/2, we have the hierarchy η γ > η 2γ > η > η γ+1 > η 2 . This allows us to simplify the
upper bound
                                                       c1 1−γ
                                ρ1 = max|κi+ | ≤ 1 −     η    + O(η).                           (158)
                                                       C

Next, we find a lower bound for ρ2 . This will be controlled by κi− . We may use then that


                   1               p
ρ2 = min{|κi− |} ≥    1 + β − ηc2 − (1 + β − ηc1 )2 − 4β ,                             (159)
                   2
                1
                                   q
              =    2 − Cη γ − ηc2 − C 2 η 2γ − 2(2 − Cη γ )ηc1 + η 2 c21 ≈ 1 − Cη γ + O(η 1−γ )
                2
                                                                                       (160)

Finally, note that since η 1−γ < η γ , we have that 1 − cC1 η 1−γ > 1 − Cη γ = β, so indeed ρ2 < ρ1 .
Equipped with the upper and lower bounds on the spectrum leads naturally to bounds on the relax-
ation rate. For the purely decaying modes at γ < 1/2, we use ρt2 ≤ |δxTt | ≤ ρt1 , δxTt represents the
projection of the fluctuations δxt onto the transverse and mixed longitudinal modes. After applying
Eqs. (151) and (152), we arrive at the result quoted in the main text in Sec. 3.3. For γ >√1/2, the
modes are oscillatory. However, the eigenvalues within the unit circle have norm either β, β, as
reflected in Eqs. (153) and (154). This implies that we can estimate the decay rate of the envelope
of the transverse and mixed longitudinal modes in this regime, thereby arriving at second expression
quoted in the main text in Sec. 3.3.


H    L INEARIZED SGD AND O RNSTEIN -U HLENBECK PROCESS ON THE
     VALLEY

In this appendix, we provide a derivation of some of the statements quoted in Sec. 1.1. To get
there, we start with the basic model for momentum SGD (1) but linearize around a point on the
valley w0 ∈ Γ where L(w0 ) = ∇L(w0 ) = 0. Let wk = w0 + δwk , and define the Hessian
H(w0 ) = ∇2 L(w0 ). Then
              πk+1 = βπk − H(w0 )δwk +  σ(w0 )ξk ,             δwk+1 = δwk + ηπk+1 ,            (161)

Consider the projector along transverse nonzero eigemode λ of H(w0 ), PλT , and define PλT x = X,
and PλT π = Π. Let σ̄ = PλT σ, and PλT H = λPλT . Let σ̄σ̄ > = Λ. Then


                              Πk+1 = βΠk − λXk +  σ̄(w0 )ξk ,                                   (162)
                              Xk+1 = Xk + ηΠk+1 ,                                               (163)
                                   = Xk + ηβΠk − ηλXk + η σ̄(w0 )ξk                             (164)

This is a simple OU process, and we can easily compute the second moments. Define the second
moments


                 C12 (k) = hXk Πk i,     C11 (k) = hXk Xk i,    C22 (k) = hΠk Πk i.             (165)

We find by taking the equations above, squaring them, then averaging over the noise,
       C22 (k + 1) = β 2 C22 (k) − 2βλC12 (k) + λ2 C11 (k) +  2 Λ,                              (166)
                          2                                                           2
       C12 (k + 1) = ηβ C22 (k) + β(1 − 2ηλ)C12 (k) − λ(1 − ηλ)C11 (k) + η  Λ,                  (167)
                        2 2                                          2             2 2
       C11 (k + 1) = η β C22 + 2ηβ(1 − ηλ)C12 (k) + .(1 − ηλ) C11 (k) + η   Λ.                  (168)


                                                 31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, assuming a stationary distribution implies C(k + 1) = C(k), which then allows us to solve for
equilibrium variance, and extract the main quantity of interest, which is the variance of the weights.
We find then
                                                   η 2  2 Λ
                              C11 (k) =                            .                            (169)
                                          (1 − β)ηλ(2(1 + β) − ηλ)

In the limit of small η we extract the scaling behavior quoted in Sec.(1.1).
We can see how the mixing timescale τ1 , discussed in Sec. 1.1, arises from this linearized analysis.
By taking the expectation value of the OU process, the noise will vanish and we find that the average
values follow the linearized GD dynamics analyzed in G. Thus, from this linearized GD analysis we
can extract the characteristic timescale for the OU process to approach its mean value.


                                                 32
