Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ED OD: F EDERATED O UTLIER D ETECTION VIA N EU -
RAL A PPROXIMATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Outlier detection (OD) is a crucial machine learning task with key applications
         in various sectors such as security, finance, and healthcare. Preserving data pri-
         vacy has been increasingly important for OD due to the sensitivity of the data
         involved. While federated learning (FL) offers the potential to protect data pri-
         vacy, it is not yet available for most classical OD algorithms, such as those based
         on distance and density estimation. To address this, we introduce F ED OD, the first
         FL-based system designed for general OD algorithms. F ED OD effectively over-
         comes the privacy and efficiency challenges inherent in classical OD algorithms
         by automatically decomposing these algorithms into a set of basic operators and
         approximating their behaviors using neural networks. Given the inherent compat-
         ibility of neural networks with FL, the approximated OD algorithms also become
         capable of privacy-preserving learning without data exchange. With this design,
         F ED OD supports over 20 popular classical OD algorithms and is readily extend-
         able to other fields like classification and clustering. Evaluation on more than
         30 benchmark and synthetic datasets demonstrates F ED OD’s accuracy and effi-
         cacy over state-of-the-art baselines—compared to existing OD systems, F ED OD
         achieves up to 11× reduction in errors and 10× improvement in performance.



1   I NTRODUCTION
Outlier detection (OD) is an important class of machine learning (ML) algorithms that identify
observations or data points deviating from the expected behavior or patterns in a dataset Zhao et al.
(2019), with numerous applications in security Khan et al. (2007), finance Lee et al. (2020), and
healthcare Gupta et al. (2021). Among these applications, one key consideration is preserving data
privacy, especially in scenarios where sensitive data is involved. For instance, OD has been used to
identify rare diseases (as outliers) in patients, while cross-hospital data sharing is often prohibited
due to regulatory reasons Pfitzner et al. (2021). This constraint restricts the analysis of an OD
algorithm to data available in a single hospital, thereby constraining its performance.
To preserve user privacy while maintaining high predictive performance, federated learning
(FL) Konečnỳ et al. (2016) enables a new ML training paradigm, where an ML model is trained
locally on a decentralized network of agents (e.g., hospitals in our motivating example). Instead of
directly sending training data to a centralized server, each agent trains a model locally using private
training samples. Once the local training process is completed, agents synchronize local gradients
to update the model for future training. The process is repeated until achieving the desired accuracy.
FL has been widely deployed in distributed DNN training Konečnỳ et al. (2016) and ensemble
learning Smith et al. (2017). For instance, neural networks (NN; also known as “deep” methods)
can conveniently learn in a distributed manner using batches, necessitating only model parameter
updates without the need for data exchange Goodfellow et al. (2016). This contrasts with non-neural-
network-based (also known as “classical”) ML algorithms such as k nearest neighbors (kNN) and
clustering Wu et al. (2008), which are thus not directly compatible with FL.
While neural-network-based OD algorithms can directly leverage FL paradigms by performing neu-
ral network computation using local samples Preuveneers et al. (2018); Li et al. (2020a); Gupta et al.
(2021); Nguyen et al. (2019); Pei et al. (2022); Astillo et al. (2022), most classical OD algorithms,
such as kNN OD Angiulli & Pizzuti (2002) and local outlier factor (LOF) Breunig et al. (2000),


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  cdist: compute pairwise distance to all other samples        topk: get neighbors   Figure 1: Demo. of dependency challenges
                   …    cross-agent                  dist 2               0.01       in classical OD. Top: kNN OD needs to
                                            …
                                                                                     compute pairwise distances (by cdist)


                                                      …
                                                                          0.01
dist(𝐗 𝟏 , 𝐗 𝐦 )
                   …                        …        dist m               0.07
                                                                 top 3    1.44       of a sample to all other samples (on both
                                                     dist 1

                   …


                                            …
                                                                          1.84       Agent 1 and Agent 2) and then find the


                                                       …
                   …                        …
                                                     dist n               2.34
         Agent 1 (m samp.)       Agent 2 (n samp.)                        4.33       top k neighbors (by topk). Note that
                                      update w/
                                                                                     cross-agent distance calculation is infeasi-
                                      Agent 1’s
                                                     dist 2’
                                                                                     ble with privacy constraints (denoted in red
                                      dist.
                                                                                     arrows). Bottom: F ED OD uses NN to ap-


                                                      …
                                                     dist m’
                   …   pred. dist.                                                   proximate cdist operator to predict pair-
                                                     dist 1’                         wise distances, where the NN is updated


                                                       …
                                                     dist n’                         w.r.t. the local data on Agents 1, 2, and so
  ours: predict pairwise distance to all samples by NN                               on. No cross-agent dist. calc. is needed.
involve global inter-sample data dependencies (i.e., computing the nearest neighbors of a sample re-
quires accessing all other samples), and face unique challenges when training in a federated fashion.
Challenge 1: data dependency. Most classical OD algorithms have both (1) inter-sample data
dependency, where the estimation of a sample depends on other samples , and (2) inter-feature data
dependency1 , where all features contribute to the estimation of outlier scores Zhao et al. (2023). For
example, kNN computes the k-th nearest neighbor of a sample as its outlier score, as shown in Fig.
1, where a larger distance indicates that the sample is far from others and thus likely to be an outlier.
We need all other samples across agents to calculate and compare a sample’s k-th nearest neighbor.
This communication is not feasible under the FL assumptions where data reside on different agents,
and cross-agent data sharing is strictly prohibited. In this example, the samples on Agent 1 do not
have access to the samples on Agent 2 since the cross-agent distance calculation is infeasible; this
prevents existing FL systems from supporting kNN for OD.
Challenge 2: computational cost. Classical OD algorithms involve high training and inference
cost, which introduces additional difficulty under the FL setting due to the limited computational
power of each agent—which is often an edge device. Given n training samples and nt inference
samples, Appx. Table A1 shows the computational complexity for many classical OD algorithms,
most of which involves a complexity higher than O(n · nt ). High computational complexity for
inference impedes the use of classical OD algorithms in most time-critical FL applications, such as
real-time credit card fraud detection Boniol et al. (2021); Jiang et al. (2022; 2023).
Our approach. To address these challenges, this paper presents federated learning based outlier
detection (F ED OD)2 that can support diverse classical OD algorithms for privacy-preserving and
scalable learning. Fig. 2 shows an overview of F ED OD’s approach. First, we analyze a diverse
group of classical OD algorithms, including distance-, density-, and tree-based algorithms, and de-
compose them into a small set of basic OD operators (see Fig. 2 (left) and §3). For each OD
operator, we design a neural network approximation to iteratively learn the behavior of the OD op-
erator from local data without inter-sample data dependency (see Fig. 2 (middle) and §4.1). By
combining these neural networks, F ED OD approximates classical OD algorithms and leverages ex-
isting FL paradigms for privacy-preserving learning (see Fig. 2 (right) and §4.2). An example of our
approach is provided in Fig. 1 bottom, where we show that F ED OD can support classical kNN OD
by approximating distance calculation using a neural network to predict pair-wise distances other
than calculating them. Note that the neural network here is trained only with regard to the local
samples, without the need to access cross-agent samples. Our key contributions are:

• The first FL system for diverse OD algorithms. F ED OD supports more than 20 popular classical
  OD algorithms for privacy-preserving learning and can be easily extended to more.
• Model decomposition and neural approximation. F ED OD decomposes OD algorithms into ba-
  sic operators and approximates them with neural networks with specialized local updating strate-
  gies, including k-nearest neighbors and clustering.
• Effectiveness and scalability. Extensive experiments on more than 30 datasets show that F ED OD
  outperforms the baseline with up to 11× error reduction and 10× speed up.
    1
      In this work, we focus on horizontal FL where all agents have the same set of features and only introduce
inter-feature dependency for completeness.
    2
      Code is available at anonymous Google Drive: https://tinyurl.com/fedod2023


                                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Sec. 3                          Sec. 4.1                                         Sec. 4.2 updates the central server w/ the local data
                     basic
                   operator 1                                            NN 1                         Central Server
                                                                                                       Network 𝑓
     Outlier                          Neural
                     basic                                                                                       Gradient update
    Detection                        Network                             NN 2                        Weight
                   operator 2                                                                                    w.r.t. local data loss
     Task 𝑶                          Converter
                                                                                                     sync


                      …
                                                                                                                                Agent 𝐾


                                                              …
                                                                                      Agent 1         Agent 2
 MD decomposes                   NNC converts                                         Gradient        Gradient                  Gradient
                     basic                                                            Update          Update          …
 an OD task into                 an operator into                                                                               Update
                   operator ℎ                                            NN ℎ
 basic operators                 neural networks                                      ∇𝑓(𝐗 𝟏)         ∇𝑓(𝐗 𝟐)                    ∇𝑓(𝐗 𝐭)



Figure 2: F ED OD overview (§2): decomposes an OD method into shared basic operators (left; §3),
which are approximated by neural nets (middle; §4.1) for privacy-preserving training (right; §4.2).

2     F EDERATED O UTLIER D ETECTION
2.1       P ROBLEM D EFINITION

A key object of federated outlier detection is to improve the predictive performance of OD algo-
rithms by leveraging samples across agents while preserving data privacy of each agent. Consider a
horizontal FL system that supports m OD models M = {M1 , ..., Mm }. It can train an OD model
M ∈ M using a distributed dataset located on K agents, where each agent k ∈ 1, . . . , K possesses
a private dataset Xk ∈ Rnk ×d without ground truth labels. Collectively, X is the aggregated dataset
across all agents, where each row corresponds to an individual training sample and each column
represents a feature of the sample, with a total of d unified features across all agents. The FL sys-
tem outputs the outlier scores, denoted as O := M (X) ∈ Rn , which provides anomaly scores for
samples across all local agents and infer on the test samples Otest = M (Xtest ). The key difference
between FL-based OD and general OD lies in designing privacy-preserving techniques that allow
agents to train the OD model M collectively across all agents without data sharing, where general
OD algorithms require access to all samples.

2.2       F ED OD’ S OVERVIEW

To address the aforementioned challenges in data privacy and inference efficiency, a key idea behind
F ED OD is to decompose a diversity of classical OD algorithms into a set of basic OD operators and
use a neural network to approximate each operator. By doing so, existing FL frameworks designed
for neural networks become available for classical OD algorithms through neural approximation.
Figure 2 provides an overview of F ED OD.                                        ABOD                            LOF
Firstly, an OD algorithm is decomposed into
low-level OD operators (§3), each of which is                                                                                              Neural Approx.
                                                        Neural Approx.


then converted into a neural network (§4.1). Fi-                                  kNN            shared          kNN

nally, these neural networks are trained by F E -
D OD in a federated fashion, using specialized                                   cosine                           nwr
local update strategies (§4.2). Thus, combining                                 similarity

these neural approximations by concatenating                                     outlier                      outlier
their network architectures emulates the out-                                    scores                       scores
puts of the OD algorithm.
                                                Figure 3: Example of building complex OD al-
In addition to the kNN example in Fig. 1, gorithms ABOD and LOF by shared basic opera-
Fig. 3 shows two additional examples for train- tors, e.g., kNN. Each operator is approximated by
ing ABOD and LOF in F ED OD. Specific, each a neural network (on two sides), which is trained
complex OD algorithm is decomposed as a se- sequentially as shown in the computational graph.
quence of basic operators (e.g., ABOD is de-
composed into kNN followed by cosine similarity), where each operator is approximated
by a neural network in F ED OD. As illustrated in the figure, we use a combination of neural net-
works to approximate an OD algorithm; the output of one neural network becomes the input of the
subsequent neural network—thus, these networks are trained together in an end-to-end fashion.

3     M ODEL D ECOMPOSITION
Overview. Real-world applications often require diverse OD algorithms based on the data char-
acteristics Zhao et al. (2021; 2022); Ma et al. (2023). To support a wide range of OD algorithms


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Outlier Detection Algorithms as Combinations of Basic Operators
   kNNOD         ABOD         COF            LOF            LOCI          HBOS            LODA           PCA            COPOD         ECOD
    (5+a)       (5+7+a)      (5+a+f)       (5+6+a)         (5+6+a)       (c+d+e)         (c+d+g)         (2+f)           (d+f)         (d+f)

       FB           LSCP         OCSVM           iForest          CBLOF              LOD
                                                                                                         …               …              …
      (8+e)        (5+a+c)        (3+f)          (10+g)           (5+9+a)           (1+4+f)



 3.1 Convex Operators          3.2 Non-convex Operators                                       3.3 Simple Operators
    1. linear                                  6. neighbors within          7. cosine
                  2. SVD        5. cdist                                                       a. topk        b. rank     c. aggr.     d. hist.
   regression                                        Range                  similarity

                                  8. density             9.              10. decision                               f. basic          g. feat.
   3. SVM        4. Lasso                                                                      e. intersect
                                  estimation         clustering              tree                                     ops.           sampler

Figure 4: With model decomposition, more than 20 OD algorithms are decomposed into 4 convex
operators (§3.1), 6 non-convex operators (§3.2), and 7 simple operators (§3.3). This decomposition
reduces the implementation and optimization effort, and makes adding new OD operators easy.
under FL, we adapt and extend existing work on the OD decomposition model Zhao et al. (2023).
The key idea is to decompose complex OD algorithms into low-level recurring operators, which are
shared across diverse OD algorithms (see left of Fig. 2). For instance, the OD algorithms ABOD and
LOF share a basic operator kNN to identify the k-th nearest neighbors (see Fig. 3). By identifying
these recurring operators for F ED OD, we gain two benefits: (1) since each neural approximator is
compatible with FL, combining them can yield FL-enabled OD algorithms, and (2) it reduces design
and optimization effort—each basic operator’s neural approximator only needs to be designed once.
Operator categories. After reviewing a diverse set of OD algorithms, we categorize basic OD
operators into two groups: convex operators (§3.1) and non-convex operators (§3.2), depending on
whether the underlying operator has a convex optimization objective. For an operator with a convex
objective, its neural approximation (§4) uses a gradient-based optimization to achieve better conver-
gence properties (e.g., fewer training epochs). In contrast, non-convex OD operators require more
specialized design and pose additional challenges for convergence. Additionally, certain simple op-
erators do not require any approximation (§3.3). Figure 4 illustrates the OD algorithms supported
in the current implementation of F ED OD and the corresponding basic operators by category. Note
that operators are independent, and F ED OD can be easily extended to support new OD operators.

3.1     C ONVEX OD O PERATORS
An operator convex if, for every pair of points within its domain, the operator applied to the weighted
average of the points is less than or equal to the weighted average of the operator applied to the
points Boyd & Vandenberghe (2004). Convex OD operators offer many desirable properties. An
important one is that any local minimum of a convex function is also a global minimum, which
greatly simplifies the search for a global optimal. Thus, using a gradient-based optimization in a
neural network can generally approximate convex operators well via gradient-based optimizations
Snyman et al. (2005) and takes less training time. Fig. 4 and Appx. B.1 left discuss a few commonly
used convex operators by classical OD algorithms with additional ones including support vector
machine (SVM) Tibshirani (1996) and Lasso Cortes & Vapnik (1995).

3.2     N ON - CONVEX OD O PERATORS
A non-convex operator is one that does not satisfy the convex condition. Handling non-convex op-
erators in optimization is challenging because they often have multiple local minima, and standard
gradient-based optimization methods may get stuck in these local minima rather than finding the
global minimum, leading to more complexity of neural approximation with gradient-based opti-
mization Boyd & Vandenberghe (2004). Fig. 4 (middle) and Appx. B.2 shows some key operators
supported in F ED OD in addition to cosine similarity calculation, and density estimation.

3.3     S IMPLE OD O PERATORS
Not all operators necessitate a (neural) approximation. Certain operators do not involve computation
and/or optimization, and can thus be directly executed federated. This category includes most sorting
and ranking operators. For instance, the kNN operator comprises two primary steps: (1) computing


                                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the pairwise distances among samples, and (2) identifying the top k distances per sample. The first
step involves computation and should be approximated by a neural network, while the second step,
which is about finding the top k values, can be directly applied to the output of the first step, without
the need for any approximation. Figure 4 (right) summarizes the simple operators in F ED OD.

4       OD A PPROXIMATION
4.1       N EURAL N ETWORK C ONVERTER

As existing FL frameworks are designed for neural networks Li et al. (2020a), we propose converting
basic OD operators (see §3) each into a neural network. This conversion is theoretically feasible
since a neural network is a “universal approximator” Hornik et al. (1989). The choice of neural
network approximations, such as architectures, can be flexible, provided that the model capacity is
sufficient — the neural networks are adequately complex for approximation (see §5.4.1). Under this
criterion, fully-connected multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) Rumelhart et al. (1986) serve as the default
choice in F ED OD. We have also explored more recent architectures like Transformers Vaswani et al.
(2017) (see §5.4.2). F ED OD’s neural network converter (NNC) translates basic OD operators in Fig.
4 into neural networks, as depicted in the middle of Fig. 2. Notably, this is the first proposal for
neural approximations of general classical OD algorithms such as kNN and clustering. With the OD
model decomposition and the NNC, a variety of classical OD algorithms can be decomposed into
and approximated by neural networks, which can then be trained in existing FL systems.

4.2       T RAINING M ETHODOLOGY

Local ground truth. Even after OD operators are converted to neural networks, training them on
each local agent without data sharing requires special considerations. As depicted on the right of
Fig. 2, F ED OD’s goal is to train a central model f (·), i.e., the neural network generated from NNC
as an approximation of the underlying OD operator.
To update f (·), we can average local gradients using the data on each agent, i.e., ∇f (X1 ), ∇f (X2 ),
a technique known as Federated Averaging (FedAvg)3 in Eq. (2) McMahan et al. (2017). However,
local gradients are not directly computable due to global data dependencies (i.e., the global ground
truth of k-th nearest neighbors is unavailable).
In F ED OD, we introduce a set of novel local-update strategies for each neural OD operator. The
key is to design a loss function that allows each neural OD operator to update the model with respect
to the local data only, to approximate the global ground truth.
Clustering example. The goal of k-means clustering is to partition n samples across all agents into
clusters defined by sample similarity. As described in §3.2, the sample similarity can be measured
by pairwise Euclidean distances —samples in the same cluster should be close. For an n × d input
matrix, all n samples are needed for the Euclidean distance calculation (i.e., cdist). However,
in the FL setting, the i-th agent can only access private data Xi ∈ Rnk ×d and the local distance
of Di = cdist(Xi , Xi ). We cannot access the global sample similarity across all agents by only
looking at a partition of data on a local agent.
Suppose we use a neural network to approximate k-Means without considering privacy preservation,
the model may minimize the discrepancy between the predicted cluster assignment and the ground
truth cluster assignment (unavailable in our settings). Differently, F ED OD performs local updates
without accessing the global ground truth of cluster assignments, as shown in Algorithm 1. The key
is to design a loss function solely based on the local data.
First, we initialize the central model f (·) with parameters w and pre-compute the local pairwise
distances for all K agents, i.e., Dk = cdist(Xk , Xk ) (lines 1-4). Second, for the k-th agent, let
c = fk (Xk ) denote the predicted cluster labels for the local data by the current model. Given
b
there are nk samples on the k-th agent, our loss defined in Eq. 1 aims to minimize the intra-cluster
distance and maximize the inter-cluster distance for each local sample given the predicted cluster
labels by f (·) (lines 5-10). Note this only uses the data on the k-th agent.

    3
        Other FL frameworks can also be applied; we use FedAvg as an example.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Neural approximation of k-Means clustering
Input: Central neural model f (·) with weights w and objective function L, K local agents where
   the k-th agent with private data Xk ∈ Rnk ×d in the same d-dimension feature space; local
   neural network models {f1 , . . . , fK }; training budget T
Output: The trained neural model f (·) across local agents

 1: Initialize the central model f (·)
 2: for each local agent k = 1 to K do
 3:   Compute pairwise local distance matrix Dk = cdist(Xk , Xk )
 4: end for

 5: for t = 1 to T do
 6:   for each local agent k = 1 to K do
 7:      Get current central model weights wt and initialize the local model fk to it
 8:                                                   c = fk (Xk )
         Predict the cluster labels on the local data b
                                                                               (t)
 9:      Compute local loss Lk = (b  c, Dk ) and gradient ∇wk to minimize the intra-cluster and
         maximize the inter-cluster distance given the predicted cluster labels by Eq. (1)
10:   end for
11:   Update the central model w(t+1) by FedAvg in Eq. (2)
12: end for



                                             nk X
                                             X                 X                X
                          L(b
                            c, Dk )) =                  (−            Di,j +             Di,j )         (1)
                                             i=1 j̸=i        ci =b
                                                             b   cj            ci ̸=b
                                                                               b    cj

                                                          min. intra dist.     max. inter dist.
                                                                                                  (t)   (t)
At t-th iteration, F ED OD iterates over all the agents to aggregate the local gradients w1 , . . . , wK
(line 11).; one straightforward way is to use FedAvg as shown in Eq. (2).

                                                                 K
                                     (t+1)          (t)     1X        (t)
                                 w           := w         +    nk · ∇wk                                 (2)
                                                            n
                                                                k=1
In this way, we could update the central model without accessing any global samples as well as
ground truth labels. We design a local loss function For each supported operator in F ED OD.
4.3   A DVANTAGES OF F ED OD

Anytime inference. An anytime algorithm can return a valid solution even if it is not fully com-
plete Cutkosky (2019), which is particularly useful in real-time OD applications. These algorithms
typically present a trade-off between computational resources, like time or memory, and the quality
of the solution; for example, longer training time results in better accuracy. Neural networks are
naturally anytime algorithms due to their iterative training nature—we can make predictions at any
time during the training process. In contrast, most classical OD algorithms (see Table A1) cannot
make predictions until the training is fully complete, limiting their applicability in time-critical ap-
plications. However, F ED OD’s neural approximation techniques convert classical OD algorithms to
anytime algorithms, thus enhancing their flexibility.
Fast inference and optimization techniques. Existing OD algorithms often have high inference
cost due to distance calculation and/or density estimation. By employing neural approximation in
F ED OD, the inference time can be largely reduced to a single forward pass with the data. Thus,
for large datasets with high feature dimensions, F ED OD offers shorter inference time. Additionally,
any neural network optimization techniques, such as parallelization Schneider et al. (2021); Wang
et al. (2023), quantization Zhao et al. (2023), also apply to shallow OD algorithms via F ED OD. See
§5.3 for a detailed comparison of inference times.
Generality and extensibility. Thanks to the generality of basic operators in F ED OD, it can be easily
extended to support ML algorithms beyond OD, such like classification. Moreover, integrating
new operators into F ED OD is straightforward, requiring just two simple steps. First, we need to


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


understand the general properties of the operator to be added, including its convexity, inputs, and
outputs. Second, we need to design a local loss function that can be computed solely based on the
local data, as described in §4.2. Our experience of developing F ED OD shows that it generally takes
a few hours to add a new OD operator and its neural approximation.

5     E XPERIMENTS
Our experiments aim to answer the following questions: (i) How does the detection performance of
F ED OD compare to baselines, both with and without privacy preservation? (§5.2) (ii) How efficient
and scalable is F ED OD when handling larger datasets? (§5.3) (iii) How do the designs in F ED OD
impact its effectiveness? (§5.4)

5.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Datasets. Appx Table C2 displays over 21 real-world OD datasets used in this study, primarily
sourced from two popular repositories, i.e., DAMI Campos et al. (2016) and ODDS Rayana (2016).
These datasets have been widely employed in OD research Tran et al. (2020); Schmidl et al. (2022);
Han et al. (2022); Zhao et al. (2023).
OD algorithms and operators. We include five diverse OD algorithms to show the effectiveness of
F ED OD: (1) Distance-based kNN for OD Ramaswamy et al. (2000); (2) Density-based local outlier
factor (LOF) Breunig et al. (2000); (3) Linear PCA for OD Shyu et al. (2003); (4) Clustering-based
OD method (CBLOF) He et al. (2003); and (5) Tree-based isolation forest (iForest) Liu et al. (2008).
Implementation and environment. F ED OD is implemented on top of PyTorch Paszke et al. (2019),
where most algorithms only depend on 2-3 operators with low complexity. All the experiments are
performed on an Amazon EC2 p3.2xlarge cluster with an Intel Xeon CPU, 61GB DRAM, and an
NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU with 16GB RAM.
Baselines. As the first work for privacy-preserving OD with shallow methods, F ED OD is compared
with (1) ground truth where the access to all samples is assumed (no privacy preservation at all); we
use PyOD Zhao et al. (2019) to get the results and (2) direct results where we train K individual
models (one per local dataset) and concatenate the results (data privacy is preserved).
Evaluation metrics. Enabled by model approximation, F ED OD’s goal is to achieve similar per-
formance as the ground truth baseline while preserving privacy. With that in mind, we measure the
performance difference4 to the ground truth—the smaller the difference, the better the method.

5.2   E ND - TO - END C OMPARISONS

Appx. Table C3 illustrates that F ED OD achieves performance close to the ground truth and sur-
passes the direct baseline across all five OD algorithms with differing characteristics. Specifically,
F ED OD displays less than 5% ROC-AUC difference from the ground truth across all five OD al-
gorithms (1.79%, 3.93%, 2.05%, 1.96%, and 4.70% for kNN, LOF, PCA, CBLOF, and iForest,
respectively), whereas the direct method shows up to a 19% performance difference. It is worth
noting that F ED OD is 11 times better than direct on kNN on average (1.79% vs. 18.92%).
Convex operators seem to exhibit smaller approximation differences. As discussed in §3.1, PCA
(Table C3c) presents relatively minor performance differences (2.05%) and variations (2.44%). This
can be attributed to the favorable convergence properties of convex operators, whereas non-convex
operators like LOF (Table C3b, 3.93% ± 4.17%) and iForest (Table C3e, 4.70%± 4.72%) may
present much larger differences and variations (which are less desirable).

5.3   S CALABLITY OF F ED OD

We evaluate the scalability of F ED OD across datasets of varying sizes (ranging from 5,000 to
320,000 samples with 1,000 features), thereby simulating scenarios of OD on high-dimensional,
large datasets. Fig. 5 illustrates the inference time of F ED OD (in black) and direct baseline (in red).
   4
     We use the area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (ROC) as the performance; this can be
substituted with any other measure of interest.


                                                     7
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                       5                                                                40
                                 direct                                                            direct                                                    direct                                                direct                                            direct


Wall Time in Seconds


                                                                 Wall Time in Seconds


                                                                                                                                                                                Wall Time in Seconds


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wall Time in Seconds
                                                                                                                          Wall Time in Seconds
                                 FEDOD                                                             FEDOD                                         0.8         FEDOD                                     1.5         FEDOD                                 1.5         FEDOD
                       4
                                                                                        30

                       3                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.0                                               1.0
                                                                                        20
                       2                                                                                                                         0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5                                               0.5
                                                                                        10
                       1                                                                                                                         0.2


                       0                                                                 0                                                       0.0                                                   0.0                                               0.0
                              000
                           20 00
                                 0

                                 0


                                           0


                                                             0


                                                                                                000
                                                                                             20 00
                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                   0



                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                     00


                                                                                                                                                          0 0
                                                                                                                                                       40 00
                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                                             0



                                                                                                                                                                     00


                                                                                                                                                                           00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                000
                                                                                                                                                                                                             20 00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20 00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                00
                              00

                              00


                                        00


                                                           0


                                                                                                00

                                                                                                00



                                                                                                          00


                                                                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                          00

                                                                                                                                                          00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                00



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  00



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00
                            50


                                                        00


                                                                                              50


                                                                                                                   00


                                                                                                                                                                     00


                                                                                                                                                                          00


                                                                                                                                                                                                              50


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               00
                           10


                           40


                                       80


                                                                                             10


                                                                                             40



                                                                                                          80


                                                                                                                                                       10



                                                                                                                                                       80


                                                                                                                                                                                                             10


                                                                                                                                                                                                             40



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                        16


                                                                                                                   16


                                                                                                                                                                 16


                                                                                                                                                                          32


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            16


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                               (a) kNN                                                           (b) LOF                                                   (c) PCA                                            (d) CBLOF                                          (e) iForest
  Figure 5: Scalability plot of algorithms in F ED OD, where it scales well with increasing samples.
 F ED OD exhibits superior efficiency compared to direct across all datasets, particularly larger ones.
 For example, F ED OD achieves a 10× speed-up over the direct method on the CBLOF and iForest
 datasets. One of the primary reasons for this improvement is that the direct method needs to invoke
 multiple models for inference, while F ED OD relies solely on a single central model. Moreover,
 F ED OD only requires a single pass of the neural network, which is significantly more economical
 than the direct method, which relies on distance and/or density estimation.
 F ED OD demonstrates robust scalability with larger datasets. As shown in Fig. 5, the inference time
 scales linearly about the number of inference samples. This is attributed to the fact that the network
 parameters are fixed—the inference time is determined solely by the number of inference samples.
  5.4                          A BLATION S TUDIES AND A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS

  5.4.1                              E FFECT OF M ODEL C APACITY
 We assess model capacity by modifying the number of hidden neurons (x-axis) and the number of
 layers (y-axis) in the neural approximation of kNN, and compare their performance variance with
 the ground truth in Fig. 6. The results indicate that F ED OD’s performance is fairly insensitive to
 the neural model capacity, provided it is adequately large, with all variations remaining under 3%.
 Thus, we employ 64 hidden neurons and 2 layers across all experiments. Utilizing a comparatively
 small model curbs both training and inference costs. Also note that the basic operators are generally
 simple, and thus small neural network could be more cost-effective.
                                                                                                  0.028

                                                                                                  0.026
                              0.0179           0.0116    0.0148                                                Figure 6: Ablation studies on model capacity (i.e., size of neural
                       2


                                                                                                  0.024
                                                                                                               networks) of approximation: (x-axis) the number of hidden neu-
number of layers


                                                                                                  0.022
                              0.027            0.0194    0.0184                                   0.020
                                                                                                               rons and (y-axis) the number of layers. We show the avg. perfor-
                       3


                                                                                                  0.018        mance diff. (smaller the better) across all datasets on kNN (Table
                                                                                                  0.016        C3a); F ED OD is insensitive model capacity with small differences
                              0.0286           0.0168    0.0259
                                                                                                               with varying sizes of neural networks.
                       4


                                                                                                  0.014

                                                                                                  0.012
                                64              128            256
                                       hidden neurons

  5.4.2                              T HE C HOICE OF BACKBONE IN F ED OD
 We evaluate the performance of using a simple MLP versus the more recent transformers Vaswani
 et al. (2017) as the backbone of the neural approximator in §4. Transformers, capable of capturing
 attention between both data points and features, have demonstrated strong performance in recent
 ADBench studies Han et al. (2022). This might help us establish a relationship that correlates input
 directly to output, based not only on feature combinations but also on other data points. Here we
 utilize a transformer model with two self-attention heads and a stacking depth of two.
 Appx. Table C3f presents the performance of kNN using both MLP (Table C3a) and transformers
 (Table C3f). We observe that MLP outperforms transformers in 14 out of 21 datasets, while the
 average performances are comparable (1.79% vs. 2.77%). Note that both are superior to the direct
 baselines (18.92%). One reason for the lower performance of transformers might be their complexity
 and sensitivity to hyperparameters Chen et al. (2020). This affirms the choice of MLP as the default
 backbone for F ED OD, given its simplicity, speed, and robustness.

  6                          L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
 Automated network conversion. At present, the conversion of operators in F ED OD is carried
 out manually, a process that could be further automated using meta-learning Vanschoren (2018).


                                                                                                                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For instance, we could train multiple neural approximators on existing datasets to evaluate their
performance. When presented with a new dataset, we identify the most similar historical dataset and
transfer the optimal neural configurations Zhao et al. (2021) in a zero-shot manner. Also, network
parameters from similar historical datasets could be transferred Scott et al. (2018), thus reducing the
training cost.
Inference optimization. On top of the already efficient inference, F ED OD may further leverage
acceleration techniques for neural networks, including quantization Hubara et al. (2017), distributed
and multi-GPU learning Jia et al. (2017), etc. However, it is worth noting that further acceleration
may be at the cost of larger performance differences.

7   R ELATED W ORK

Federated learning for OD. OD is a crucial task in a variety of applications such as credit card
fraud detection Zhong et al. (2020), cybersecurity Mothukuri et al. (2021), healthcare Gupta et al.
(2021), and environmental anomaly detection Chandola et al. (2009). In many circumstances, due
to privacy constraints or regulatory requirements, data cannot be shared, rendering traditional OD
methods untenable. There exists a huge need for privacy-preserving OD methods that can operate
without sharing data, thereby preventing potential misuse of sensitive info Sater & Hamza (2021).
Federated learning (FL), as a leading privacy-preserving framework, has been applied to various
deep OD algorithms. These algorithms employ different neural architectures, including recurrent
neural networks (RNN) Nguyen et al. (2019); Mothukuri et al. (2021), autoencoders Pei et al. (2022),
LSTM Sater & Hamza (2021), and CNN Astillo et al. (2022). There are OD applications in diverse
domains such as healthcare Gupta et al. (2021); Astillo et al. (2022), internet of things (IoT) Nguyen
et al. (2019); Mothukuri et al. (2021), network security Pei et al. (2022), and smart buildings Sater
& Hamza (2021). Most of these works primarily focus on horizontal FL, where different agents
(e.g., mobile devices or workstations) hold a partition of samples from the same feature space. FL
for deep OD typically follows the following procedures Sater & Hamza (2021). Initially, a global
neural network OD model is initialized. Then, local datasets are utilized to update the model param-
eters through local training using techniques such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Finally, the
updated model parameters from each device are aggregated to update the global model for OD, such
as Federated Averaging (FedAvg) McMahan et al. (2017).
However, most classical OD algorithms cannot leverage existing FL frameworks due to inter-sample
data dependency as we elaborate in the introduction. Table A1 summarizes a diverse group of
classical OD algorithms, many of which lack a straightforward FL solution due to data dependency.
Hence, F ED OD is designed to address this gap while accelerating inference.
Neural approximation for OD. Neural networks are widely recognized for their remarkable func-
tion approximation capabilities Goodfellow et al. (2016). This is predominantly due to their ability
to model complex, high-dimensional, and nonlinear relationships inherent in data. The Universal
Approximation Theorem provides theoretical support to this notion by asserting that a feedforward
network with a single hidden layer containing a finite number of neurons can approximate con-
tinuous functions under specific conditions Hornik et al. (1989). Also, deep neural networks can
represent complex functions more compactly. This allows them to model complex patterns in data,
making them useful in various applications such as language translation and autonomous driving
LeCun et al. (2015). In F ED OD, we employ neural networks to approximate OD operators for the
dual purposes of preserving privacy and accelerating inference.

8   C ONCLUSION

We introduce F ED OD, a novel system designed to overcome challenges associated with privacy
preservation and efficiency in outlier detection applications. F ED OD enables popular federated
learning paradigm and extends its benefits to over 20 shallow (non-neural-network) OD algorithms.
The key steps include decomposing OD algorithms into shared operators for neural approximation,
after which federated learning becomes compatible with the operators. Through extensive experi-
ments on more than 30 datasets and 5 diverse detection algorithms, we demonstrate that F ED OD can
efficiently approximate OD algorithms while ensuring privacy. Future work can extend F ED OD’s
support to more other ML tasks and optimize it by neural network acceleration techniques.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Charu C. Aggarwal. Outlier Analysis. Springer, 2013.
Fabrizio Angiulli and Clara Pizzuti. Fast outlier detection in high dimensional spaces. In Tapio
  Elomaa, Heikki Mannila, and Hannu Toivonen (eds.), Principles of Data Mining and Knowledge
  Discovery, 6th European Conference, PKDD 2002, Helsinki, Finland, August 19-23, 2002, Pro-
  ceedings, volume 2431 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 15–26. Springer, 2002. doi:
  10.1007/3-540-45681-3\ 2. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45681-3_2.
Philip Virgil Astillo, Daniel Gerbi Duguma, Hoonyong Park, Jiyoon Kim, Bonam Kim, and Ilsun
  You. Federated intelligence of anomaly detection agent in iotmd-enabled diabetes management
  control system. Future Generation Computer Systems, 128:395–405, 2022.
Paul Boniol, John Paparrizos, Themis Palpanas, and Michael J Franklin. Sand: streaming subse-
  quence anomaly detection. VLDB, 14(10):1717–1729, 2021.
Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Markus M. Breunig, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Raymond T. Ng, and Jörg Sander. Lof: Identifying density-
 based local outliers. In SIGMOD, pp. 93–104. ACM, 2000. ISBN 1-58113-217-4.
Guilherme O Campos, Arthur Zimek, Jörg Sander, Ricardo JGB Campello, Barbora Micenková,
  Erich Schubert, Ira Assent, and Michael E Houle. On the evaluation of unsupervised outlier
  detection: measures, datasets, and an empirical study. Data mining and knowledge discovery, 30
  (4):891–927, 2016.
Varun Chandola, Arindam Banerjee, and Vipin Kumar. Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM com-
  puting surveys (CSUR), 41(3):1–58, 2009.
Tianlong Chen, Jonathan Frankle, Shiyu Chang, Sijia Liu, Yang Zhang, Zhangyang Wang, and
  Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis for pre-trained bert networks. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:15834–15846, 2020.
Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine learning, 20:273–297,
  1995.
Ashok Cutkosky. Anytime online-to-batch, optimism and acceleration. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 1446–1454. PMLR, 2019.
Evelyn Fix and Joseph Lawson Hodges. Discriminatory analysis. nonparametric discrimination:
  Consistency properties. International Statistical Review/Revue Internationale de Statistique, 57
  (3):238–247, 1989.
Markus Goldstein and Andreas Dengel. Histogram-based outlier score (hbos): A fast unsupervised
 anomaly detection algorithm. KI, pp. 59–63, 2012.
Gene H Golub and Charles F Van Loan. Matrix computations. JHU press, 2013.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. MIT, 2016.
Deepti Gupta, Olumide Kayode, Smriti Bhatt, Maanak Gupta, and Ali Saman Tosun. Hierarchical
  federated learning based anomaly detection using digital twins for smart healthcare. In 2021 IEEE
  7th International Conference on Collaboration and Internet Computing (CIC), pp. 16–25. IEEE,
  2021.
Songqiao Han, Xiyang Hu, Hailiang Huang, Mingqi Jiang, and Yue Zhao. Adbench: Anomaly
  detection benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.09426, 2022.
Zengyou He, Xiaofei Xu, and Shengchun Deng. Discovering cluster-based local outliers. Pattern
  recognition letters, 24(9-10):1641–1650, 2003.
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are uni-
  versal approximators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Itay Hubara, Matthieu Courbariaux, Daniel Soudry, Ran El-Yaniv, and Yoshua Bengio. Quantized
   neural networks: Training neural networks with low precision weights and activations. The Jour-
   nal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):6869–6898, 2017.
Gareth James, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. An introduction to statistical
  learning, volume 112. Springer, 2013.
Zhihao Jia, Yongkee Kwon, Galen Shipman, Pat McCormick, Mattan Erez, and Alex Aiken. A
  distributed multi-gpu system for fast graph processing. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 11
  (3):297–310, 2017.
Jiaxin Jiang, Yuan Li, Bingsheng He, Bryan Hooi, Jia Chen, and Johan Kok Zhi Kang. Spade: A
   real-time fraud detection framework on evolving graphs. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
   16(3):461–469, 2022.
Minqi Jiang, Chaochuan Hou, Ao Zheng, Songqiao Han, Hailiang Huang, Qingsong Wen, Xiyang
 Hu, and Yue Zhao. Adgym: Design choices for deep anomaly detection. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Latifur Khan, Mamoun Awad, and Bhavani Thuraisingham. A new intrusion detection system using
  support vector machines and hierarchical clustering. The VLDB journal, 16:507–521, 2007.
Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richtárik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.
Hans-Peter Kriegel, Peer Kröger, Erich Schubert, and Arthur Zimek. Outlier detection in axis-
  parallel subspaces of high dimensional data. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data
  Mining: 13th Pacific-Asia Conference, PAKDD 2009 Bangkok, Thailand, April 27-30, 2009 Pro-
  ceedings 13, pp. 831–838. Springer, 2009.
Hyafil Laurent and Ronald L Rivest. Constructing optimal binary decision trees is np-complete.
  Information processing letters, 5(1):15–17, 1976.
Aleksandar Lazarevic and Vipin Kumar. Feature bagging for outlier detection. In KDD, pp. 157–
  166. ACM, 2005.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. nature, 521(7553):436–444,
  2015.
Meng-Chieh Lee, Yue Zhao, Aluna Wang, Pierre Jinghong Liang, Leman Akoglu, Vincent S. Tseng,
 and Christos Faloutsos. Autoaudit: Mining accounting and time-evolving graphs. In Big Data,
 pp. 950–956. IEEE, 2020.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
  methods, and future directions. IEEE signal processing magazine, 37(3):50–60, 2020a.
Zheng Li, Yue Zhao, Nicola Botta, Cezar Ionescu, and Xiyang Hu. COPOD: copula-based outlier
  detection. In ICDM, pp. 1118–1123. IEEE, 2020b.
Zheng Li, Yue Zhao, Xiyang Hu, Nicola Botta, Cezar Ionescu, and George Chen. Ecod: Unsuper-
  vised outlier detection using empirical cumulative distribution functions. IEEE Transactions on
  Knowledge and Data Engineering, pp. 1–1, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2022.3159580.
Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Isolation forest. In ICDM, pp. 413–422. IEEE
  Computer Society, 2008.
Martin Q Ma, Yue Zhao, Xiaorong Zhang, and Leman Akoglu. The need for unsupervised out-
 lier model selection: A review and evaluation of internal evaluation strategies. ACM SIGKDD
 Explorations Newsletter, 25(1), 2023.
James MacQueen et al. Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations. In
  Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and probability, volume 1,
  pp. 281–297. Oakland, CA, USA, 1967.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
Viraaji Mothukuri, Prachi Khare, Reza M Parizi, Seyedamin Pouriyeh, Ali Dehghantanha, and Gau-
  tam Srivastava. Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for iot security attacks. IEEE Inter-
  net of Things Journal, 9(4):2545–2554, 2021.
Thien Duc Nguyen, Samuel Marchal, Markus Miettinen, Hossein Fereidooni, N Asokan, and
  Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. Dı̈ot: A federated self-learning anomaly detection system for iot. In
  2019 IEEE 39th International conference on distributed computing systems (ICDCS), pp. 756–
  767. IEEE, 2019.
Spiros Papadimitriou, Hiroyuki Kitagawa, Phillip B Gibbons, and Christos Faloutsos. Loci: Fast
  outlier detection using the local correlation integral. In Proceedings 19th international conference
  on data engineering, pp. 315–326. IEEE, 2003.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. NeuIPS, 32:8026–8037, 2019.
Jiaming Pei, Kaiyang Zhong, Mian Ahmad Jan, and Jinhai Li. Personalized federated learning
   framework for network traffic anomaly detection. Computer Networks, 209:108906, 2022.
Tomás Pevný. Loda: Lightweight on-line detector of anomalies. Mach. Learn., 102(2):275–304,
  2016.
Bjarne Pfitzner, Nico Steckhan, and Bert Arnrich. Federated learning in a medical context: a sys-
  tematic literature review. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT), 21(2):1–31, 2021.
Davy Preuveneers, Vera Rimmer, Ilias Tsingenopoulos, Jan Spooren, Wouter Joosen, and Elisabeth
  Ilie-Zudor. Chained anomaly detection models for federated learning: An intrusion detection case
  study. Applied Sciences, 8(12):2663, 2018.
J. Ross Quinlan. Induction of decision trees. Machine learning, 1:81–106, 1986.
Sridhar Ramaswamy, Rajeev Rastogi, and Kyuseok Shim. Efficient algorithms for mining outliers
  from large data sets. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD international conference on
  Management of data, pp. 427–438, 2000.
Shebuti Rayana. ODDS library, 2016. URL https://odds.cs.stonybrook.edu.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by back-
  propagating errors. nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
Raed Abdel Sater and A Ben Hamza. A federated learning approach to anomaly detection in smart
  buildings. ACM Transactions on Internet of Things, 2(4):1–23, 2021.
Sebastian Schmidl, Phillip Wenig, and Thorsten Papenbrock. Anomaly detection in time series: a
  comprehensive evaluation. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 15(9):1779–1797, 2022.
Johannes Schneider, Phillip Wenig, and Thorsten Papenbrock. Distributed detection of sequential
  anomalies in univariate time series. The VLDB Journal, 30(4):579–602, 2021.
Bernhard Schölkopf, John C Platt, John Shawe-Taylor, Alex J Smola, and Robert C Williamson.
  Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution. Neural computation, 13(7):1443–1471,
  2001.
Tyler Scott, Karl Ridgeway, and Michael C Mozer. Adapted deep embeddings: A synthesis of meth-
  ods for k-shot inductive transfer learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  31, 2018.
Mei-Ling Shyu, Shu-Ching Chen, Kanoksri Sarinnapakorn, and LiWu Chang. A novel anomaly
 detection scheme based on principal component classifier. Technical report, 2003.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Virginia Smith, Chao-Kai Chiang, Maziar Sanjabi, and Ameet S Talwalkar. Federated multi-task
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jan A Snyman, Daniel N Wilke, et al. Practical mathematical optimization. Springer, 2005.
Jian Tang, Zhixiang Chen, Ada Wai-Chee Fu, and David W Cheung. Enhancing effectiveness of
   outlier detections for low density patterns. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
   ing: 6th Pacific-Asia Conference, PAKDD 2002 Taipei, Taiwan, May 6–8, 2002 Proceedings 6,
   pp. 535–548. Springer, 2002.
Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 58(1):267–288, 1996.
Luan Tran, Min Y Mun, and Cyrus Shahabi. Real-time distance-based outlier detection in data
  streams. VLDB, 14(2):141–153, 2020.
Joaquin Vanschoren. Meta-learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03548, 2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Weiyang Wang, Moein Khazraee, Zhizhen Zhong, Manya Ghobadi, Zhihao Jia, Dheevatsa Mudi-
 gere, Ying Zhang, and Anthony Kewitsch. {TopoOpt}: Co-optimizing network topology and
 parallelization strategy for distributed training jobs. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked
 Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23), pp. 739–767, 2023.
Xindong Wu, Vipin Kumar, J Ross Quinlan, Joydeep Ghosh, Qiang Yang, Hiroshi Motoda, Geof-
  frey J McLachlan, Angus Ng, Bing Liu, Philip S Yu, et al. Top 10 algorithms in data mining.
  Knowledge and information systems, 14:1–37, 2008.
Yue Zhao, Zain Nasrullah, and Zheng Li. PyOD: A python toolbox for scalable outlier detection.
  JMLR, 20:96:1–96:7, 2019.
Yue Zhao, Ryan Rossi, and Leman Akoglu. Automatic unsupervised outlier model selection. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4489–4502, 2021.
Yue Zhao, Sean Zhang, and Leman Akoglu. Toward unsupervised outlier model selection. In 2022
  IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 773–782. IEEE, 2022.
Yue Zhao, George H. Chen, and Zhihao Jia. Tod: Gpu-accelerated outlier detection via tensor
  operations. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 16(3), 2023.
Qiwei Zhong, Yang Liu, Xiang Ao, Binbin Hu, Jinghua Feng, Jiayu Tang, and Qing He. Financial
  defaulter detection on online credit payment via multi-view attributed heterogeneous information
  network. In WWW, pp. 785–795. ACM, 2020.


                                                 13
