Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROVABLY D OUBLY ACCELERATED F EDERATED
L EARNING : T HE F IRST T HEORETICALLY S UCCESSFUL
C OMBINATION OF L OCAL T RAINING AND C OMMUNI -
CATION C OMPRESSION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In federated learning, a large number of users collaborate to learn a global model.
         They alternate local computations and two-way communication with a distant
         server. Communication, which can be slow and costly, is the main bottleneck in
         this setting. To reduce the communication load and therefore accelerate distributed
         gradient descent, two strategies are popular: 1) communicate less frequently; that
         is, perform several iterations of local computations between the communication
         rounds; and 2) communicate compressed information instead of full-dimensional
         vectors. We propose the first algorithm for distributed optimization and federated
         learning, which harnesses these two strategies jointly and converges linearly to
         an exact solution in the strongly convex setting, with a doubly accelerated rate:
         our algorithm benefits from the two acceleration mechanisms provided by local
         training and compression, namely a better dependency on the condition number of
         the functions and on the dimension of the model, respectively.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Federated Learning (FL) is a novel paradigm for training supervised machine learning models.
Initiated a few years ago (Konečný et al., 2016a;b; McMahan et al., 2017; Bonawitz et al., 2017),
it has become a rapidly growing interdisciplinary field. The key idea is to exploit the wealth of
information stored on edge devices, such as mobile phones, sensors and hospital workstations, to
train global models, in a collaborative way, while handling a multitude of challenges, like data
privacy (Kairouz et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2021). In contrast to centralized learning
in a datacenter, in FL, the parallel computing units have private data stored on each of them and
communicate with a distant orchestrating server, which aggregates the information and synchronizes
the computations, so that the process reaches a consensus and converges to a globally optimal model.
In this framework, communication between the parallel workers and the server, which can take place
over the internet or cell phone network, can be slow, costly, and unreliable. Thus, communication
dominates the overall duration and cost of the process and is the main bottleneck to be addressed by
the community, before FL can be widely adopted and applied in our daily lives.
The baseline algorithm of distributed Gradient Descent (GD) alternates between two steps: one
round of parallel computation of the local function gradients at the current model estimate, and
one round of communication of these gradient vectors to the server, which averages them to form
the new estimate for the next iteration. To decrease the communication load, two strategies can
be used: 1) communicate less frequently, or equivalently do more local computations between
successive communication rounds; or 2) compress the communicated vectors. We detail these two
strategies in Section 1.3. In this paper, we combine them, within a unified framework for randomized
communication, and derive a new algorithm named CompressedScaffnew, with local training and
communication compression. It is variance-reduced (Hanzely & Richtárik, 2019; Gorbunov et al.,
2020a; Gower et al., 2020), so that it converges to an exact solution, and provably benefits from
the two mechanisms: the convergence rate is doubly accelerated, with a better dependency on the
condition number of the functions and on the dimension of the model, in comparison with GD. In the


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


remainder of this section, we formulate the convex optimization problem to solve, we propose a new
model to characterize the communication complexity, and we present the state of the art.

1.1    F ORMALISM

We consider a distributed client-server setting, in which n ≥ 2 clients perform computations in
parallel and communicate back and forth with a server. We study the convex optimization problem:
                                                        n
                                                     1X
                                 minimize f (x) :=         fi (x),                            (1)
                                   x∈Rd              n i=1
where each function fi : Rd → R models the individual cost of client i ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n}, based
on its underlying private data. The number n of clients, as well as the dimension d ≥ 1 of the
model, are typically large. This problem is of key importance as it is an abstraction of empirical risk
minimization, the dominant framework in supervised machine learning.
For every i ∈ [n], the function fi is supposed L-smooth and µ-strongly convex,1 for some L ≥ µ > 0
(a sublinear convergence result is derived in the Appendix for the merely convex case, i.e. µ = 0).
Thus, the sought solution x⋆ of equation 1 exists and is unique. We define κ := L      µ . We focus
on the strongly convex case, because the analysis of linear convergence rates in this setting gives
clear insights and allows us to deepen our theoretical understanding of the algorithmic mechanisms
under study; in our case, local training and communication compression. The analysis of algorithms
converging to a stationary point with nonconvex functions relies on significantly different proof
techniques (Karimireddy et al., 2021; Das et al., 2022), so the nonconvex setting is out of the scope
of this paper.
To solve equationP 1, the baseline algorithm of Gradient Descent (GD) consists in the simple iteration
                     n
xt+1 := xt − nγ i=1 ∇fi (xt ), for some stepsize γ ∈ (0, L2 ). That is, at iteration t ≥ 0, xt is
first broadcast by the server to all clients, which compute the gradients ∇fi (xt ) ∈ Rd in parallel.
These vectors are then sent by the clients to the server, which averages them and updates the model
estimate. It is well known that for γ = Θ( L1 ), GD converges linearly, with iteration complexity
O(κ log ϵ−1 ) to reach ϵ-accuracy. Since d-dimensional vectors are communicated at every iteration,
the communication complexity of GD in number of reals is O(dκ log ϵ−1 ). Our goal is a twofold
acceleration of GD, with a better dependency to both κ and d in this communication complexity. We
want to achieve this goal by leveraging the best of the two popular mechanisms of local training and
communication compression.

1.2    A SYMMETRIC COMMUNICATION REGIME

Uplink and downlink communication. We call uplink communication (UpCom) the parallel
transmission of data from the clients to the server and downlink communication (DownCom) the
broadcast of the same message from the server to all clients. UpCom is usually significantly
slower than DownCom, just like uploading is slower than downloading on the internet or cell phone
network. This can be due to the asymmetry of the service provider’s systems or protocols used on the
communication network, or cache memory and aggregation speed constraints of the server, which
has to decode and average the large number n of vectors received at the same time during UpCom.
Communication complexity. We measure the UpCom or DownCom complexity as the expected
number of communication rounds needed to estimate a solution with ϵ-accuracy, multiplied by the
number of real values sent during a communication round between the server and any client. Thus, the
UpCom or DownCom complexity of GD is O(dκ log ϵ−1 ). We leave if for future work to refine this
model of counting real numbers, to take into account how sequences of real numbers are quantized
into bitstreams, achieving further compression (Horváth et al., 2022; Albasyoni et al., 2020).
A model for the overall communication complexity. Since UpCom is usually slower than Down-
Com, we propose to measure the total communication (TotalCom) complexity as a weighted sum of
    1
      A function f : Rd → R is said to be L-smooth if it is differentiable and its gradient is Lipschitz continuous
with constant L; that is, for every x ∈ Rd and y ∈ Rd , ∥∇f (x) − ∇f (y)∥ ≤ L∥x − y∥, where, here and
throughout the paper, the norm is the Euclidean norm. f is said to be µ-strongly convex if f − µ2 ∥ · ∥2 is convex.
We refer to Bauschke & Combettes (2017) for such standard notions of convex analysis.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the two UpCom and DownCom complexities: we assume that the UpCom cost is 1 (unit of time per
transmitted real number), whereas the downCom cost is c ∈ [0, 1]. Therefore,
                               TotalCom = UpCom + c.DownCom.                                        (2)
A symmetric but unrealistic communication regime corresponds to c = 1, whereas ignoring downCom
and focusing on UpCom, which is usually the limiting factor, corresponds to c = 0. We will provide
explicit expressions of the parameters of our algorithm to minimize the TotalCom complexity for any
given c ∈ [0, 1], keeping in mind that realistic settings correspond to small values of c. Thus, our
model of communication complexity is richer than only considering c = 0, as is usually the case.

1.3     C OMMUNICATION EFFICIENCY IN FL: STATE OF THE ART

Two approaches come naturally to mind to decrease the communication load: Local Training
(LT), which consists in communicating less frequently than at every iteration, and Communication
Compression (CC), which consists in sending less than d floats during every communication round.
In this section, we review existing work related to these two strategies.

1.3.1    L OCAL T RAINING (LT)
LT is a conceptually simple and surprisingly powerful communication-acceleration technique. It
consists in the clients performing multiple local GD steps instead of only one, between successive
communication rounds. This intuitively results in “better” information being communicated, so that
less communication rounds are needed to reach a given accuracy. As shown by ample empirical
evidence, LT is very efficient in practice. It was popularized by the FedAvg algorithm of McMahan
et al. (2017), in which LT is a core component. However, LT was heuristic and no theory was
provided in their paper. LT was analyzed in several works, in the homogeneous, or i.i.d. data, regime
(Haddadpour & Mahdavi, 2019), and in the heterogeneous regime, which is more representative
in FL (Khaled et al., 2019; 2020; Stich, 2019; Woodworth et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020b; Gorbunov
et al., 2021; Glasgow et al., 2022). It stands out that LT suffers from so-called client drift, which
is the fact that the local model obtained by client i after several local GD steps approaches the
minimizer of its local cost function fi . The discrepancy between the exact solution x⋆ of equation 1
and the approximate solution obtained at convergence of LT was characterized in Malinovsky et al.
(2020). This deficiency of LT was corrected in the Scaffold algorithm of Karimireddy et al. (2020)
by introducing control variates, which correct for the client drift, so that the algorithm converges
linearly to the exact solution. S-Local-GD (Gorbunov et al., 2021) and FedLin (Mitra et al., 2021)
were later proposed, with similar convergence properties. Yet, despite the empirical superiority of
these recent algorithms relying on LT, their communication complexity remains the same as vanilla
GD, i.e. O(dκ log ϵ−1 ).
It is only very recently
                 √       that Scaffnew was proposed by Mishchenko et al. (2022), a LT algorithm finally
achieving O(d κ log ϵ−1 ) accelerated communication complexity. In Scaffnew, communication
is triggered randomly with a small probability p at every iteration. Thus, the expected
                                                                                     √      number of
local GD steps √  between two communication rounds is 1/p. By choosing p = 1/ κ, the optimal
dependency on κ instead of κ is obtained. Thus, Scaffnew is an important milestone, as it provides
the theoretical confirmation that LT is a communication acceleration mechanism. In this paper, we
propose to go even further and tackle the multiplicative factor d in the complexity of Scaffnew.

1.3.2    C OMMUNICATION C OMPRESSION (CC)
To decrease the communication complexity, a widely used strategy is to make use of (lossy) compres-
sion; that is, a possibly randomized mapping C : Rd → Rd is applied to the vector x that needs to be
communicated, with the property that it is much faster to transfer C(x) than the full d-dimensional
vector x. A popular sparsifying compressor is rand-k, for some k ∈ [d] := {1, . . . , d}, which
multiplies k elements of x, chosen uniformly at random, by d/k, and sets the other ones to zero. If
the receiver knows which coordinates have been selected, e.g. by running the same pseudo-random
generator, only these k elements of x are actually communicated, so that the communication com-
plexity is divided by the compression factor d/k. Another sparsifying compressor is top-k, which
keeps the k elements of x with largest absolute values unchanged and sets the other ones to zero.
Some compressors, like rand-k, are unbiased; that is, E[C(x)] = x for every x ∈ Rd , where E[·]


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


denotes the expectation. On the other hand, compressors like top-k are biased (Beznosikov et al.,
2020).
The variance-reduced algorithm DIANA (Mishchenko et al., 2019), later extended in several ways
(Horváth et al., 2022; Gorbunov et al., 2020a; Condat & Richtárik, 2022), is a major contribution, as
it converges linearly with a large class of unbiased compressors. For instance, when the clients use
                                                                                                      d
independent
         −1
              rand-1 compressors for UpCom, the UpCom complexity of DIANA is O (κ(1 + n ) +
d) log ϵ     . If n is large, this is much better than with GD. Algorithms converging linearly with biased
compressors have been proposed recently, like EF21 (Richtárik et al., 2021; Fatkhullin et al., 2021;
Condat et al., 2022), but the theory is less mature and the acceleration potential not as clear as with
unbiased compressors. We summarize existing results in Table 1. Our algorithm CompressedScaffnew
benefits from CC with specific unbiased compressors, with even more acceleration than DIANA. Also,
the focus in DIANA is on UpCom and its DownCom step is the same as in GD, with the full model
broadcast at every iteration, so that its TotalCom complexity can be worse than the one of GD.
Extensions of DIANA with bidirectional CC, i.e. compression in both UpCom and DownCom, have
been proposed (Gorbunov et al., 2020b; Philippenko & Dieuleveut, 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Condat
& Richtárik, 2022), but this does not improve its TotalCom complexity; see also Philippenko &
Dieuleveut (2021) and references therein on bidirectional CC. We note that if LT is disabled (p = 1),
CompressedScaffnew is still new and does not revert to a known algorithm with CC.


2    G OALS , CHALLENGES , CONTRIBUTIONS

Our new algorithm CompressedScaffnew builds upon the LT mechanism of Scaffnew and enables
CC. In short,
                              CompressedScaffnew = GD + LT + CC.
                                                   | {z }
                                                          Scaffnew

We focus on the strongly convex setting but we also prove sublinear convergence of Compressed-
Scaffnew in the merely convex case in the Appendix. We emphasize that the problem can be arbitrarily
heterogeneous: we don’t make any assumption on the functions fi beyond smoothness and strong
convexity, and there is no notion of data similarity whatsoever. We also stress that our goal is to
deepen our theoretical understanding of LT and CC, and to make these two intuitive and effective
mechanisms, which are widely used in practice, work in the best possible way when harnessed to
GD. It would certainly be interesting to consider possibly variance-reduced (Gorbunov et al., 2020a;
Gower et al., 2020) SGD local steps, as was done for Scaffnew in Malinovsky et al. (2022). We leave
it for future work, since we focus on the communication complexity, and stochastic gradients can only
worsen it. Reducing the computation complexity using accelerated (Nesterov, 2004) or stochastic
GD steps is somewhat orthogonal to our present study.
It is very challenging to combine LT and CC. In the strongly convex and heterogeneous case
considered here, the methods Qsparse-local-SGD (Basu et al., 2020) and FedPAQ (Reisizadeh et al.,
2020) do not converge linearly. The only linearly converging LT + CC algorithm we are aware of
is FedCOMGATE (Haddadpour et al., 2021). But its rate is O(dκ log ϵ−1 ), which does not show
any acceleration. By contrast, our algorithm is the first, to the best of our knowledge, to exhibit a
doubly-accelerated linear rate, by leveraging LT and CC. We note that random reshuffling, which
can be seen as a kind of LT, has been combined with CC in Sadiev et al. (2022). The TotalCom
complexity of the various algorithms is reported in Table 1.
The program of combining LT and CC looks simple, but the naive approach of plugging compressors
into Scaffnew does not work. The key of our design is to combine the two stochastic processes of
probabilistic communication and compression with a random mask in two different ways, for updating
after communication the model estimates xi on one hand, and the control variates hi on the other
hand. Indeed, a crucial property is that the sum of the control variates over all clients always remains
zero. If there is no compression (s = n), the two mechanisms coincide, since there is only one source
of randomness, which is the coin flip to trigger communication, and CompressedScaffnew reverts to
Scaffnew. Our approach relies on a dedicated design of the compressors, explained in Figure 1, so
that the messages sent by the different clients complement each other, to keep a tight control of the
variance after aggregation. We currently don’t know how to use any other type of compressors in
CompressedScaffnew.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 CompressedScaffnew
 1: input: stepsizes γ > 0, η > 0, probability p ∈ (0, 1], s ∈ {2,                    Pn. . . , n}, initial iterates
    x01 , . . . , x0n ∈ Rd , initial control variates h01 , . . . , h0n ∈ Rd such that i=1 h0i = 0, sequence of
    independent coin flips θ0 , θ1 , . . . with Prob(θt = 1) = p, known by the server and all clients,
    and for every t with θt = 1, a random binary mask qt = (qit )ni=1 ∈ Rd×n with s ones per row,
    generated as explained in Figure 1, so that the binary vector qit ∈ Rd is known by client i and the
    server. The compressed vector Cit (v) is v multiplied elementwise by qit .
 2: for t = 0, 1, . . . do
 3:     for i = 1, . . . , n, at clients in parallel, do
 4:         x̂ti := xti − γ∇fi (xti ) + γhti
 5:         if θt = 1 then                                                                    Pn
 6:              send Cit (x̂ti ) to the server, which aggregates and broadcasts x̄t := 1s j=1 Cjt (x̂tj )
 7:              xt+1
                   i   := x̄t
                 hi := hti + pη
                   t+1                    t t      t t

 8:                                  γ Ci (x̄ ) − Ci (x̂i )
 9:         else
10:              xt+1
                   i   := x̂ti
                   t+1
11:              hi := hti
12:         end if
13:     end for
14: end for


          (a)                        (b)                       (c)                            (d)

Figure 1: The random sampling pattern qt = (qit )ni=1 ∈ Rd×n used for communication is generated
by a random permutation of the columns of a fixed binary template pattern, which has the prescribed
number s ≥ 2 of ones in every row. In (a) with (d, n, s) = (5, 6, 2) and (b) with (d, n, s) = (5, 7, 2),
with ones in blue and zeros in white, examples of the template pattern used when d ≥ ns : for every
row k ∈ [d], there are s ones at columns i = mod(s(k − 1), n) + 1, . . . , mod(sk − 1, n) + 1. Thus,
there are ⌊ sd      sd
            n ⌋ or ⌈ n ⌉ ones in every column vector qi . In (c), an example of sampling pattern obtained
after a permutation of the columns of the template pattern in (a). In (d) with (d, n, s) = (3, 10, 2), an
example of the template pattern used when ns ≥ d: for every column i = 1, . . . , ds, there is 1 one at
row k = mod(i − 1, d) + 1. Thus, there is 0 or 1 one in every column vector qi . We can note that
when d = ns , the two different rules for d ≥ ns and ns ≥ d for constructing the template pattern are
equivalent, since they give exactly the same set of sampling patterns when permuting their columns.
These two rules make it possible to generate easily the columns qit of qt on the fly, without having to
generate the whole mask qt explicitly.


Thus, by making use of CC on top of LT, CompressedScaffnew establishes the new state of the art in
communication efficiency. If c is small and n is large, its TotalCom complexity is
                                        √ √
                                    O      d κ + d log ϵ−1 ;

our general result is in Theorem 3.√Thus, CompressedScaffnew enjoys twofold acceleration, with
√
  κ instead of κ thanks to LT and d instead of d thanks to CC.

3    P ROPOSED ALGORITHM CompressedScaffnew
The proposed algorithm CompressedScaffnew is shown as Algorithm 1. At every iteration t ≥ 0,
every client i ∈ [n] performs a gradient descent step with respect to its private cost fi , evaluated
at its local model xti , with a correction term by its control variate hti . This yields a prediction x̂ti


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: TotalCom complexity of linearly converging algorithms using Local Training (LT), Com-
munication Compression (CC), or both. The O         e notation hides the log ϵ−1 factor. We note that
some of the referenced methods incorporate features of practical interest like the use of stochastic
gradients or partial participation. They are irrelevant for our purpose, since they can only worsen the
communication complexity, which is the object of our study.
       Algorithm          LT    CC               TotalCom                   TotalCom=UpCom when c = 0
       DIANA (a)                        e (1+cd+ d+cd2 )κ+d+cd2                   e (1 + d )κ + d

                           ✗     ✓     O             n
                                                                                  O        n
        EF21 (b)           ✗     ✓                O(dκ)
                                                   e                                   O(dκ)
                                                                                        e
        Scaffold           ✓     ✗                O(dκ)
                                                   e                                   O(dκ)
                                                                                        e
        FedLin             ✓     ✗                O(dκ)
                                                   e                                   O(dκ)
                                                                                        e
      S-Local-GD           ✓     ✗                O(dκ)
                                                   e                                   O(dκ)
                                                                                        e
       Scaffnew            ✓     ✗                e √κ)
                                                 O(d                                   e √κ)
                                                                                      O(d
     FedCOMGATE            ✓     ✓                O(dκ)
                                                   e
                                                                                   √ O(dκ)
                                                                                        e
                                           √
                                             κ
                                                √ √       √ √                        κ
                                                                                          √ √
 CompressedScaffnew        ✓     ✓     O d
                                       e   √
                                              n
                                               + d κ+d+ c d κ                  O d n + d κ+d
                                                                               e   √

                                                                         √ √
    (a) using
        √
              independent rand-1 compressors, for instance. Note that O( d κ + d) is better than O(κ + d)
and O(d √nκ + d) is better than O( nd κ + d), so that CompressedScaffnew has a better complexity than DIANA.
     (b) using top-k compressors with any k, for instance.



of the updated local model. Then a random coin flip is made, to decide whether communication
occurs or not. Communication occurs with probability p ∈ (0, 1], with p typically small. If there is
no communication, xt+1 i   is simply set as x̂ti and hi is unchanged. If communication occurs, every
client sends a compressed version of x̂ti ; that is, it sends only a few of its elements, selected randomly
according to the rule explained in Figure 1 and known by both the clients and the server (for decoding).
The server aggregates the received vectors and forms x̄t , which is broadcast to all clients. They
all resume with this fresh estimate of the solution. Every client updates its control variates hi by
modifying only the coordinates which have been involved in the communication process; that is, for
which qit has a one. Indeed, the other coordinates of x̂ti have not participated to the formation of x̄t ,
so the received vector x̄t does not contain relevant information to update hti at these coordinates.
The probability p ∈ (0, 1] of communication controls the amount of LT, since the expected number
of local GD steps between two successive communication rounds is 1/p. If p = 1, communication
happens at every iteration and LT is disabled. The sparsity index s ∈ {2, . . . , n} controls the amount
of compression: the lower s, the more compression. If s = n and η = 1, there is no compression and
Cit (v) = v for any v; then CompressedScaffnew reverts to Scaffnew.
Our main result, stating linear convergence of CompressedScaffnew to the exact solution x⋆ of
equation 1, is the following:
Theorem 1. In CompressedScaffnew, suppose that

                                  2                n(s − 1)     1
                         0<γ<        and 0 < η ≤            ∈     ,1 .                    (3)
                                  L                s(n − 1)     2
For every t ≥ 0, define the Lyapunov function
                                  n                      n
                               1X t         2  γ n−1X t              2
                       Ψt :=         xi − x⋆ + 2            hi − h⋆i ,                                   (4)
                               γ i=1          p η s − 1 i=1

where x⋆ is the unique solution to equation 1 and h⋆i = ∇fi (x⋆ ). Then CompressedScaffnew
converges linearly: for every t ≥ 0,
                                       E Ψt ≤ ρ t Ψ0 ,

                                                                                        (5)
where
                                        2          2      2 s−1
                      ρ := max (1 − γµ) , (γL − 1) , 1 − p η         < 1.               (6)
                                                             n−1
Also, for every i ∈ [n], (xti )t∈N and (x̂ti )t∈N both converge to x⋆ and (hti )t∈N converges to h⋆i , almost
surely.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 1. One can simply set η = 12 in CompressedScaffnew, which is independent of n and s.
However, the larger η, the better, so it is recommended to set
                                                      n(s − 1)
                                             η=                .                                  (7)
                                                      s(n − 1)

3.1   I TERATION COMPLEXITY

CompressedScaffnew has the same iteration complexity as GD, with rate ρ♯ := max(1−γµ, γL−1)2 ,
as long as p and s are large enough to have
                                                      s−1
                                        1 − p2 η          ≤ ρ♯ .
                                                      n−1
This is remarkable: compression during aggregation with p < 1 and s < n does not harm convergence
at all, until some threshold. This is in contrast with other algorithms with CC, like DIANA, where
even a small amount of compression worsens the worst-case complexity.
For any s ≥ 2, p ∈ (0, 1], γ = Θ( L1 ), and fixed η ∈ (0, 1], the asymptotic iteration complexity of
CompressedScaffnew to reach ϵ-accuracy, i.e. E[Ψt ] ≤ ϵ, is

                                                 n         −1
                                    O      κ + 2 log ϵ          .                                (8)
                                                sp
Thus, by choosing
                                              s                      !
                                                  (1 − ρ♯ )(n − 1)
                                p = min                            ,1 ,                           (9)
                                                     η(s − 1)

or more generally
                                              r
                                               n
                                    p = min Θ     ,1 ,                                          (10)
                                               sκ
the iteration complexity becomes
                                                      n
                                        O        κ+      log ϵ−1 .
                                                      s
In particular, with the choice recommended in equation 13 of s = max(2, ⌊ nd ⌋, ⌊cn⌋), which yields
the best TotalCom complexity, the iteration complexity is

                                  O κ + min d, n, 1c log ϵ−1

(with 1c = +∞ if c = 0).

3.2   C ONVERGENCE IN THE CONVEX CASE

In this section only, we remove the hypothesis of strong convexity: the functions fi are just assumed
to be convex and L-smooth, and we suppose that a solution x⋆ ∈ Rd to equation 1 exists. Then we
have sublinear ergodic convergence:
Theorem 2. In CompressedScaffnew, suppose that

                           0 < γ < L2             0 < η < n(s−1)               1

                                            and           s(n−1) ∈             2, 1   .         (11)

Then, for every i = 1, . . . , n and T ≥ 0,
                                        h             i
                                                    2              1

                                       E ∇f (x̃Ti )     =O         T       ,                    (12)

                1
                     PT
where x̃Ti := T +1         t
                      t=0 xi (an explicit upper bound is given in the proof).


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4    C OMMUNICATION COMPLEXITY
For any s ≥ 2, p ∈ (0, 1], γ = Θ( L1 ), and fixed η ∈ (0, 1], the asymptotic iteration complexity
of CompressedScaffnew is given in equation 8. Communication occurs at every iteration with
probability p, and during every communication round, DownCom consists in broadcasting the full
d-dimensional vector x̄t , whereas in UpCom, compression is effective and the number of real values
sent in parallel by the clients is equal to the number of ones per column in the sampling pattern q,
which is ⌈ sd
           n ⌉ ≥ 1. Hence, the communication complexities are:

                                                           n        −1
                             DownCom: O pd κ + 2 log ϵ                   ,
                                                          sp

                                              sd              n
                         UpCom: O p               +1     κ + 2 log ϵ−1 .
                                               n             sp

                                            sd                    n
                      TotalCom: O p             + 1 + cd    κ + 2 log ϵ−1 .
                                            n                    sp
For a given s, the best choice for p, for both DownCom and UpCom, is given in equation 9, or more
generally equation 10, for which
                                                           r
                                              n               nκ n
                               O p κ+ 2              =O           +
                                             sp                s    s
and the TotalCom complexity is
                                       r
                                           nκ n          sd
                      TotalCom: O             +             + 1 + cd log ϵ−1 .
                                            s   s        n
We see the first acceleration
                   √           effect due to LT: with a suitable p < 1, the communication complexity
only depends on κ, not κ, whatever the compression level s. Without√          compression, i.e. s = n,
CompressedScaffnew reverts to Scaffnew, with TotalCom complexity O(d κ log ϵ−1 ). We can now
set s to further accelerate the algorithm, by minimizing the TotalCom complexity:
Theorem 3. In CompressedScaffnew, suppose that equation 3 holds, with η fixed and γ = Θ( L1 ),
that p satisfies equation 10 and that
                                                   jnk
                                       s = max 2,         , ⌊cn⌋ .                                (13)
                                                      d
Then the TotalCom complexity of CompressedScaffnew is
                                 √
                                     κ √ √               √ √

                           O d √ + d κ + d + c d κ log ϵ−1 .                                      (14)
                                     n

Hence, as long as c ≤ max( n2 , d1 , κ1 ), there is no difference with the case c = 0, in which we only
focus on UpCom, and the TotalCom complexity is
                                     √
                                               κ √ √

                                                                      −1
                              O d           √    + d κ + d log ϵ           .
                                               n
                                                                                       √ √
On the other hand, if c ≥ max( n2 , d1 , κ1 ), the complexity increases and becomes O c d κ log ϵ−1 ,

                                                                    √
but compression remains operational and effective with the c factor. It is only when c = 1 that
s = n, i.e. there is no compression and CompressedScaffnew√reverts to  Scaffnew, and that the
Upcom, DownCom and TotalCom complexities all become O d κ log ϵ−1 . In any case, for every
c ∈ [0, 1], CompressedScaffnew is faster than Scaffnew.
We have reported in Table 1 the TotalCom complexity for several algorithms, and to the best of
our knowledge, CompressedScaffnew improves upon all known algorithms, which use either LT or
CC on top of GD. Moreover, this is achieved not only for uplink communication, but for our more
comprehensive model of total communication.
Carrying out large-scale experiments is beyond the scope of this work, which studies the foundational
algorithmic and theoretical properties of a class of algorithms. Nevertheless, we illustrate and confirm
our results on a practical logistic regression problem. The results are shown in Figures 2 and 3 and
we refer to the Appendix for the explanations, by lack of space.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) real-sim, n = 2000, c = 0                      (b) real-sim, n = 2000, c = 0.2


           (c) w8a, n = 3000, c = 0                           (d) w8a, n = 3000, c = 0.2

Figure 2: Logistic regression experiment. The datasets real-sim and w8a have d = 20, 958 and
d = 300 features, respectively. In (a) and (b), d ≈ 10n, whereas in (c) and (d), this is the opposite
with n = 10d.


         (a) real-sim, n = 2000, c = 0                      (b) real-sim, n = 2000, c = 0.2


           (c) w8a, n = 3000, c = 0                           (d) w8a, n = 3000, c = 0.2

Figure 3: Logistic regression experiment. The setting is the same as in Figure 2, but with κ = 106
instead of 334.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
A. Albasyoni, M. Safaryan, L. Condat, and P. Richtárik. Optimal gradient compression for distributed
  and federated learning. preprint arXiv:2010.03246, 2020.
D. Basu, D. Data, C. Karakus, and S. N. Diggavi. Qsparse-Local-SGD: Distributed SGD With Quan-
  tization, Sparsification, and Local Computations. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information
  Theory, 1(1):217–226, 2020.
H. H. Bauschke and P. L. Combettes. Convex Analysis and Monotone Operator Theory in Hilbert
  Spaces. Springer, New York, 2nd edition, 2017.
D. P. Bertsekas. Convex optimization algorithms. Athena Scientific, Belmont, MA, USA, 2015.
A. Beznosikov, S. Horváth, P. Richtárik, and M. Safaryan. On biased compression for distributed
  learning. preprint arXiv:2002.12410, 2020.
K. Bonawitz, V. Ivanov, B. Kreuter, A. Marcedone, H. B. McMahan, S. Patel, D. Ramage, A. Segal,
  and K. Seth. Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving machine learning. In Proc. of
  the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 1175–1191,
  2017.
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines. ACM
  Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2:27:1–27:27, 2011. Software available at
  http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/%7Ecjlin/libsvm.
L. Condat and P. Richtárik. MURANA: A generic framework for stochastic variance-reduced
  optimization. In Proc. of the conference Mathematical and Scientific Machine Learning (MSML),
  PMLR 190, 2022.
L. Condat and P. Richtárik. RandProx: Primal-dual optimization algorithms with randomized
  proximal updates. In Proc. of Int. Conf. Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
L. Condat, K. Li, and P. Richtárik. EF-BV: A unified theory of error feedback and variance reduction
   mechanisms for biased and unbiased compression in distributed optimization. In Proc. of Conf.
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Rudrajit Das, Anish Acharya, Abolfazl Hashemi, Sujay Sanghavi, Inderjit S. Dhillon, and Ufuk
  Topcu. Faster non-convex federated learning via global and local momentum. In Proc. of Conf. on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2022.
I. Fatkhullin, I. Sokolov, E. Gorbunov, Z. Li, and P. Richtárik. EF21 with bells & whistles: Practical
   algorithmic extensions of modern error feedback. preprint arXiv:2110.03294, 2021.
M. R. Glasgow, H. Yuan, and T. Ma. Sharp bounds for federated averaging (Local SGD) and
 continuous perspective. In Proc. of Int. Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),
 PMLR 151, pp. 9050–9090, 2022.
E. Gorbunov, F. Hanzely, and P. Richtárik. A unified theory of SGD: Variance reduction, sampling,
   quantization and coordinate descent. In Proc. of 23rd Int. Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics
  (AISTATS), PMLR 108, 2020a.
E. Gorbunov, F. Hanzely, and P. Richtárik. Local SGD: Unified theory and new efficient methods. In
  Proc. of 24th Int. Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), PMLR 130, pp. 3556–3564,
   2021.
Eduard Gorbunov, Dmitry Kovalev, Dmitry Makarenko, and Peter Richtárik. Linearly converging
  error compensated SGD. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2020b.
R. M. Gower, M. Schmidt, F. Bach, and P. Richtárik. Variance-reduced methods for machine learning.
  Proc. of the IEEE, 108(11):1968–1983, November 2020.
Farzin Haddadpour and Mehrdad Mahdavi. On the Convergence of Local Descent Methods in
  Federated Learning. preprint arXiv:1910.14425, 2019.


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Farzin Haddadpour, Mohammad Mahdi Kamani, Aryan Mokhtari, and Mehrdad Mahdavi. Federated
  learning with compression: Unified analysis and sharp guarantees. In Proc. of Int. Conf. Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), PMLR 130, pp. 2350–2358, 2021.
Filip Hanzely and Peter Richtárik. One method to rule them all: Variance reduction for data,
   parameters and many new methods. preprint arXiv:1905.11266, 2019.
S. Horváth, D. Kovalev, K. Mishchenko, S. Stich, and P. Richtárik. Stochastic distributed learning
   with gradient quantization and variance reduction. Optimization Methods and Software, 2022.
Samuel Horváth, Chen-Yu Ho, Ludovı́t Horváth, Atal Narayan Sahu, Marco Canini, and Peter
  Richtárik. Natural compression for distributed deep learning. In Proc. of the conference Mathe-
  matical and Scientific Machine Learning (MSML), PMLR 190, 2022.
P. Kairouz et al. Advances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends in
   Machine Learning, 14(1–2), 2021.
S. P. Karimireddy, S. Kale, M. Mohri, S. Reddi, S. U. Stich, and A. T. Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic
   controlled averaging for federated learning. In Proc. of 37th Int. Conf. Machine Learning (ICML),
   pp. 5132–5143, 2020.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Martin Jaggi, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian U.
  Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Breaking the centralized barrier for cross-device federated
  learning. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
A. Khaled, K. Mishchenko, and P. Richtárik. Tighter theory for local SGD on identical and heteroge-
  neous data. In Proc. of 23rd Int. Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), PMLR 108,
  2020.
Ahmed Khaled, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter Richtárik. Better communication complexity for
  local SGD. In NeurIPS Workshop on Federated Learning for Data Privacy and Confidentiality,
  2019.
J. Konečný, H. B. McMahan, D. Ramage, and P. Richtárik. Federated optimization: distributed
   machine learning for on-device intelligence. arXiv:1610.02527, 2016a.
J. Konečný, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richtárik, A. T. Suresh, and D. Bacon. Federated learning:
   Strategies for improving communication efficiency. In NIPS Private Multi-Party Machine Learning
   Workshop, 2016b. arXiv:1610.05492.
T. Li, A. K. Sahu, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith. Federated learning: Challenges, methods, and future
   directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 3(37):50–60, 2020a.
X. Li, K. Huang, W. Yang, S. Wang, and Z. Zhang. On the convergence of FedAvg on non-iid data.
  In Proc. of Int. Conf. Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020b.
Xiaorui Liu, Yao Li, Jiliang Tang, and Ming Yan. A double residual compression algorithm for
  efficient distributed learning. In Proc. of Int. Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),
  PMLR 108, pp. 133–143, 2020.
G. Malinovsky, D. Kovalev, E. Gasanov, L. Condat, and P. Richtárik. From local SGD to local fixed
  point methods for federated learning. In Proc. of 37th Int. Conf. Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Grigory Malinovsky, Kai Yi, and Peter Richtárik. Variance reduced ProxSkip: Algorithm, theory
  and application to federated learning. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2022.
H Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Agüera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Proc. of Int. Conf.
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), PMLR 54, 2017.
K. Mishchenko, E. Gorbunov, M. Takáč, and P. Richtárik. Distributed learning with compressed
  gradient differences. arXiv:1901.09269, 2019.


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K. Mishchenko, G. Malinovsky, S. Stich, and P. Richtárik. ProxSkip: Yes! Local Gradient Steps
  Provably Lead to Communication Acceleration! Finally! In Proc. of the 39th International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), July 2022.
A. Mitra, R. Jaafar, G. Pappas, and H. Hassani. Linear convergence in federated learning: Tackling
  client heterogeneity and sparse gradients. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2021.
Y. Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex optimization: a basic course. Kluwer Academic
  Publishers, 2004.
Constantin Philippenko and Aymeric Dieuleveut. Artemis: tight convergence guarantees for bidirec-
  tional compression in federated learning. preprint arXiv:2006.14591, 2020.
Constantin Philippenko and Aymeric Dieuleveut. Preserved central model for faster bidirectional
  compression in distributed settings. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), 2021.
A. Reisizadeh, A. Mokhtari, H. Hassani, A. Jadbabaie, and R. Pedarsani. FedPAQ: A communication-
  efficient federated learning method with periodic averaging and quantization. In Proc. of Int. Conf.
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 2021–2031, 2020.
Peter Richtárik, Igor Sokolov, and Ilyas Fatkhullin. EF21: A new, simpler, theoretically better, and
  practically faster error feedback. In Proc. of 35th Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2021.
Abdurakhmon Sadiev, Grigory Malinovsky, Eduard Gorbunov, Igor Sokolov, Ahmed Khaled, Kon-
  stantin Burlachenko, and Peter Richtárik. Federated optimization algorithms with random reshuf-
  fling and gradient compression. preprint arXiv:2206.07021, 2022.
S. U. Stich. Local SGD converges fast and communicates little. In Proc. of International Conference
   on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
J. Wang et al. A field guide to federated optimization. preprint arXiv:2107.06917, 2021.
B. E. Woodworth, K. K. Patel, and N. Srebro. Minibatch vs Local SGD for heterogeneous distributed
  learning. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                      1
    1.1   Formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2
    1.2   Asymmetric communication regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           2
    1.3   Communication efficiency in FL: state of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      3
          1.3.1    Local Training (LT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
          1.3.2    Communication Compression (CC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           3

2   Goals, challenges, contributions                                                                  4

3   Proposed algorithm CompressedScaffnew                                                            5
    3.1   Iteration complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
    3.2   Convergence in the convex case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7

4   Communication complexity                                                                          8

A Experiments                                                                                        14

B Conclusion                                                                                         14

C Proof of Theorem 1                                                                                 15
    C.1 The random variable dt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18

D Proof of Theorem 3                                                                                 21

E Proof of Theorem 2                                                                                 21


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Table 2: Summary of the main notations used in the paper.
              LT              local training
             CC               communication compression
               L              smoothness constant
               µ              strong convexity constant
           κ = L/µ            condition number of the functions
               d              dimension of the model
             n, i             number and index of clients
       [n] = {1, . . . , n}
               c              weight on downlink communication (DownCom), see equation 2
        s ∈ {2, . . . , n}    sparsity index for compression. No compression if s = n
         q = (qi )ci=1        random binary mask for compression, as detailed in Figure 1
               p              probability that communication occurs at any iteration
             p−1              expected number of local steps per round
             t, T             indexes of iterations
            γ, η, τ           stepsizes
              xi              local model estimate at client i
              hi              local control variate tracking ∇fi
               x̄             model estimate at the server
               ρ              convergence rate


A    E XPERIMENTS
We consider a logistic regression problem. The global loss function is
                                      M
                                  1 X                            µ
                        f (x) =         log(1 + exp(−bm a⊤
                                                         m x)) +   ∥x∥2 ,                        (15)
                                  M m=1                          2

where the am ∈ Rd and bm ∈ {−1, 1} are data samples and M is their total number. The function f
in equation 15 is split into n functions fi (the remainder of M divided by n samples is discarded).
The strong convexity parameter µ is set to 0.003L0 in Figure 2 and 10−6 L0 in Figure 3, where L0 is
the smoothness constant without the µ2 ∥x∥2 term (so that L = L0 + µ). We consider the case where
the number of clients is larger than the model dimension (n > d) and vice versa. For this, we use the
‘w8a’ and ‘real-sim’ datasets from the classical LIBSVM library (Chang & Lin, 2011). For each of
them, we consider the two cases c = 0 and c = 0.2.
We measure the convergence error f (x) − f (x⋆ ) with respect to the TotalCom amount of commu-
nication, where x is xt for GD and x̄t when communication occurs for CompressedScaffnew and
Scaffnew. The objective gap f (x) − f (x⋆ ) is a fair way to compare different algorithms and, since f
is L-smooth, f (x) − f (x⋆ ) ≤ L2 ∥x − x⋆ ∥2 for any x, so that it is guaranteed to converge linearly
with the same rate as Ψ in Theorem 1.
                     2
The stepsize γ = L+µ     is used in all algorithms. The probability p is set to √1κ for Scaffnew and
     pn
min( sκ , 1) for CompressedScaffnew, with s and η set according to equation 13 and equation 7,
respectively. x0 and the h0i are all set to zero vectors.
The results are shown in Figures 2 and 3. The algorithms converge linearly, and CompressedScaffnew
is faster than Scaffnew, as expected. This confirms that the proposed compression technique is
effective. The speedup of CompressedScaffnew over Scaffnew is higher for c = 0 than for c = 0.2.
This is also expected, since when c increases, there is less compression and the two algorithms
become more similar; they are the same, without compression, when c = 1.

B    C ONCLUSION
We have proposed CompressedScaffnew, the first communication-efficient algorithm for distributed
optimization that provably benefits from the two combined acceleration mechanisms of Local
Training (LT) and Communication Compression (CC). Moreover, this is achieved not only for uplink


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


communication, but for our more comprehensive model of total communication. These theoretical
guarantees are confirmed in practice and CompressedScaffnew communicates less than existing
algorithms to reach the same accuracy. An important venue for future work will be to generalize our
specific compression mechanism to a broad class of compressors including quantization (Horváth
et al., 2022). Also, bidirectional compression, i.e. applying compression to not only uplink but also
downlink communication, should be investigated (Liu et al., 2020; Philippenko & Dieuleveut, 2021).
Another venue consists in replacing the true gradients by stochastic estimates, in combination with
variance reduction strategies, as was done for Scaffnew in Malinovsky et al. (2022). Analyzing the
properties of CompressedScaffnew on nonconvex problems should also be studied (Karimireddy
et al., 2021; Das et al., 2022).


C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

We introduce vector notations to simplify the derivations: the problem equation 1 can be written as
                                  find x⋆ = arg min f (x) s.t.     W x = 0,                       (16)
                                             x∈X

                d×n
Pn X := R
where               , an element x = (xi )ni=1 ∈ X is a collection of vectors xi ∈ Rd , f : x ∈ X 7→
       f (x
   i=1 i iP ) is L-smooth   and µ-strongly convex, the linear operator W : X → X maps x = (xi )ni=1
          1    n       n
to (xi − n j=1 xj )i=1 . The constraint W x = 0 means that x minus its average is zero; that is, x
has identical components x1 = · · · = xn . Thus, equation 16 is indeed equivalent to equation 1. We
have W = W ∗ = W 2 .
We solve the problem equation 16 using the following algorithm, which will be shown below to be
CompressedScaffnew:

Algorithm 2
                                                                                           Pn
  input: stepsizes γ > 0, τ > 0; s ∈ {2, . . . , n}; initial estimates x0 ∈ X , u0 ∈ X with i=1 u0i =
  0; constant ω ≥ 0; sequence of independent coin flips θ0 , θ1 , . . . with Prob(θt = 1) = p, and
  for every t with θt = 1, a random binary mask qt = (qit )ni=1 ∈ Rd×n generated as explained in
  Figure 1. The compressed vector Cit (v) is v multiplied elementwise by qit .
  for t = 0, 1, . . . do
     x̂t := xt − γ∇f (xt ) − γut
     if θt = 1 then
                 Pn
        x̄t := 1s j=1 Cjt (x̂tj )
        xt+1 := x̄t , with x̄ti = x̄t , for every i = 1, . . . , n
     else
        xt+1 := x̂t
     end if
     dt :≈ W x̂t
                        τ
     ut+1 := ut + 1+ω     dt
  end for


We denote by Ft the σ-algebra generated by the collection of X -valued random variables
(x0 , u0 ), . . . , (xt , ut ), for every t ≥ 0. In Algorithm 2, dt :≈ W x̂t means that dt is a random
variable with expectation W x̂t . Its construction, so that Algorithm 2 becomes CompressedScaffnew,
is explained in Section C.1, but the convergence analysis of Algorithm 2 only relies on the 3 following
properties of this stochastic process, which are supposed to hold: for every t ≥ 0,

      1. E[dt | F t ] = W x̂t .
      2. There exists a value ω ≥ 0 such that
                                    h               i
                                              2               2
                                  E dt − W x̂t | F t ≤ ω W x̂t .                                  (17)
                                                   Pn
      3. dt belongs to the range of W ; that is,          t
                                                     i=1 di = 0.


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                Pn
                we suppose that i=1 u0i = 0. Then, it follows from the third property of dt that,
In Algorithm 2, P
                  n
for every t ≥ 0, i=1 uti = 0; that is, W ut = ut .

Algorithm 2 converges linearly:
Theorem 4. In Algorithm 2, suppose that 0 < γ < L2 and that τ ≤ γp n(s−1)
                                                                      s(n−1) . For every t ≥ 0, define
the Lyapunov function
                                    1 t          2   1+ω               2
                              Ψt :=    x − x⋆ +               ut − u⋆ ,                           (18)
                                    γ                  τ
where x⋆ is the unique solution to equation 16 and u⋆ := −∇f (x⋆ ). Then Algorithm 2 converges
linearly: for every t ≥ 0,
                                           E Ψt ≤ ρ t Ψ0 ,

                                                                                                  (19)
where
                                                                  γτ
                          ρ := max (1 − γµ)2 , (γL − 1)2 , 1 −           < 1.                     (20)
                                                                 1+ω
Also, (xt )t∈N and (x̂t )t∈N both converge to x⋆ and (ut )t∈N converges to u⋆ , almost surely.


Proof. For every t ≥ 0, we define ût+1 := ut + τ W x̂P        t
                                                                 , wt := xt − γ∇f (xt ) and w⋆ := x⋆ −
                                                                   n
γ∇f (x⋆ ). We also define x̄t♯ := (x̄t♯ )ni=1 , with x̄t♯ := n1 i=1 x̂ti ; that is, x̄t♯ is the exact average of
the x̂ti , of which x̄t is an unbiased random estimate.
We have
              h         2
                             i      h             i
                                             2                       2
             E xt+1 − x⋆ | Ft = pEqt x̄t − x⋆ | Ft + (1 − p) x̂t − x⋆ ,
                                                                                       t
    h Eqt denotes ithe expectation with respect to the random mask q .
where                                                                                       To analyze
         t    ⋆  2
Eqt ∥x̄ − x ∥ | Ft , we can remark that the expectation and the squared Euclidean norm are
separable with respect to the coordinates of the d-dimensional vectors, so that we can reason on the
coordinates independently on each other, even if the the coordinates, or rows, of qt are mutually de-
pendent. Thus, for every coordinate k ∈ [d], it is like a subset Ωtk ⊂ [n] of size s, which corresponds
to the location of the ones in the k-th row of qt , is chosen uniformly at random and
                                                  1 X t
                                           x̄tk =          x̂i,k .
                                                  s      t
                                                        i∈Ωk
                t         t♯
Since Eqt [x̄ | Ft ] = x̄ ,
                     h           i           2
                                                   h          2
                                                                   i
                            2
                Eqt x̄t − x⋆ | Ft = x̄t♯ − x⋆ + Eqt x̄t − x̄t♯ | Ft ,
with
                                              2                 2            2
                             x̄t♯ − x⋆ = x̂t − x⋆ − W x̂t
and, as proved in Condat & Richtárik (2022, Proposition 1),
                                                                        2     
                                  d                             n
                                           1                1
        h           2
                          i     X               X              X                            2
   Eqt x̄t − x̄t♯ | Ft = n                          x̂ti,k −       x̂tj,k  | Ft  = ν W x̂t ,
                                                                                 
                                     EΩtk 
                                             s    t
                                                             n j=1
                                      k=1              i∈Ωk

where
                                               n−s          1
                                         ν :=          ∈ 0,     .                                            (21)
                                              s(n − 1)      2
Moreover,
            2                  2                   2
 x̂t − x⋆       = wt − w⋆          + γ 2 ut − u⋆       − 2γ⟨wt − w⋆ , ut − u⋆ ⟩
                               2                   2
                = wt − w⋆          − γ 2 ut − u⋆       − 2γ⟨x̂t − x⋆ , ut − u⋆ ⟩
                               2                   2
                = wt − w⋆          − γ 2 ut − u⋆       − 2γ⟨x̂t − x⋆ , ût+1 − u⋆ ⟩ + 2γ⟨x̂t − x⋆ , ût+1 − ut ⟩
                               2                   2
                = wt − w⋆          − γ 2 ut − u⋆       − 2γ⟨x̂t − x⋆ , ût+1 − u⋆ ⟩ + 2γτ ⟨x̂t − x⋆ , W x̂t ⟩
                               2                   2                                                 2
                = wt − w⋆          − γ 2 ut − u⋆       − 2γ⟨x̂t − x⋆ , ût+1 − u⋆ ⟩ + 2γτ W x̂t          .


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence,
    h        2
                  i
                               2         2          2                   2
  E xt+1 − x⋆ | Ft = p x̂t − x⋆ − p W x̂t + pν W x̂t + (1 − p) x̂t − x⋆
                                               2                            2
                                 = x̂t − x⋆        − p(1 − ν) W x̂t
                                                   2                   2
                                 = wt − w⋆   − γ 2 ut − u⋆ − 2γ⟨x̂t − x⋆ , ût+1 − u⋆ ⟩
                                                          2
                                  + 2γτ − p(1 − ν) W x̂t .


On the other hand,
                                                                        2
 h              2
                   i                            1                                  ω                2
E ut+1 − u⋆ | Ft ≤ ut − u⋆ +                       ût+1 − ut                            ût+1 − ut

                                                                            +
                                               1+ω                              (1 + ω)2
                                   ω                      1                  2         ω                2
                                         ut − u⋆ +              ût+1 − u⋆                   ût+1 − ut

                             =                                                  +         2
                                 1+ω                  1+ω                         (1 + ω)
                                   ω2                2          1                    2
                             =          2
                                           ut − u⋆ +                2
                                                                       ût+1 − u⋆
                               (1 + ω)                      (1 + ω)
                                     2ω                                     ω                   2
                               +            ⟨ut − u⋆ , ût+1 − u⋆ ⟩ +               ût+1 − u⋆
                                 (1 + ω)2                               (1 + ω)2
                                      ω                 2         2ω
                               +              ut − u⋆ −                 ⟨ut − u⋆ , ût+1 − u⋆ ⟩
                                 (1 + ω)2                     (1 + ω)2
                                  1                 2         ω               2
                             =          ût+1 − u⋆ +                ut − u⋆ .
                               1+ω                         1+ω
Moreover,
                         2                                       2
            ût+1 − u⋆       = (ut − u⋆ ) + (ût+1 − ut )
                                           2                     2
                             = ut − u⋆         + ût+1 − ut          + 2⟨ut − u⋆ , ût+1 − ut ⟩
                                           2                                                      2
                             = ut − u⋆         + 2⟨ût+1 − u⋆ , ût+1 − ut ⟩ − ût+1 − ut
                                           2                     2
                             = ut − u⋆         − ût+1 − ut          + 2τ ⟨ût+1 − u⋆ , W (x̂t − x⋆ )⟩
                                           2                 2
                             = ut − u⋆         − τ 2 W x̂t       + 2τ ⟨W (ût+1 − u⋆ ), x̂t − x⋆ ⟩
                                           2                 2
                             = ut − u⋆         − τ 2 W x̂t       + 2τ ⟨ût+1 − u⋆ , x̂t − x⋆ ⟩.

Hence,
  1 h t+1     2
                   i 1+ω h                    2
                                                     i
    E x   − x⋆ | Ft +       E ut+1 − u⋆ | Ft
  γ                     τ

                      1     t     ⋆ 2          t     ⋆ 2           p            2
                    ≤     w −w          −γ u −u          + 2τ − (1 − ν) W x̂t
                      γ                                            γ
                                                     1           2
                      − 2⟨x̂t − x⋆ , ût+1 − u⋆ ⟩ +     ut − u⋆
                                                     τ
                                 2                                ω           2
                      − τ W x̂t + 2⟨ût+1 − u⋆ , x̂t − x⋆ ⟩ +         ut − u⋆
                                                                  τ
                      1               2     1+ω                     2
                    =     wt − w⋆ +                −γ      ut − u⋆
                      γ                       τ

                               p                    2
                      + τ − (1 − ν) W x̂t .                                     (22)
                               γ
Since we have supposed τ − γp (1 − ν) ≤ 0,
               1 h t+1           2
                                       i 1+ω h             2
                                                                 i
                 E x      − x⋆ | Ft +           E ut+1 − u⋆ | Ft
               γ                             τ

                            1     t     ⋆ 2   1+ω       γτ           2
                         ≤      w −w        +      1−         ut − u⋆ .
                            γ                  τ       1+ω


                                                       17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


According to Condat & Richtárik (2023, Lemma 1),
                                        2                                            2
                           wt − w⋆          = (Id − γ∇f )xt − (Id − γ∇f )x⋆
                                                                                     2
                                            ≤ max(1 − γµ, γL − 1)2 xt − x⋆               .
Therefore,

                       t+1                    2          2       γτ
                                                                      Ψt .

                    E Ψ    | Ft ≤ max (1 − γµ) , (γL − 1) , 1 −                                              (23)
                                                                1+ω
Using the tower rule, we can unroll the recursion in equation 23 to obtain the unconditional expecta-
tion of Ψt+1 . Moreover, using classical results on supermartingale convergence (Bertsekas, 2015,
Proposition A.4.5), it follows from equation 23 that Ψt → 0 almost surely. Almost sure convergence
of xt and ut follows. Finally, by Lipschitz continuity of ∇f , we canh upper bound
                                                                                        t   ⋆ 2
                                                                                   i ∥x̂ − x ∥ by a
                                                                                 2
linear combination of ∥xt − x⋆ ∥2 and ∥ut − u⋆ ∥2 . It follows that E ∥x̂t − x⋆ ∥ → 0 linearly with
the same rate ρ and that x̂t → x⋆ almost surely, as well.


CompressedScaffnew corresponds to Algorithm 2 with ui replaced by −hi , the randomization
strategy for the dual update detailed in Section C.1, the variance factors ω and ν defined in equation 26
and equation 21, respectively, and τ := γp η, for some η with

                                                    n(s − 1)        1
                                0<η ≤1−ν =                     ∈      ,1 .
                                                    s(n − 1)        2
With these substitutions, Theorem 4 yields Theorem 1.

C.1    T HE RANDOM VARIABLE dt

We define the random variable dt used in Algorithm 2, so that it becomes CompressedScaffnew. If
θt = 0, dt := 0. If, on the other hand, θt = 1, for every coordinate k ∈ [d], a subset Ωtk ⊂ [n] of
size s is chosen uniformly at random. These sets (Ωtk )dk=1 are mutually dependent, but this does not
matter for the derivations, since we can reason on the coordinates separately. Then, for every k ∈ [d]
and i ∈ [n],                        (
                                        a x̂ti,k − 1s j∈Ωt x̂tj,k if i ∈ Ωtk ,
                                                      P
                            t
                          di,k :=                              k                                             (24)
                                        0 otherwise,
                                                                  Pn
for some value a > 0 to determine. We can check that i=1 dti = 0. We can also note that dt
depends only on P W x̂t and not on x̂t ; in particular, if x̂t1 = · · · = x̂tn , dti = 0. We have to set a so that
               1    n
E[di ] = x̂i − n j=1 x̂tj , where the expectation is with respect to θt and the Ωtk (all expectations in
    t      t

this section are conditional to x̂t ). So, let us calculate this expectation.
Let k ∈ [d]. For every i ∈ [n],
                                                                   
                               t       s t       a         X
                            E di,k = p    ax̂i,k − EΩ:i∈Ω    x̂tj,k  ,
                                       n          s
                                                                      j∈Ω

where EΩ:i∈Ω denotes the expectation with respect to a subset Ω ⊂ [n] of size s containing i and
chosen uniformly at random. We have
                            
                                                                                n
                 X                        s−1 X             n−s t       s−1 X t
        EΩ:i∈Ω       x̂tj,k  = x̂ti,k +          x̂tj,k =     x̂i,k +           x̂ .
                                          n−1               n−1         n − 1 j=1 j,k
                    j∈Ω                            j∈[n]\{i}

Hence, for every i ∈ [n],
                                                                       n
                                  s        an−s             s a s−1 X
                      E dti,k = p

                                        a−        x̂i,k − p               x̂j,k .
                                  n        sn−1             n s n − 1 j=1


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, by setting
                                                                         n−1
                                                             a :=                ,                                                                      (25)
                                                                        p(s − 1)
we have, for every i ∈ [n],
                                                                                                         n
                                      s              1n−1 1 n−s                                       1X
                          E dti,k = p

                                                           −                                x̂i,k −         x̂j,k
                                      n              p s−1   p s(s − 1)                               n j=1
                                                             n
                                                        1X
                                       = x̂i,k −              x̂j,k ,
                                                        n j=1

as desired.
Now, we want to find ω such that equation 17 holds or, equivalently,
                                    " n       #                             2
                                                           n           n
                                     X
                                          t 2
                                                          X
                                                                t   1X t
                                   E     di     ≤ (1 + ω)     x̂i −      x̂   .
                                     i=1                  i=1
                                                                    n j=1 j

We can reason on the coordinates separately, or all at once to ease the notations: we have
                                " n       #                              2
                                                  n
                                 X
                                      t 2      sX              t   aX t
                               E     di     =p       EΩ:i∈Ω ax̂i −   x̂j .
                                 i=1
                                               n i=1               s
                                                                                                 j∈Ω

For every i ∈ [n],
                                                        2                                                                2
                                       a   X                                            a  t a           X
               EΩ:i∈Ω          ax̂ti −           x̂tj       = EΩ:i∈Ω                 a−   x̂ −                   x̂tj
                                       s                                                s i s
                                           j∈Ω                                                         j∈Ω\{i}
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                    a  t 2             a X
                                                            = a−      x̂i + EΩ:i∈Ω               x̂tj
                                                                    s                  s
                                                                                         j∈Ω\{i}
                                                                *                                  +
                                                                       a t a
                                                                                         X
                                                                                                 t
                                                             −2     a−     x̂ , EΩ:i∈Ω         x̂j .
                                                                       s i s
                                                                                                         j∈Ω\{i}

We have
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                n
                                    X               s−1                 X               s − 1  X
                   EΩ:i∈Ω                    x̂tj =                              x̂tj =          x̂t − x̂ti 
                                                    n−1                                 n − 1 j=1 j
                                   j∈Ω\{i}                        j∈[n]\{i}

and
                               2
               X                                    X                   2                   X           X
 EΩ:i∈Ω                 x̂tj       = EΩ:i∈Ω                      x̂tj        + EΩ:i∈Ω                               x̂tj , x̂tj ′
              j∈Ω\{i}                            j∈Ω\{i}                                j∈Ω\{i} j ′ ∈Ω\{i,j}
                                       s−1         X                    2        s−1 s−2          X              X
                                   =                             x̂tj        +                                                      x̂tj , x̂tj ′
                                       n−1                                       n−1n−2
                                              j∈[n]\{i}                                         j∈[n]\{i} j ′ ∈[n]\{i,j}
                                                                                                                                                    2

                                     s−1             s−2                         X          2  s−1 s−2                        X
                                   =              1−                                    x̂tj +                                             x̂tj
                                     n−1             n−2                                          n−1n−2
                                                                            j∈[n]\{i}                                    j∈[n]\{i}
                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                  n                              n
                                     s − 1 n − s X t 2         2   s−1 s−2 X t
                                   =                 x̂j − x̂ti  +                x̂ − x̂ti                                                             .
                                     n − 1 n − 2 j=1                n − 1 n − 2 j=1 j


                                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence,
  " n        #       n                                n
   X
         t 2      sX       a  t 2     a2 s − 1 n − s X t 2
 E      di     =p       a−   x̂i + ps 2                  x̂
    i=1
                  n i=1    s         (s) n − 1 n − 2 j=1 j
                                                                                                   2
                                           n                                    n   n
                       s a2 s − 1 n − s X t 2               s a2 s − 1 s − 2 X X t
                    −p                         x̂       + p                           x̂ − x̂ti
                       n (s)2 n − 1 n − 2 i=1 i             n (s)2 n − 1 n − 2 i=1 j=1 j
                                             n
                                               *         n
                                                                      +
                         s a s−1        a  X        t
                                                        X
                                                              t     t
                    − 2p            a−            x̂i ,     x̂j − x̂i
                         nsn−1          s i=1           j=1
                             n                         n
                    (n − 1)2 X t 2    (n − 1)2 n − s X t 2
                =              x̂i +                      x̂
                      psn i=1        ps(s − 1)n n − 2 i=1 i
                                      n            2                       n      2
                      1 s−2n−1 X t                         1 s−2n−1 X t
                    +                   x̂             −2                    x̂
                      ps s − 1 n − 2 i=1 i                psn s − 1 n − 2 i=1 i
                                         n               n               n                 2
                         1 s−2n−1X t 2              n−1X t 2        n−1 X t
                    +                       x̂i + 2         x̂i − 2        x̂
                        psn s − 1 n − 2 i=1         psn i=1         psn i=1 i
                                  n                          n
                  (n − 1)(n + 1) X t 2      (n − 1)2 n − s X t 2
                =                    x̂i +                      x̂
                       psn       i=1
                                           ps(s − 1)n n − 2 i=1 i
                                 n            2                      n
                      n−1 s     X                    1 s−2n−1X t 2
                    −              x̂t            +                     x̂
                      psn s − 1 i=1 i               psn s − 1 n − 2 i=1 i
                                                                                      n
                    (n2 − 1)(s − 1)(n − 2) + (n − 1)2 (n − s) + (s − 2)(n − 1) X t 2
                =                                                                  x̂i
                                       ps(s − 1)n(n − 2)                       i=1
                                 n        2
                        n−1     X
                    −              x̂t
                      p(s − 1)n i=1 i
                            n                   n                 2
                   n−1 X t 2           n−1     X
                =              x̂i −              x̂t
                  p(s − 1) i=1       p(s − 1)n i=1 i
                                                        2
                            n           n
                   n−1 X t 1 X t
                =              x̂i −      x̂                .
                  p(s − 1) i=1       n j=1 j

Therefore, we can set
                                                   n−1
                                        ω :=               − 1.                                   (26)
                                                  p(s − 1)


                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
We suppose that the assumptions in Theorem 3 hold. s is set as the maximum of three values. Let us
consider these three cases.
1) Suppose that s = 2. Since 2 = s ≥ ⌊cn⌋ and 2 = s ≥ ⌊ nd ⌋, we have c ≤ n3 and 1 ≤ 3d
                                                                                     n . Hence,
                                    r
                                       nκ n        sd
                                 O         +          + 1 + cd
                                        s     s    n
                                    √

                                               d     d      d
                               = O nκ + n         + +
                                                 n n n
                                     √
                                     d κ
                               =O √ +d .                                                    (27)
                                        n

2) Suppose that s = ⌊ nd ⌋. Then sd                          n
                                 n ≤ 1. Since s ≥ ⌊cn⌋ and ⌊ d ⌋ = s ≥ 2, we have cn ≤ s + 1 ≤
n         d     1                   d
d + 1 and n ≤ 2 , so that cd ≤ 1 + n ≤ 2. Hence,
                                     r
                                        nκ n        sd
                                  O        +           + 1 + cd
                                         s    s     n
                                     r
                                        nκ n
                                =O         +      .
                                         s    s
Since 2s ≥ nd , we have 1s ≤ 2d
                             n and
                                       r
                                       nκ n      sd
                                  O       +         + 1 + cd
                                        s   s    n
                                    √
                                =O    dκ + d .                                                   (28)

3) Suppose that s = ⌊cn⌋. Then s ≤ cn. Also, 2s ≥ cn and 1s ≤ cn 2
                                                                   . Since s = ⌊cn⌋ ≥ ⌊ nd ⌋, we
have cn + 1 ≥ d and 1 ≤ cd + n . Since s = ⌊cn⌋ ≥ 2, we have n ≤ 2c and 1 ≤ 2cd. Hence,
               n              d                                1

                                   r
                                      nκ n          sd
                                O          +           + 1 + cd
                                        s     s     n
                                   r
                                      κ 1
                             =O           +     (cd + cd + cd)
                                       c    c
                                   √
                             = O cκd + d .                                                  (29)

By adding up the three upper bounds equation 27, equation 28, equation 29, we obtain the upper
bound in equation 14.

E    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
                                                                   ⋆       d
We suppose that the assumptions in Theorem   Pn2 hold. A solution x ∈ R to equation 1, which
is supposed to exist, satisfies ∇f (x⋆ ) = n1 i=1 ∇fi (x⋆ ) = 0. x⋆ is not necessarily unique but
h⋆i := ∇fi (x⋆ ) is unique.
We define the Bregman divergence of a L-smooth convex function g at points x, x′ ∈ Rd as
Dg (x, x′ ) := g(x) − g(x′ ) − ⟨∇g(x′ ), x − x′ ⟩ ≥ 0. We have Dg (x, x′ ) ≥ 2L 1
                                                                                  ∥∇g(x) − ∇g(x′ )∥2 .
We can note that for every x ∈ Rd and i = 1, . . . , n, Dfi (x, x⋆ ) is the same whatever the solution
x⋆ .
For every t ≥ 0, we define the Lyapunov function
                                 n                      n
                              1X t         2  γ n−1X t             2
                      Ψt :=         xi − x⋆ + 2            h − h⋆i ,                             (30)
                              γ i=1          p η s − 1 i=1 i


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Starting from equation 22 with the substitutions detailed at the end of the proof of Theorem 1, we
have, for every t ≥ 0,
                   n                                      n
               1X      h
                                 ⋆ 2
                                          i    γ n − 1 X h t+1       ⋆ 2
                                                                              i
  E Ψt+1 | Ft =       E xt+1

                         i   − x     | Ft   +                E hi − hi   | Ft
                γ i=1                         p2 η s − 1 i=1
                         n
                     1X                                              2
                                xti − γ∇fi (xti ) − x⋆ − γ∇fi (x⋆ )

                 ≤
                     γ i=1
                                                                                        2
                                            Xn                         n           n
                              γ n−1              t    ⋆ 2 p           X
                                                                            t   1X t
                     +                  −γ      hi − hi + (η − 1 + ν)     x̂i −      x̂
                             p2 η s − 1     i=1
                                                          γ           i=1
                                                                                n j=1 j

with
                                        2           2
  xti − γ∇fi (xti ) − x⋆ − γ∇fi (x⋆ )     = xti − x⋆ − 2γ⟨∇fi (xti ) − ∇fi (x⋆ ), xti − x⋆ ⟩


                                                                                          2
                                                         + γ 2 ∇fi (xti ) − ∇fi (x⋆ )
                                                                     2
                                                   ≤ xti − x⋆            − (2γ − γ 2 L)⟨∇fi (xti ) − ∇fi (x⋆ ), xti − x⋆ ⟩,
where the second inequality follows from cocoercivity of the gradient. Moreover, for every x, x′ ,
Dfi (x, x′ ) ≤ ⟨∇fi (x) − ∇fi (x′ ), x − x′ ⟩. Therefore,
                                      n
                                      X
          E Ψt+1 | Ft ≤ Ψt − (2 − γL)   Dfi (xti , x⋆ )

                                                    i=1
                                                                                                             2
                                      n                                n                         n
                                      X                 2 p           X                      1   X
                               −γ             hti − h⋆i + (η − 1 + ν)                 x̂ti −          x̂tj       .
                                      i=1
                                                          γ           i=1
                                                                                              n j=1

Telescopic the sum and using the tower rule of expectations, we get summability over t of the three
negative terms above: for every T ≥ 0, we have
                                    n X
                                    X T
                                        E Dfi (xti , x⋆ ) ≤ Ψ0 − E ΨT +1 ≤ Ψ0 ,

                     (2 − γL)                                                                                        (31)
                                    i=1 t=0

                              n X
                                T  h            i
                              X               2
                                  E hti − h⋆i     ≤ Ψ0 − E ΨT +1 ≤ Ψ0 ,

                         γ                                                                                           (32)
                              i=1 t=0
                                                          
                                                         2
                             n X T               n
              p             X                 1 X
                                    E x̂ti −       x̂tj  ≤ Ψ0 − E ΨT +1 ≤ Ψ0 .

                (1 − ν − η)                                                                                          (33)
                                                          
              γ             i=1 t=0
                                              n j=1

Taking ergodic averages and using convexity of the squared norm and of the Bregman divergence, we
can now get O(1/T ) rates. We use a tilde to denote averages over the iterations so far. That is, for
every i = 1, . . . , n and T ≥ 0, we define
                                                                 T
                                                            1 X t
                                               x̃Ti :=             x
                                                          T + 1 t=0 i

and
                                                                 n
                                                           1X T
                                                 x̃T :=         x̃ .
                                                           n i=1 i
The Bregman divergence is convex in its first argument, so that, for every T ≥ 0,
                              n                          n          T
                              X                          X     1 X
                                    Dfi (x̃Ti , x⋆ ) ≤                 Dfi (xti , x⋆ ).
                              i=1                        i=1
                                                             T + 1 t=0


                                                            22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining this inequality with equation 31 yields, for every T ≥ 0,
                                                 n
                                                 X                                        Ψ0
                                                   E Dfi (x̃Ti , x⋆ ) ≤

                                      (2 − γL)                                                .                    (34)
                                                    i=1
                                                                                         T +1

Similarly, for every i = 1, . . . , n and T ≥ 0, we define
                                                                         T
                                                                    1 X t
                                                    h̃Ti :=                h
                                                                  T + 1 t=0 i

and we have, for every T ≥ 0,
                              n                      2        n          T
                              X                               X     1 X t            2
                                       h̃Ti − h⋆i         ≤                 hi − h⋆i .
                                i=1                           i=1
                                                                  T + 1 t=0

Combining this inequality with equation 32 yields, for every T ≥ 0,
                                   n
                                                             Ψ0

                                  X                  2
                                γ     E h̃Ti − h⋆i       ≤      .                                                  (35)
                                  i=1
                                                           T +1

Finally, for every i = 1, . . . , n and T ≥ 0, we define
                                                                         T
                                                    ˜T :=           1 X t
                                                    x̂ i                   x̂
                                                                  T + 1 t=0 i

and
                                                              n
                                                     ˜T := 1
                                                             X
                                                     x̂         ˜T ,
                                                                x̂
                                                           n i=1 i
and we have, for every T ≥ 0,
                                                                                                       2
                          n                     2         n      T           n
                          X
                                 ˜T − x̂
                                      ˜T
                                                          X 1 X t 1X t
                                 x̂ i               ≤               x̂i −      x̂                          .
                          i=1                         i=1
                                                          T + 1 t=0       n j=1 j

Combining this inequality with equation 33 yields, for every T ≥ 0,
                                         n
                                                                   Ψ0

                          p             X                   2
                            (1 − ν − η)         ˜ T
                                            E x̂i − x̂  ˜ T
                                                                ≤      .                                           (36)
                          γ             i=1
                                                                  T +1

Next, we have, for every i = 1, . . . , n and T ≥ 0,
                                        2                                            2                         2
                          ∇f (x̃Ti )        ≤ 2 ∇f (x̃Ti ) − ∇f (x̃T )                   + 2 ∇f (x̃T )
                                                                           2                   2
                                            ≤ 2L2 x̃Ti − x̃T                   + 2 ∇f (x̃T )       .               (37)
Moreover, for every T ≥ 0 and solution x⋆ to equation 1,
                      2                                           2
          ∇f (x̃T )       = ∇f (x̃T ) − ∇f (x⋆ )
                               n
                            1X                           2
                          ≤       ∇fi (x̃T ) − ∇fi (x⋆ )
                            n i=1
                                 n                                n
                              2X                            2  2X                            2
                          ≤         ∇fi (x̃T ) − ∇fi (x̃Ti ) +       ∇fi (x̃Ti ) − ∇fi (x⋆ )
                              n i=1                            n i=1
                                       n                                       n
                              2L2 X T                         2        4L X
                          ≤          x̃ − x̃T                     +          Df (x̃T , x⋆ ).                       (38)
                               n i=1 i                                  n i=1 i i


                                                                      23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 2
There remains to control the terms x̃Ti − x̃T                        : we have, for every T ≥ 0,

            n                                n                                                   2        n                   2
            X                      2         X                                                            X
                   x̃Ti − x̃T          ≤2                            ˜T − x̂
                                                    (x̃Ti − x̃T ) − (x̂   ˜T )                       +2           ˜T − x̂
                                                                                                                  x̂   ˜T
                                                                        i                                            i
            i=1                              i=1                                                          i=1
                                             n
                                             X                        2        n
                                                                               X                          2
                                       ≤2                  ˜T
                                                    x̃Ti − x̂             +2          ˜T − x̂
                                                                                      x̂   ˜T                 .                            (39)
                                                              i                          i
                                             i=1                               i=1



For every i = 1, . . . , n and t ≥ 0,


                                                 x̂ti = xti − γ ∇fi (xti ) − hti


so that, for every i = 1, . . . , n and T ≥ 0,

                                                                 T
                                              ˜T = γ        1 X
                                       x̃Ti − x̂ i                  ∇fi (xti ) − γ h̃Ti
                                                          T + 1 t=0


and

                                                    T                                2
                              2                1 X
                      ˜T
               x̃Ti − x̂          =γ   2
                                                       ∇fi (xti ) − h̃Ti
                        i
                                             T + 1 t=0
                                                  T                                           2
                                             1 X                           2
                                  ≤ 2γ 2             ∇fi (xti ) − ∇fi (x⋆ ) + 2γ 2 h̃Ti − h⋆i
                                           T + 1 t=0
                                                     T                                    2
                                                1 X
                                  ≤ 4Lγ 2               Dfi (xti , x⋆ ) + 2γ 2 h̃Ti − h⋆i .                                                (40)
                                              T + 1 t=0


Combining equation 37, equation 38, equation 39, equation 40, we get, for every T ≥ 0,

      n                                n
      X                  2             X                     2                               2
            ∇f (x̃Ti )       ≤ 2L2             x̃Ti − x̃T        + 2n ∇f (x̃T )
      i=1                              i=1
                                       n                                   n                                      n
                                       X                     2             X                          2           X
                             ≤ 2L2             x̃Ti − x̃T        + 2L2               x̃Ti − x̃T           + 4L          Dfi (x̃Ti , x⋆ )
                                       i=1                                 i=1                                    i=1
                                       n                                   n
                                       X                     2             X
                             = 4L2             x̃Ti − x̃T        + 4L           Dfi (x̃Ti , x⋆ )
                                       i=1                                 i=1
                                       n
                                       X                     2              Xn                        2           n
                                                                                                                  X
                             ≤ 8L2                    ˜T
                                               x̃Ti − x̂         + 8L     2          ˜T − x̂
                                                                                     x̂   ˜T              + 4L          Dfi (x̃Ti , x⋆ )
                                                         i                              i
                                       i=1                                 i=1                                    i=1
                                                      n X
                                                        T                                            2    n
                                               1      X                                                   X
                             ≤ 32L3 γ 2                    Dfi (xti , x⋆ ) + 16L2 γ 2     h̃Ti − h⋆i
                                             T + 1 i=1 t=0                            i=1
                                           n
                                           X                      2            n
                                                                               X
                               + 8L2               ˜T − x̂
                                                   x̂   ˜T            + 4L           Dfi (x̃Ti , x⋆ ).
                                                      i
                                           i=1                                 i=1



                                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Taking the expectation and using equation 31, equation 35, equation 36 and equation 34, we get, for
every T ≥ 0,
 n                                        n   T
 X  h           2
                  i                   1 XX
   E ∇f (x̃Ti )     ≤ 32L3 γ 2                   E Dfi (xti , x⋆ )

 i=1
                                   T + 1 i=1 t=0
                                      Xn
                                                     2

                                  2 2         T    ⋆
                             + 16L γ     E h̃i − hi
                                          i=1
                                   n
                                   X
                                                          2
                                                                         n
                                                                         X
                                 2      ˜T − x̂
                                             ˜T                            E Dfi (x̃Ti , x⋆ ) .

                             + 8L    E x̂ i                       + 4L
                                    i=1                                  i=1
                        32L3 γ 2 Ψ0            Ψ0          8L2 γ    Ψ0   4L    Ψ0
                      ≤              + 16L2 γ       +                  +
                        2 − γL T + 1          T + 1 p(1 − ν − η) T + 1 2 − γL T + 1
                             3 2
                                                     8L2 γ       Ψ0

                          32L γ + 4L       2
                      =              + 16L γ +                      .
                            2 − γL               p(1 − ν − η) T + 1

                     p

Hence, with γ = Θ    L       and a fixed η, we have
                                           n  h             i
                                           X              2
                                             E ∇f (x̃Ti )     ≤ϵ
                                           i=1

after
                                                          Ψ0

                                                 O
                                                          pϵ
iterations and
                                                          Ψ0

                                                 O
                                                           ϵ
communication rounds.
We note that in these conditions, with γ scaled by p, LT does not yield any acceleration: the
communication complexity is the same whatever p. CC is effective, however, since we communicate
much less than d floats during every communication round.


                                                      25
