Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H EURISTIC -G UIDED P RIVACY AGAINST M EMBERSHIP
I NFERENCE ATTACKS IN F EDERATED L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Federated Learning (FL) enables collaborative model training among several par-
         ticipants, while keeping local data private at the participants’ premises. However,
         despite its merits, FL remains vulnerable to privacy attacks, and in particular, to
         membership inference attacks that allow adversaries to deduce confidential in-
         formation about participants’ training data. In this paper, we propose D INAR, a
         novel privacy-preserving FL method. D INAR follows a fine-grained approach that
         specifically tackles FL neural network layers that leak more private information
         than other layers, thus, efficiently protecting the FL model against membership
         inference attacks in a non-intrusive way. And in order to compensate for any po-
         tential loss in the accuracy of the protected model,D INAR combines the proposed
         fine-grained approach with adaptive gradient descent. The paper presents our ex-
         tensive empirical evaluation of D INAR, conducted with six widely used datasets,
         four neural networks, and comparing against five state-of-the-art FL privacy pro-
         tection mechanisms. The evaluation results show that D INAR reduces the mem-
         bership inference attack success rate to reach its optimal value, without hurting
         model accuracy, and without inducing computational overhead. In contrast, ex-
         isting FL defense mechanisms incur an overhead of up to +36% and +3,000% on
         respectively FL client-side and FL server-side computation times.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Nowadays, advancements in Machine Learning (ML), along with the need of better privacy,
have given rise to Federated Learning (FL) paradigm. FL enables collaborative model training
among decentralized participants’ devices, while keeping local data private at the participants’
premises (McMahan et al., 2017). Thus, participants contribute by training their respective local
models using their private data, and only transmit their local model parameters to a FL server,
which aggregates these parameters to produce a global model. FL has various applications, such
as e-health monitoring (Wu et al., 2022), disease diagnosis (Li et al., 2019), and fraud detection in
banking systems (Grimm et al., 2021). Despite the privacy benefits offered by FL, recent studies
have highlighted the vulnerability of FL systems to privacy inference attacks (Nasr et al., 2019; Lyu
et al., 2020). These attacks, particularly Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs) (Shokri et al., 2017),
exploit the parameters of the shared models to infer sensitive information about the training data of
other participants. In a white-box FL configuration, where the model architecture and parameters
are known to all participants, membership inference attacks pose a significant threat to privacy. For
instance, an attacker on the server-side could discern from the aggregated parameters whether a
specific individual’s data was included in the training process. Similarly, a malicious participant on
the client-side could deduce whether the data of a particular individual was used for training and
potentially uncover sensitive information.
To address these privacy concerns, various FL defense mechanisms have been proposed (Abadi
et al., 2016; Naseri et al., 2020; Papernot et al., 2018; 2017). These mechanisms leverage tech-
niques such as cryptographic methods and secure multiparty computation (Zhang et al., 2019; Xu
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021), trusted execution environments (Lebrun et al., 2022; Messaoud
et al., 2022), perturbation-based methods and differential privacy (Naseri et al., 2020; Sun et al.,
2019). Software and hardware-based cryptographic solutions provide interesting theoretical privacy
guarantees, although at the expense of high computational overhead. Whereas existing perturbation-
based methods negatively impact model utility and quality. Thus, our objective is to precisely strike


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a balance between FL model privacy, model utility and computational cost for enabling effective
privacy-preserving FL, especially in the case of cross-silo FL systems (e.g., banking systems, hos-
pitals, etc.) where the FL server shares the global model with the participating clients and not with
external parties.
In this paper, we propose D INAR, a fine-grained privacy-preserving FL method that tackles mem-
bership inference attacks. This approach is motivated by an interesting observation made in recent
studies (Mo et al., 2021a;b), and confirmed in our empirical analysis in §3, that is there is a layer in
neural networks that leaks more private information than other layers. Thus, D INAR is based on a
simple yet effective approach that consists in protecting more specifically the FL model layer that is
the most sensitive to membership privacy leakage.
D INAR runs at the FL client-side, and allows to protect both the global FL model and the client
models. Whereas for its own model predictions the client uses its privacy sensitive layer as part of
the model, that privacy sensitive layer is obfuscated before sending client model updates to the FL
server. Thus, the aggregated model produced by the FL server includes an obfuscated version of the
privacy sensitive layer. And when the client receives the protected global model from the server,
it first restores its local privacy sensitive layer (i.e., the non-obfuscated version of that layer) that
was stored during the previous FL round, and integrates it into its copy of the global model, before
actually using the resulting personalized model for client predictions. Furthermore, in order to
improve the utility of the protected model, D INAR leverages the adaptive gradient descent technique
to further maximize the accuracy of the model (Duchi & Hazan, 2011). Indeed, given the high-
dimensional nature of optimization problems in neural networks, adaptive gradient descent allows
to dynamically adjust the model learning rate for each dimension in an iterative manner.
In particular, the paper makes the following contributions:
       • We present an empirical analysis on several datasets and neural networks to characterize
         how much each layer of a neural network leaks membership privacy information.
       • To the best of our knowledge, we propose the first fine-grained FL privacy-preserving
         method against MIAs, that specifically obfuscates the most privacy sensitive layer, for an
         effective yet non-intrusive privacy protection.
       • We conduct extensive empirical experiments of our solution D INAR with six widely used
         datasets and four neural networks. We also compare D INAR against five state-of-the-art
         FL privacy protection mechanisms. Our evaluation results show that D INAR reduces the
         membership inference attack success rate to reach its optimal value, without hurting model
         accuracy, and without inducing computational overhead. In contrast, existing FL defense
         mechanisms incur an overhead of up to +36% and +3,000% on respectively client-side and
         server-side computation times.

2     BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
2.1   F EDERATED L EARNING

In Federated Learning (FL), instead of sharing raw data, several clients collaboratively train a pre-
dictive model. This allows better privacy, since clients only share their local model parameters to a
server, that orchestrates the FL distributed protocol, while clients keep their raw data private on their
devices. At each FL round, clients that are selected by the FL server to participate to that round train
their local models using their own data. They then transmit their model updates to the FL server,
which aggregates them to produce a new version of the global model shared with the clients. The
classical algorithm used for model aggregation is FedAvg (Li et al., 2020b), a weighted averaging
scheme that considers the amount of data each client has when aggregating the model updates. Fur-
thermore, we consider the case where the FL server shares the global model with the participating
clients and not with external parties. This is usually the case in cross-silo FL systems such as in
banking systems, or between medical centers.

2.2   M EMBERSHIP I NFERENCE ATTACK T HREAT M ODEL

Membership inference attacks (MIAs) aim to infer whether a data sample has been used to train
a given model. Such attacks exploit vulnerabilities in the parameters and statistical properties of


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the trained model to reveal information about the training data. Thus, it is important to safeguard
individuals’ confidentiality against MIAs that cause significant privacy violations, in particular, in
areas involving highly sensitive information such as health applications, financial systems, etc.
Attacker’s Objective and Capabilities. We consider the standard setting of a membership in-
ference attack and its underlying attacker’s capabilities Shokri et al. (2017). The objective of the
attacker is to determine whether a given data sample was used by other participants for model train-
ing. An attacker can be on the client-side or the server-side. If the attacker is on the client-side, its
goal is to determine, based on the global model, whether a data sample has been used for training
by other clients, without knowing to which client it actually belongs. If the attacker is on the server-
side, it is also able to determine, based on a client model, whether a data sample has been used by
that client for training. The attacker has access to the parameters of the model for which it tries to
violate privacy.


2.3   R ELATED W ORK

Cutting-edge research in countering membership inference attacks has made significant strides
through innovative approaches, encompassing cryptographic techniques, secure hardware, and
perturbation-based methods as summarized in Appendix B - Table 3. Cryptography-based solu-
tions such as PEFL (Zhang et al., 2019), HybridAlpha (Xu et al., 2019), Chen et al. (Chen et al.,
2021), or Secure Aggregation (Zheng et al., 2022), offer robust privacy solutions, with interesting
theoretical guarantees. However, they tend to incur high computational costs due to complex en-
cryption and decryption processes. Furthermore, these solutions often protect either the client-side
or the server-side model, but not both, leaving potential vulnerabilities in the other unprotected com-
ponent. Interestingly, solutions based on Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) emerge as another
alternative for better privacy protection (Lebrun et al., 2022; Messaoud et al., 2022). However, be-
cause of the high dimension of underlying models, striking a tight balance between privacy and
computational overhead remains challenging.
On the other hand, perturbation methods, such as differential privacy (DP) with algorithm-specific
random noise injection, serve as interesting safeguards against potential information leakage. When
applied in the context of FL, DP has two main forms, namely Local Differential Privacy (LDP)
that applies on client model parameters before transmission to the FL server (Chamikara et al.,
2022), and Central Differential Privacy (CDP) where the server applies DP on aggregated model
parameters before sending the resulting model to the clients (Naseri et al., 2020). WDP applies
norm bounding and Gaussian noise with a low magnitude, which provides a good model utility (Sun
et al., 2019). However, attack mitigation is limited, whereas computational costs. Recent works,
such as PFA (Liu et al., 2021), MR-MTL (Liu et al., 2022), DP-FedSAM (Shi et al., 2023), and
PrivateFL (Yang et al., 2023), allow better privacy and model utility. However, in practice, existing
DP-based FL methods can only effectively improve privacy at the expense of utility, as shown in
the evaluation presented later in the paper. Another approach to counter inference attacks in FL is
through gradient compression techniques, since such techniques reduce the amount of information
available for the attacker (Fu et al., 2022). However, such techniques also decrease the model utility.
In summary, existing FL privacy-preserving methods tackling MIAs either rely on cryptographic
techniques and secure environments which induce a high computational overhead, or reduce model
utility and quality with classical perturbation-based methods. In contrast, we propose a novel method
that follows a finer-grained approach applying obfuscation on specific parts of model parameters that
leak privacy sensitive information. This results in good privacy protection, good model utility, and
no perceptible computational overhead.


3     M OTIVATION OF A F INE -G RAINED P RIVACY-P RESERVING A PPROACH

Recent studies analyzed the sensitivity and privacy risk of neural networks at a fine-grained level, to
better characterize how much each layer of the model leaks privacy information (Mo et al., 2021a;b).
As claimed in these studies, a similar pattern appears in all models, namely, there is a layer that
leaks more private information than other layers. To better illustrate this behavior, we conduct an
empirical analysis with four different datasets (GTSRB, CelebA, Texas100, Purchase100) and their


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


underlying models, deployed in a FL setting1 . More precisely, we aim to characterize how much
each layer of a model helps an attacker conducting MIAs to better infer if a given data sample
was member of the model training set or not. In other words and as described in §2.2, such an
attacker is able to differentiate between member data samples and non-member data samples. Thus,
using a trained FL model, we conduct, on the one hand, a set of predictions with member data
samples, and on the other hand, another set of predictions with non-member data samples. We
then compute the gradients of each layer resulting from the predictions of member samples, and
the gradients of each layer resulting from the predictions of non-member samples. Finally, we
compute the generalization gap of each layer, i.e., the difference between the gradients of member
data samples and the gradients of non-member data samples. Thus, the higher the generalization
gap, the more successful MIA is, i.e., the easier it is for the MIA to differentiate between members
and non-members, as shown in recent studies (Li et al., 2020a; Wu et al., 2023). Our empirical
results are presented in Figure 1, where the generalization gap is computed using the widely used
Jensen-Shannon divergence (Menéndez et al., 1997). We observe that different layers of a model
may exhibit different generalization gaps. We also observe a similar behavior in all the model
architectures, namely, the generalization gap of the penultimate layer is notably higher than the
generalization gap of the other layers. Thus, that layer leaks more privacy sensitive information
(i.e., membership-related information), as shown in other studies (Mo et al., 2021a;b).


           (a) GTSRB                  (b) CelebA                 (c) Texas100                (d) Purchase100

Figure 1: Layer-level analysis of divergence between member data samples and non-member data
samples, using Jensen-Shannon divergence, when FL models are not protected against MIAs – FL
models of GTSRB and CelebA include eight convolutional layers and one fully connected layer ,
and FL models of Texas100 and Purchase100 have six fully connected layers


4       D ESIGN P RINCIPLES OF D INAR

We propose D INAR2 , a novel FL scheme for privacy protection against MIAs. The objective of
D INAR is threefold: (i) improving resilience of models against MIAs, (ii) preserving model util-
ity, and (iii) avoiding additional computational overheads. Whereas existing privacy-preserving FL
methods either apply perturbation on all model layers, or use cryptographic techniques and secure
environments, which induce a high computational overhead (as shown in §2.3 and §5.4), the intu-
ition behind D INAR is to specifically handle the most privacy sensitive layer of a FL model, i.e., the
layer which reveals more client’s privacy information than the others. This allows a non-intrusive yet
effective solution to protect FL models against MIAs. D INAR is based on a prior knowledge of the
most privacy sensitive layer of a model architecture, either based on prior studies such as (Mo et al.,
2021a;b), or based on an empirical analysis of model architectures and datasets such as in Figure 1.
D INAR runs at the client-side, for each FL
client that wants better protection against
MIAs. Each D INAR instance on a client runs
independently from the other clients’ D INAR
instances, and the interaction between the FL
server and the clients follows the classical FL
protocol, where at each FL round the clients
send their local model updates to the server, and
the server sends the aggregated global model to                 Figure 2: D INAR pipeline
    1
        A description of the datasets, models and experimental setup can be found in §5.1.
    2
        D INAR: fine-graineD prIvacy-preserviNg federAted leaRning


                                                         4
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   the clients. D INAR pipeline is presented in Fig-
   ure 2, and consists of the successive stages of client model personalization, adaptive model training
   for improving model utility, and model obfuscation, that are detailed in the following. Furthermore,
   Algorithm 1 describe the different steps of D INAR pipeline.

   Algorithm 1: D INAR algorithm on FL Clienti
   Inputs: θ: global model parameters; p: private layer index                      7 Adaptive Model Training
   Output: θi : client model parameters                                            8 G ← 0 //Set initial accumulated gradients matrix
   Local variables:                                                                9 foreach local training epoch do
                                                                                                        i
    p
   θi ∗ : parameters of private layer of client model                             10       foreach (Bk    , Yk ) ∈ (B i , Y )) do
                                                                                  11             Ybk ← θi (B i ) // Perform local prediction
   (B i , Y ) = {(B1 i                   i
                       , Y1 ), . . . , (Bx , Yx )}: training batches of Clienti                                  k
   η : learning rate                                                              12             loss ← L(Yk , Y     bk ) // Compute model loss
1 Model Personalization                                                           13             G ← G + ∇θ .loss2 // Compute new cumulated gradients
2 for j in {1..J} do                                                                                               ∇ .loss
                                                                                  14               θi ← θi − η √ θ         // Update local model
3        if j 6= p then                                                                                            G+1e−5
                 j
4               θi ← θ j // Use j th layer parameters from global model
5        else                                                                     15   Model Obfuscation
                                                                                        p        p
6
                 j      p
                θi ← θi ∗ // Restore parameters of client’s private layer         16   θi ∗ ← θi // Save parameters of client’s private layer
                                                                                        p
                                                                                  17   θi ← random values // Obfuscate parameters of client’s private layer
                                                                                  18   return θi


   4.1       M ODEL O BFUSCATION

   In the following, we consider a model M with J layers, and model parameters θ, where θ1 . . . θJ are
   the parameters of the respective layers 1 . . . J. We denote p the index of the privacy sensitive layer of
   model M . At each FL round, Clienti that participates to that round updates its model parameters θi
   through local training. Before sending the local model updates to the FL server, the client obfuscates
   the privacy sensitive layer of its model, namely θip that is the client model parameters of layer p.
   This obfuscation can be performed by applying differential privacy on θip layer (i.e., D INAR /DP),
   or by simply replacing the actual value of θip by random values (i.e., D INAR). The resulting local
   model updates are sent to the FL server for aggregation. Note that the raw parameters of the privacy
                                                                                  ∗
   sensitive layer (i.e., before obfuscation) are stored at the client side in θip , and will be used in other
   stages of the D INAR pipeline.

   4.2       M ODEL P ERSONALIZATION

   As a first step of D INAR pipeline, when Clienti participates to a FL round, it first receives the
   parameters θ of the global model M . Here, θp , i.e., the model parameters of the privacy sensitive
   layer p, correspond to obfuscated values. Clienti integrates to its local model parameters θi all global
                                                                                                         ∗
   model layer parameters but the parameters θp of layer p. Instead, Clienti restores for that layer θip ,
   its previously stored and non-obfuscated local model parameters of layer p. Thus, while the global
   FL model is protected against MIAs, Clienti makes use of an effective personalized local model.
   This allows client model’s privacy sensitive information to remain protected, while client data still
   contributes to the overall improvement of the global model through collaborative training.

   4.3       A DAPTIVE M ODEL T RAINING

   While D INAR’s model obfuscation and model personalization tackle model privacy against MIAs,
   D INAR pipeline also includes a stage to improve model utility through adaptive learning. This relies
   on the optimization of the loss function, denoted as L, for each Clienti and its local model Mi . L
   represents the cumulative errors of the client model Mi across its training and testing data batches.
   In order to minimize the loss function L, client model parameters θi are updated at each local train-
   ing epoch, given a learning rate η (with η ∈ [0, 1]). The latter serves as a coefficient that scales the
   computed gradient values at each learning epoch. To address model convergence challenges, D I -
   NAR leverages the adaptive gradient descent technique, which mitigates the issues associated with
   local minima and saddle points (Duchi & Hazan, 2011). Firstly, when training intricate models like
   Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) over multiple iterations, adaptive gradient descent allows
   a deliberate convergence, exhibiting a slower learning rate compared to algorithms such as Adam
   and RMSProp, particularly during the initial iterations (Kingma & Ba, 2015b; Mukkamala & Hein,
   2017). Secondly, given the high-dimensional nature of optimization problems in neural networks,
   this technique dynamically adjusts the learning rate for each dimension in an iterative manner, which


                                                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


holds true for both Adam and Adagrad. However, Adagrad does not implement momentum Karim-
ireddy et al. (2020) contrary to Adam; as suggested and empirically observed by Jin et al. (2022),
integrating momentum to the optimization algorithm may cause client-drift because of low participa-
tion rates of client devices, and incure potential convergence issues. Such a behaviour may even be
exacerbated while increasing the number of client participants and introducing non-IID distributions
between participants.

4.4   A NALYTICAL I NSIGHTS

Figure 3 puts into perspective two aspects of a fine-grained analysis of model layers
for privacy purposes.         On the one hand, Figure 3(a) shows how much one can de-
termine the divergence between member data samples that were used for model train-
ing and non-member data samples, by analyzing the one or the other of model layers.
In this case, we consider CelebA dataset with a model containing eight
convolutional layers. On the other hand, Figure 3(b) presents the result
of a fine-grained protection that obfuscates the one or the other of lo-
cal model layers. We observe that obfuscating the layer that leaks more
membership information is actually sufficient to reach the optimal pro-
tection of the overall client model against MIAs3 . Whereas obfuscating
other layers that leak less membership information is not sufficient for
the protection of the overall client model. This is the basis of the heuris-
tics provided by D INAR. Note that similar behavior is observed with (a) Members vs. non-
other datasets and models, although not presented here due to space lim- members
itation.
                                                                                                                    57


                                                                                          46 48 50 52 54 56 58
Furthermore, in order to provide an insight on D INAR’s ability to pre-



                                                                                 Attack AUC (%)
                                                                                                                               54
                                                                                                                                       53              53
serve both privacy and model utility, we analyze the impact of D INAR                                                                          52              52 52                   52
                                                                                                                                                                               50
and the considered baselines on the behavior of protected models. In
Figure 4, we measure the loss of the attacked model separately for mem-
ber and non-member data samples of Cifar-10, considering different de-
                                                                                                                 No defense
                                                                                                                              conv1
                                                                                                                                      conv2
                                                                                                                                              conv3
                                                                                                                                                      conv4
                                                                                                                                                              conv5
                                                                                                                                                                      conv6
                                                                                                                                                                              conv7
                                                                                                                                                                                      conv8
fense methods. We evaluate the effectiveness of each defense technique
in reducing loss distribution discrepancies between members and non-
members, and in minimizing loss values. Ideally, the loss distribution                            (b) Local model privacy
of members and non-members should match, thus, resulting in model’s
                                                                                Figure 3:      Per-layer
lack of insightful information to distinguish members and non-members.
                                                                                analysis of divergence
First, we observe that in the no defense case, the loss distributions be-
                                                                                between members and
tween members and non-members are very different, thus, enabling suc-
                                                                                non-member vs. resi-
cessful MIAs. DP-based techniques (i.e., LDP, CDP, WDP) reduce loss
                                                                                ience to MIAs with a
distribution discrepancies, however, at the expense of more frequent high
                                                                                fine-grained protection
loss values (i.e., lower model utility) due to noise added to all model
                                                                                considering     different
layers’ parameters. In contrast, a fine-grained obfuscation approach as
                                                                                obfuscated layers
followed by D INAR results in similar and more frequently low loss dis-
tributions of members and non-members, making MIAs more difficult
and maintaining a good model utility.


  (a) No Defense           (b) LDP              (c) CDP              (d) WDP                                                      (e) D INAR

Figure 4: Model loss distribution with different FL privacy-preserving techniques. The dark curve
shows the loss distribution for member data samples, and the light curve shows the distribution for
non-members

    3
      50% is the optimal attack AUC that could be reached by a random protection approach, since determining
the occurrence of a MIA is a binary decision.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5       E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION

5.1       DATASETS AND E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Datasets. We conduct experiments using a diverse set of datasets and models, encompassing four
image datasets (Cifar-10, Cifar-100, GTSRB, and CelebA), a tabular dataset (Purchase100), and a
raw audio dataset (Speech Commands). For each dataset, half of the data is used as the attacker’s
prior knowledge to conduct MIAs (Shokri et al., 2017), and the other half is partitioned into training
(80%) and test (20%) sets. These datasets are sum up in Table 1, and further detailed in Appendix C.

Baselines. Our evaluation compares D INAR with different defense scenarios, including a
no-defense baseline and five state-of-the-art solutions. Three of them, LDP (Chamikara
et al., 2022), CDP (Naseri et al., 2020), and WDP (Sun et al., 2019), are inspired by
Differential Privacy and employ various approaches for privacy preservation. We also in-
clude a cryptographic solution based on Secure Aggregation (SA) (Zheng et al., 2022)
and another defense solution based on Gradient Compression (GC) (Fu et al., 2022).
These solutions, LDP, CDP, and WDP, em-
ploy various approaches for privacy preser-                  Table 1: Used datasets and models
                                                     Dataset     #Records #Features #Classes Data type  Model
vation. For LDP and CDP, we set the pri-             Cifar-10       50,000    3,072       10 Images    ResNet20
vacy budget parameter   = 2.2 and the               Cifar-100       50,000    3,072     100 Images     ResNet20
probability of privacy leakage δ = 10−5 ,            GTSRB
                                                     CelebA
                                                                    51,389
                                                                   202,599
                                                                              6,912
                                                                              4,096
                                                                                          43 Images
                                                                                          32 Images
                                                                                                        VGG11
                                                                                                        VGG11
following the findings of (Naseri et al., Speech Commands 64,727 16,000                   36 Audio       M18
2020). In the case of WDP, a norm bound            Purchase100      97,324      600     100 Tabular 6-layer FCNN

of 5 is considered, and Gaussian noise with
a standard deviation of σ = 0.025 is applied. These settings ensure an optimal level of privacy
preservation in our experiments. We also evaluate D INAR against a variant, D INAR /DP, that ap-
plies differential privacy to the private layer instead of generating random values for obfuscating
that layer. As in D INAR, D INAR /DP personalizes FL client models (c.f., §4.2). D INAR /DP uses
the same hyper-parameters as LDP. Furthermore, for a fair comparison of model accuracy of the
different defense methods, we also consider a variant (referred to with +) of each state-of-the-art
defense method where adaptive model training is applied (c.f., §4.3).

Experimental setup. The software prototype of D INAR is available: https://anonymous.
4open.science/r/dinar_87CD.4 All the experiments are conducted on an NVIDIA A40
GPU. We use PyTorch 1.13 to implement D INAR, and the underlying classification models. For
the state-of-the-art defense mechanisms based on differential privacy, we employ the Opacus li-
brary (Yousefpour et al., 2021). We consider a FL system with 5 FL clients. Data are carefully
divided into disjoint splits for each FL client, following a non-IID distribution. We run 50 FL
rounds for Cifar-10, Cifar-100, GTSRB and CelebA, 80 FL rounds for Speech Commands, and 300
for Purchase100. We consider 5 local epochs per round for each FL client. Each dataset is splited
into 80% for training, and 20% for testing.The learning rate is set to 10−3 , and the batch size is
64. We evaluate FL privacy-preserving methods by measuring the attack AUC, as well as the model
accuracy under maximum attack, and several cost-related metrics, as detailed in Appendix D.

5.2       E VALUATION OF P RIVACY P ROTECTION

We first measure the effectiveness of D INAR in countering MIAs, i.e., minimizing the attack AUC
against both global and local models, considering Cifar-10 dataset. The attacker runs a white
box membership inference attack, as described (Shokri et al., 2017). For each dataset and un-
derlying model, we compare D INAR with defense baselines. We systematically evaluate D I -
NAR , WDP, LDP, and CDP on both local and global models, considering the utility and the
membership inference attack AUC. In Figure 5, we first plot distinctly the average attack AUC
against local models. In all plots, each bar represents one defense scenario amongst the base-
lines we consider. Our results show that D INAR exhibits privacy mitigation rates that closely ap-
proach the 50% mark across all datasets, indicating a strong level of privacy protection. This
holds true for both global and local model inference attacks, while differencial privacy mech-
    4
        Anonymous link will be replaced by public git link in the camera-ready.


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


anisms are less constant at protecting the models. It is worth noting that D INAR achieves re-
ducing the privacy leakage of local models by 19% in the best case, as shown by Figure 5,
while differential privacy reveals its limits in that case: WDP only reduces the privacy leakage
by 6% and in the best case, and even CDP is worse than D INAR by only reducing it by 15%.
By concealing sensitive layers and replacing parameters by random val-                            70           69



ues, D INAR enables the perturbation of the attacked model outputs as                             65
                                                                                                                         66
                                                                                                                                           64


                                                                              Attack AUC (%)
                                                                                                                                    63


received by the attacker, thereby mitigating membership inference at-                             60
                                                                                                                                                                           60

                                                                                                                                                                57    57                57

tacks. Indeed, the attacker receives an altered version of the model with                         55                                              54
                                                                                                                                                       55



randomized private layer parameters. And when the attacker tries to re-                           50
                                                                                                                                                                                 50             50



produce the behavior of the target model, the randomization necessarily                           45
                                                                                                                         e           + P      + DP      + DP      + GC           SA             P  R
                                                                                                                      ns            e D                                                       /D A
impacts the outputs of the model, which makes them barely comparable                                     No
                                                                                                               de
                                                                                                                 fe

                                                                                                                No
                                                                                                                       de
                                                                                                                             fe
                                                                                                                                  ns W   W
                                                                                                                                           DP   L
                                                                                                                                                   LD
                                                                                                                                                      P   C
                                                                                                                                                             CD
                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                                                      DIN
                                                                                                                                                                                            AR DIN


to the outputs of the shadow model. This counters the logic of MIAs, Figure 5: Privacy eval-
and explains the drop of the attack AUC. When it comes to D INAR /DP, uation – The horizon-
which provides protection by applying DP to the protected layer, we ob- tal dashed line represents
serve a lower protection than D INAR, due to the fact that the noisy data the optimal value of at-
still shares some similarities with raw data. More extensive results with tack AUC (50%)
other datasets and models are presented in Appendix E, and corroborate
our observations.

5.3   A NALYZING P RIVACY VS . U TILITY T RADE - OFF

With the objective of empirically confirming D INAR’s ability to balance both privacy and model
utility in a FL system, we evaluate its impact on local models behavior. We conduct the experiments
on different datasets, by running the same attack scenario as the one presented in §5.2, introducing
the consideration of both privacy and model utility metrics. Figure 6 shows our results by plotting
both metrics on two axes: the x axis represents the average local model accuracy, while the y-axis
plots the overall attack AUC we previously defined. In a best-case scenario, the dot should be
located in the bottom-right corner of each plot, meaning that the effective defense mechanism both
preserves the model accuracy and decreases the attack AUC to 50%. We observe that WDP, CDP
and LDP achieve reasonable attack mitigation but often reduce model utility. For example, on the
Purchase100 dataset, WDP reduces attack AUC by 2%, while CDP reduces it by 28%; however,
with a significant reduction of model accuracy by 20%. D INAR /DP, which preserve a good model
utility, is able to reduce the attack AUC by 10%, although, not fully protecting the model agains
MIAs. In contrast, D INAR reaches the optimal attack AUC, with a model accuracy drop lower than
1%. In most cases, D INAR strikes a balance between privacy preservation and utility, demonstrating
the effectiveness of mitigating membership information leakage in a fine-grained FL approach.

5.4   C OST OF P RIVACY-P RESERVING M ECHANISMS

In the following, we evaluate the possible overheads induced by privacy-                                 30                                                                           28
preserving FL mechanisms across key metrics, such as model training                                      25
duration at the client-side andmodel aggregation duration at the server-
                                                                               Training time (s)


                                                                                                         20                          19                19
                                                                                                                                                                     17    17
side. We additionally evaluate peak GPU memory usage for training and                                    15           14
                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                 14

privacy protection at the client-side in Appendix K. In the following,                                   10
we report on the costs of different defense mechanisms with the GTSRB                                     5

dataset and VGG11 model, although other evaluations of overheads were                                     0
                                                                                                                            e P
                                                                                                                         ens WD                 LDP    CD
                                                                                                                                                            P        GC     SA             P AR
                                                                                                                                                                                       AR/D DIN
conducted with other datasets and models, and resulted to similar obser-                                            def                                                          DIN
                                                                                                               No

vations.                                                                                                                          (a) Client-side
Model Training Time. We examine different scenarios to evaluate the
                                                                                                                                                       12.7
average training duration per FL round for each client.                                                  10
                                                                                                           1
                                                                               FL aggregation time (s)


This duration refers to the total time required for all the local training
epochs of a client during a FL round. The impact of privacy mechanisms                                     0
                                                                                                         10
like LDP, CDP, WDP, SC and SA on the training duration is depicted in                                                 0.4            0.4        0.4                  0.4   0.4        0.4        0.4
Figure 7(a). We notice that incorporating privacy-preserving techniques
                                                                                                                                e P             LDP      P           GC     SA             P AR
that are based on differential privacy may have a negative effect on the                                        No
                                                                                                                      def
                                                                                                                             ens WD                    CD
                                                                                                                                                                                  DIN
                                                                                                                                                                                       AR/D DIN

overall training duration. Despite the improvements made by the Opacus
                                                                                                                              (b) Server-side
framework in speeding up differential privacy, there is still a significant
                                                                              Figure 7: Computational
                                                                              cost of FL defense mech-
                                                   8                          anisms
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     70        No defense                                                                                                                                                           No defense
                               No defense +                                                                                                                                               64
                                                                                                   65.0                                                                                             No defense +
                               WDP                                                                                                                                                                  WDP
                               WDP +                                                               62.5                                                                                   62        WDP +
                     65        LDP                                                                                                                                                                  LDP
                               LDP +                                                                                                                                                      60
    Attack AUC (%)
                                                                                                   60.0                                                                                             LDP +


                                                                                                                                                                         Attack AUC (%)
                                                                                  Attack AUC (%)
                               CDP                                                                                                    No defense
                                                                                                                                      No defense +                                                  CDP
                     60        CDP +                                                               57.5                                                                                   58        CDP +
                               GC                                                                                                     WDP
                                                                                                                                      WDP +                                                         GC
                               SA                                                                  55.0                               LDP                                                 56        SA
                               DINAR/DP                                                                                                                                                             DINAR/DP
                     55        DINAR                                                                                                  LDP +
                                                                                                                                                                                                    DINAR
                                                                                                   52.5                               CDP                                                 54
                                                                                                                                      CDP +
                                                                                                   50.0                               GC
                     50                                                                                                               SA                                                  52
                                                                                                   47.5                               DINAR/DP
                                                                                                                                      DINAR                                               50
                     45                                                                            45.0
                      50.0 52.5 55.0 57.5 60.0 62.5 65.0 67.5 70.0                                        40         45          50          55           60        65                         30         40          50          60        70     80
                                              Model accuracy (%)                                                           Model accuracy (%)                                                                   Model accuracy (%)

                                        (a) Cifar-10                                                                  (b) Cifar-100                                                                            (c) CelebA

                     80                                                                            60                                                                                     55
                               No defense                                                                                                                                                           No defense
                               No defense +                                                                                                                                                         No defense +
                     75        WDP                                                                 58                                                                                     54        WDP
                               WDP +                                                                                                                                                                WDP +
                               LDP                                                                                                                                                                  LDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LDP +



                                                                                  Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                                                                                                         Attack AUC (%)
                     70        LDP +                                                                                                  No defense                                          53
    Attack AUC (%)


                               CDP                                                                 56                                 No defense +                                                  CDP
                               CDP +                                                                                                  WDP                                                           CDP +
                     65        GC                                                                                                     WDP +                                               52        GC
                               SA                                                                  54                                 LDP                                                           SA
                               DINAR/DP                                                                                               LDP +                                                         DINAR/DP
                     60        DINAR                                                                                                  CDP                                                 51        DINAR
                                                                                                   52                                 CDP +
                                                                                                                                      GC
                     55                                                                                                               SA                                                  50
                                                                                                   50                                 DINAR/DP
                     50                                                                                                               DINAR
                                                                                                                                                                                          49
                          30   35      40       45   50    55      60   65   70                         50      55    60    65        70      75     80        85   90                         30    40        50      60    70        80    90   100
                                            Model accuracy (%)                                                             Model accuracy (%)                                                                      Model accuracy (%)
                                    (d) Purchase100                                                            (e) Speech Commands                                                                             (f) GTSRB

                                    Figure 6: Trade-off between privacy and utility in different FL defense scenarios


cost. In the worst-case scenario, adding noise results in a training dura-
tion increased by 36%. However, it is important to highlight that D INAR
effectively addresses the computational overhead associated with differ-
ential privacy without compromising system performance.
FL Aggregation Time. We conduct measurements to determine the
average duration for server aggregation in various scenarios, that we plot in Figure 7(b). This in-
volved tracking the time taken from when the server received all weights to be aggregated until it
sent the aggregated weights. Notably, the use of CDP resulted in a significant increase in aggrega-
tion duration, reaching up to 30 times longer for GTSRB with VGG. This prolonged duration can be
attributed to CDP’s design principle, which involves introducing noise to the parameter aggregate
before transmission to clients. This process substantially extends the time required for aggregation,
measured in seconds in our case. However, when employing D INAR, LDP, and WDP, the durations
exhibit similar orders of magnitude compared to the scenario without any baseline. This suggests
that these privacy mechanisms do not impose a substantial additional cost in terms of aggregation
time, presenting a more efficient alternative.


6                     C ONCLUSION

D INAR heuristics has the potential to better protect the privacy of FL systems against membership
inference attacks, both for global FL model and client models. D INAR follows a simple yet effec-
tive fine-grained approach that consists in protecting more specifically the model layer that is the
most sensitive to membership privacy leakage. This provides effective and non-intrusive FL privacy
protection. Furthermore, D INAR compensates for any potential loss in the accuracy of the protected
model by leveraging adaptive gradient descent and, thus, further maximizing model utility. Our
empirical evaluation using various widely used datasets, neural networks, and state-of-the-art FL
privacy protection mechanisms demonstrated the effectiveness of D INAR in terms of privacy, util-
ity and cost. Beyond FL defense against membership inference attacks, we envision that similar
fine-grained protection approaches could be used for other types of privacy attacks, such as property
inference attacks, and model inversion attacks. In addition, another interesting research direction to
explore is helping in automatically determining the neural network layers that are the most sensi-
tive to privacy leakage depending on the actual threat model, type of privacy attack, and FL model
architecture.


                                                                                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martı́n Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian J. Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov,
 Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang.             Deep Learning with Differential Privacy.   In
 Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
 pp. 308–318, Vienna, Austria, October 2016.
Mahawaga Arachchige Pathum Chamikara, Dongxi Liu, Seyit Camtepe, Surya Nepal, Marthie
 Grobler, Peter Bertók, and Ibrahim Khalil. Local Differential Privacy for Federated Learning. In
 Vijayalakshmi Atluri, Roberto Di Pietro, Christian Damsgaard Jensen, and Weizhi Meng (eds.),
 Computer Security - ESORICS 2022 - 27th European Symposium on Research in Computer
 Security, volume 13554, pp. 195–216, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2022.
Zhenzhu Chen, Anmin Fu, Yinghui Zhang, Zhe Liu, Fanjian Zeng, and Robert H. Deng. Secure
  Collaborative Deep Learning Against GAN Attacks in the Internet of Things. IEEE Internet
  Things J., 8(7):5839–5849, 2021.
Wei Dai, Chia Dai, Shuhui Qu, Juncheng Li, and Samarjit Das. Very Deep Convolutional Neural
 Networks for Raw Waveforms. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
 Signal Processing, ICASSP 2017, pp. 421–425, New Orleans, LA, USA, March 2017.
John Duchi and Elad Hazan. Adaptive Subgradient Methods for Online Learning and Stochastic
  Optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2121–2159, July 2011.
Chong Fu, Xuhong Zhang, Shouling Ji, Jinyin Chen, Jingzheng Wu, Shanqing Guo, Jun Zhou,
  Alex X Liu, and Ting Wang. Label inference attacks against vertical federated learning. In 31st
  USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22), pp. 1397–1414, 2022.
Stefanie Grimm, Stefanie Schwaar, and Patrick Holzer. Federated Learning for Fraud Detection in
  Accounting and Auditing. ERCIM News, July 2021.
Sebastian Houben, Johannes Stallkamp, Jan Salmen, Marc Schlipsing, and Christian Igel. Detection
  of Traffic Signs in Real-World Images: The German Traffic Sign Detection Benchmark. In The
  2013 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, IJCNN 2013, pp. 1–8, Dallas, TX,
  USA, August 2013.
Jinyuan Jia, Ahmed Salem, Michael Backes, Yang Zhang, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. MemGuard:
   Defending against Black-Box Membership Inference Attacks via Adversarial Examples. In
   Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
   CCS, pp. 259–274, London, UK, November 2019.
Jiayin Jin, Jiaxiang Ren, Yang Zhou, Lingjuan Lyu, Ji Liu, and Dejing Dou. Accelerated federated
   learning with decoupled adaptive optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
   pp. 10298–10322. PMLR, 2022.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Martin Jaggi, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J Reddi, Sebas-
  tian U Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Mime: Mimicking centralized stochastic algorithms
  in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.03606, 2020.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. ArXiv,
  abs/1412.6980, 2015a.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In
  3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, San Diego, CA, USA, May 2015b.
Samuel Kotz, Narayanaswamy Balakrishnan, and Norman L Johnson. Continuous multivariate dis-
  tributions, volume 1: Models and applications. 1, 2004.
Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton. CIFAR-10 (Canadian Institute for Advanced
  Research), 2010. http://www.cs.toronto.edu/ kriz/cifar.html.
Thomas Lebrun, Antoine Boutet, Jan Aalmoes, and Adrien Baud. MixNN: Protection of Federated
  Learning against Inference Attacks by Mixing Neural Network Layers. In Middleware ’22: 23rd
  International Middleware Conference, pp. 135–147, Quebec, Canada, November 2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiacheng Li, Ninghui Li, and Bruno Ribeiro. Membership Inference Attacks and Defenses in Super-
   vised Learning via Generalization Gap. ArXiv, abs/2002.12062, 2020a.

Wenqi Li, Fausto Milletarı̀, Daguang Xu, Nicola Rieke, Jonny Hancox, Wentao Zhu, Maximil-
 ian Baust, Yan Cheng, Sébastien Ourselin, M. Jorge Cardoso, and Andrew Feng. Privacy-
 Preserving Federated Brain Tumour Segmentation. In Machine Learning in Medical Imaging
 - 10th International Workshop, MLMI 2019, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI, volume 11861
 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 133–141, Shenzhen, China, October 2019.

Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the Convergence
  of FedAvg on Non-IID Data. ArXiv:1907.02189, 2020b.

Junxu Liu, Jian Lou, Li Xiong, Jinfei Liu, and Xiaofeng Meng. Projected federated averaging with
  heterogeneous differential privacy. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 15(4):828–840, 2021.

Ken Liu, Shengyuan Hu, Steven Z Wu, and Virginia Smith. On privacy and personalization in cross-
  silo federated learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:5925–5940,
  2022.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep Learning Face Attributes in the
  Wild. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2015, pp. 3730–3738,
  Santiago, Chile, December 2015.

Lingjuan Lyu, Han Yu, and Qiang Yang. Threats to Federated Learning: A Survey. ArXiv,
  abs/2003.02133, 2020.

Yura Malitsky and Konstantin Mishchenko. Adaptive Gradient Descent without Descent. In
  Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July
  2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6702–6712,
  Virtual Event, 2020.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Agüera y Arcas.
  Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data. In Proceedings
  of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2017,
  volume 54 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1273–1282, Fort Lauderdale, FL,
  USA, April 2017.

M.L. Menéndez, J.A. Pardo, L. Pardo, and M.C. Pardo. The Jensen-Shannon divergence. Journal of
 the Franklin Institute, 334(2):307–318, 1997.

Aghiles Ait Messaoud, Sonia Ben Mokhtar, Vlad Nitu, and Valerio Schiavoni. Shielding Federated
  Learning Systems against Inference Attacks with ARM TrustZone. In Middleware ’22: 23rd
  International Middleware Conference, pp. 335–348, QC, Canada, November 2022.

Fan Mo, Anastasia Borovykh, Mohammad Malekzadeh, Hamed Haddadi, and Soteris Demetriou.
  Layer-wise Characterization of Latent Information Leakage in Federated Learning.      In
  The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), volume Workshop on Dis-
  tributed and Private Machine Learning, Virtual, May 2021a.

Fan Mo, Anastasia Borovykh, Mohammad Malekzadeh, Hamed Haddadi, and Soteris Demetriou.
  Quantifying Information Leakage from Gradients. ArXiv, abs/2105.13929, 2021b.

Mahesh   Chandra      Mukkamala       and    Matthias   Hein.           Variants  of RM-
 SProp     and      Adagrad       with     Logarithmic     Regret    Bounds.             In
 Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017,     vol-
 ume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2545–2553, Sydney, NSW, Australia,
 August 2017.

Mohammad Naseri, Jamie Hayes, and Emiliano De Cristofaro. Toward Robustness and Privacy
 in Federated Learning: Experimenting with Local and Central Differential Privacy. ArXiv,
 abs/2009.03561, 2020.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Milad Nasr, Reza Shokri, and Amir Houmansadr. Comprehensive Privacy Analysis of Deep Learn-
 ing: Passive and Active White-box Inference Attacks against Centralized and Federated Learning.
 In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 739–753, San Francisco, CA, USA, May
 2019.
Nicolas Papernot, Martı́n Abadi, Úlfar Erlingsson, Ian J. Goodfellow, and Kunal Talwar. Semi-
  supervised Knowledge Transfer for Deep Learning from Private Training Data. ArXiv,
  abs/1610.05755, 2017.
Nicolas Papernot, Shuang Song, Ilya Mironov, Ananth Raghunathan, Kunal Talwar, and Úlfar Er-
  lingsson. Scalable Private Learning with PATE. ArXiv, abs/1802.08908, 2018.
Yifan Shi, Yingqi Liu, Kang Wei, Li Shen, Xueqian Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Make landscape
  flatter in differentially private federated learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 24552–24562, 2023.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership Inference At-
  tacks Against Machine Learning Models. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, S&P
  2017, pp. 3–18, San Jose, CA, USA, May 2017.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image
  Recognition. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San
  Diego, CA, USA, May 2015.
Ziteng Sun, Peter Kairouz, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and H. Brendan McMahan. Can You Really
  Backdoor Federated Learning? ArXiv, abs/1911.07963, 2019.
Aleksei Triastcyn and Boi Faltings. Federated Generative Privacy. IEEE Intell. Syst., 35(4):50–57,
  2020.
Pete Warden. Speech Commands: A Dataset for Limited-Vocabulary Speech Recognition. ArXiv,
  abs/1804.03209, 2018.
Di Wu, Saiyu Qi, Yong Qi, Qian Li, Bowen Cai, Qi Guo, and Jingxian Cheng. Understanding and
  Defending Against White-box Membership Inference Attack in Deep Learning. Knowl. Based
  Syst., 259:110014, 2023.
Qiong Wu, Xu Chen, Zhi Zhou, and Junshan Zhang. FedHome: Cloud-Edge Based Personalized
  Federated Learning for In-Home Health Monitoring. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., 21(8):2818–
  2832, 2022.
Runhua Xu, Nathalie Baracaldo, Yi Zhou, Ali Anwar, and Heiko Ludwig. HybridAlpha: An Ef-
  ficient Approach for Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM
  workshop on artificial intelligence and security, pp. 13–23, 2019.
Yuchen Yang, Bo Hui, Haolin Yuan, Neil Gong, and Yinzhi Cao. {PrivateFL}: Accurate, differen-
  tially private federated learning via personalized data transformation. In 32nd USENIX Security
  Symposium (USENIX Security 23), pp. 1595–1612, 2023.
Ashkan Yousefpour, Igor Shilov, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Davide Testuggine, Karthik Prasad,
  Mani Malek, John Nguyen, Sayan Ghosh, Akash Bharadwaj, Jessica Zhao, Graham Cormode,
  and Ilya Mironov. Opacus: User-Friendly Differential Privacy Library in PyTorch. ArXiv,
  abs/2109.12298, 2021.
Jiale Zhang, Bing Chen, Shui Yu, and Hai Deng. PEFL: A Privacy-Enhanced Federated Learn-
   ing Scheme for Big Data Analytics. In 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference,
   GLOBECOM 2019, Waikoloa,, pp. 1–6, HI, USA, December 2019.
Yifeng Zheng, Shangqi Lai, Yi Liu, Xingliang Yuan, Xun Yi, and Cong Wang. Aggregation Service
  for Federated Learning: An Efficient, Secure, and More Resilient Realization. IEEE Transactions
  on Dependable and Secure Computing, 20(2):988–1001, 2022.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       A PPENDIX – N OTATIONS


                                                            Table 2: Notations
                                 Notation        Description
                                    N            Number of FL clients
                                   Di            Local training data of Clienti
                                   M             Global FL model
                                     J           Number of layers in global FL model
                                   Mi            Local model of Clienti
                                    θ            Global model parameters
                                    θi           Model parameters of Clienti
                                   θj            Parameters of the j th layer of global model
                                   θij           Parameters of the j th layer of Clienti ’s model
                                                 The index of the private layer of a model, e.g., θip are
                                      p
                                                 the parameters of the private layer of Mi
                                          ∗      Non-obfuscated parameters of private layer
                                    θip
                                                 of Mi stored on Clienti
                                     η           Model learning rate
                                     L           Model loss function


B       A PPENDIX – S UMMARY OF R ELATED W ORK ON P ROTECTION AGAINST
        M EMBERSHIP I NFERENCE ATTACKS IN F EDERATED L EARNING


                      Table 3: Comparison of FL privacy-preserving methods against MIAs
 Privacy-preserving category               Protection method                Model protection against MIAs   Model utility   Negligible overhead
                                       PEFL (Zhang et al., 2019)                          3                     3                   77
 Cryptography-based methods          HybridAlpha (Xu et al., 2019)                        3                     3                   77
                                     Chen et al. (Chen et al., 2021)                      3                     3                   77
                                 Secure Aggregation (Zheng et al., 2022)                  3                     3                    7
                                      MixNN (Lebrun et al., 2022)                         3                     3                   77
       TEE-based methods
                                    GradSec (Messaoud et al., 2022)                       3                     3                   77
                                        CDP (Naseri et al., 2020)                         3                     7                    7
                                        LDP (Naseri et al., 2020)                         3                     7                    7
                                   FedGP Triastcyn & Faltings (2020)                      3                     7                    7
    Perturbation-based methods           WDP (Sun et al., 2019)                           7                     3                    7
                                          PFA (Liu et al., 2021)                          7                     3                    7
                                       MR-MTL (Liu et al., 2022)                          7                     3                    7
                                     DP-FedSAM (Shi et al., 2023)                         7                     3                    7
                                      PrivateFL (Yang et al., 2023)                       7                     3                    7
      Gradient Compression              Fu et al. (Fu et al., 2022)                       3                     3                    7
          Our method                              D INAR                                  3                     3                    3


C       A PPENDIX – D ETAILED D ESCRIPTION OF DATASETS AND M ODELS

CelebA. CelebFaces Attributes Dataset is a large face images dataset, with 202,599 images for
facial recognition and attribute detection. A subset of 40,000 images, resized to 64x64 pixels, was
randomly selected. We create 32 classes by combining five pre-annotated binary facial attributes
(Male, Pale Skin, Eyeglasses, Chubby, Mouth slightly Opened) for each picture (Liu et al., 2015).
The VGG11 architecture was employed for image processing (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015).

Cifar-10 and Cifar-100. These are image dataset that consists of 60,000 images categorized into
10 classes for Cifar-10, and contains 100 classes for Cifar-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2010). These
datasets encompass a wide range of objects such as airplanes, automobiles, birds, cats, and more.
Each image in these datasets has a resolution of 32x32 pixels. For our experiments, we employ the
ResNet-20 model.

Speech Commands. This dataset is a Google-released audio waveform for speech recognition
classification (Warden, 2018). It consists of 64,727 utterances from 1,881 speakers pronouncing 35
words (respectively 35 classes). Each audio record was transformed into a frequency spectrum with


                                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a duration of 1 second. For classification, we use the M18 classifier, a convolutional model with 18
layers and 3.7M parameters (Dai et al., 2017).

GTSRB. German Traffic Sign Recognition Benchmark dataset comprises 51,389 records across
43 classes, specifically designed for traffic sign recognition. It captures real-world traffic scenar-
ios, including variations in lighting, weather conditions, and camera angles. This dataset is widely
used for evaluating traffic sign recognition algorithms and developing machine learning models for
autonomous driving. We use VGG11 model architecture for this dataset (Houben et al., 2013; Si-
monyan & Zisserman, 2015).

Purchase100. It is a tabular dataset adapted from Kaggle’s ”Acquire Valued Shoppers” challenge,
consisting of 97,324 records with 600 binary features representing customer purchases. The goal
was to classify customers into 100 types based on their buying behavior Shokri et al. (2017). For
modeling, we use a fully-connected neural network architecture with layers of sizes 4096, 2048,
1024, 512, 256, and 128, leveraging Tanh activation functions and a fully-connected classification
layer (Jia et al., 2019).


D    A PPENDIX – D ETAILED D ESCRIPTION OF E VALUATION M ETRICS

Attack AUC. The attack success rate on a given model measures the percentage of successful MIAs
conducted by an adversary. The attack AUC (Area Under the Curve) is a single value that measures
the overall performance of the binary classifier implementing MIAs. The AUC value is within
the range [50%–100%], where the minimum value represents the performance of a random MIA
attacker, and the maximum value would correspond to a perfect attacker. The attack AUC is a robust
overall measure to evaluate the performance of MIAs because its calculation involves all possible
attacker’s binary classification thresholds. Since the weakest (i.e., most naive) MIA attacker would
reach a minimum attack AUC of 50%, the best defense against MIAs would approach that optimal
value of attack AUC of 50%. Thus, we use attack AUC as a means to evaluate the privacy of a
model.

Overall Model Privacy Metric. In a FL system that consists of the global FL model M , and N
clients models M1 . . . MN , we define a metric for measuring the overall privacy of all these models.
Namely, we measure the highest potential privacy leakage from both the global model and clients’
local models. Given the FAU C function for computing the attack AUC of a model, the overall model
privacy of the FL system is computed as follows:
                                                   PN                  !
                                                         F AU C (M i )
                              M ax FAU C (M ), i=1
                                                          N


Overall Model Utility Metric. We evaluate the utility of a protected model by measuring its accu-
racy, namely the ratio of correctly classified instances to the total number of instances. Considering
D INAR’s approach for protecting FL clients’ models, we consider the average of accuracy of clients’
protected models. Given N clients, Mi the model of each Clienti , and FAcc the function that calcu-
lates accuracy of a model, the overall model utility metric is as follows:
                                          PN
                                             i=1 FAcc (Mi )
                                                 N


Cost-Related Metrics. We also evaluate the additional costs that can be induced by a privacy-
preserving FL mechanism, both in terms of execution times and memory usage. For instance, we
measure the necessary time for a client to train a model during a FL round. We also measure the
necessary time for the FL server to perform aggregation of client model updates. Finally, we measure
the memory used by a client during model training,.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                  .0                                                                                                                                            85
                                                                                                                                                             65
                     70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                                                                   5                                                                                                                                                      78         78
                                                                                                                                                             6   2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 75        75
                               65   65
                                                                                                                                                                  .0                                                                                                                                            75
                     65                   64    64                                                                                                           60

    Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Attack AUC (%)
                                                                                                                                            Attack AUC (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    70
                                                           61                                                                                                   .5           57    57                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                             57
                     60                              59
                                                                                                  58                                                                0                                                                                                                                           65
                                                                                                                                                             5   5.                                                        54            54
                                                                                                                    56

                     55                                                                                                                                           .5                      52       52    52   52                                    52                    52                                    60
                                                                      53                                                                                     52
                                                                                      52                                                                                                                                                                        50              50                                                                                                   55
                                                                                                                                                                .  0                                                                                                                                            55
                                                                                                        50                50                                 50
                     50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50   50   50   50        50             50
                                                                                                                                                                 7.
                                                                                                                                                                   5                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                             4

                     45                                                                                                                                           .0                                                                                                                                            45
                                               + P     + DP      + DP                                                     P                                  45                                                                                                                                                                                + P      + DP      + DP
                                    ns
                                       e
                                              e D
                                                                           + GC                             SA          /D NA
                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                 ns
                                                                                                                                                                                    e      + P
                                                                                                                                                                                          e D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    + DP      + DP      +                           GC          SA          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /D A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ns
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            + GC          SA            DP AR
                                 fe         ns W    DP   L
                                                            LD
                                                               P   C
                                                                      CD
                                                                         P
                                                                                                                      AR DI                                                    fe       ns W     DP   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                         LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                            P   C     P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AR DIN                                                 fe           ns W     DP   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P                           R/ IN
                               de        fe        W                                                                N                                                        de       fe       W                   CD                                                                                                     de           fe          W                                                NA D
                          No         de                                                                          DI                                                     No        de                                                                                 DIN                                             No             de                                                         DI
                                 No                                                                                                                                            No                                                                                                                                          No



                     (a) Cifar-100 – local models                                                                                                                   (b) CelebA – local models                                                                                                         (c) Purchase100 – local models

                                                                                                                                                                  .0                                                                                                                                            85
                                                                                                                                                             65
                     70                                                                                                                                                            62                                                                                                                           80
                                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                                                                                                             62              61                                                                                 61                                                                   76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          75                                                              75
                                                                                                                                                                  .0                                                                                                                                            75
                     65                                                                                                                                      60
    Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Attack AUC (%)
                                                                                                                                            Attack AUC (%)
                                    63
                                                     62    62
                               61                                                                       61                                                         5                                                                                                      57                                    70
                                                                                                                                                             5   7.
                     60
                                                                                                                                                                  .0                                                                                                                                            65
                                                                      57              57                                                                     55
                                                                                                                    56                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                  55                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       59
                     55                         54                                                                                                                .5                                          52           52            52         52                                                          60                               58
                                          53                                                                                                                 52                                    51
                                                                                                                                                                                          50             50                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                 0.
                                                                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                                           55
                                                                                                                          50                                 5
                     50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50   50   50   50   50                  50
                                                                                                                                                                  .5                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                             47

                     45                                                                                                                                           .0                                                                                                                                            45
                                               + P     + DP      + DP                                                     P                                  45                                                                                                                                                                                + P      + DP      + DP
                                    ns
                                       e
                                              e D
                                                                           + GC                             SA          /D NA
                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                 ns
                                                                                                                                                                                    e      + P
                                                                                                                                                                                          e D
                                                                                                                                                                                                    + DP      + DP      +                           GC          SA          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /D A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ns
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            + GC          SA            DP AR
                                 fe         ns W    DP   L
                                                            LD
                                                               P   C
                                                                      CD
                                                                         P
                                                                                                                      AR DI                                                    fe       ns W     DP   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                         LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                            P   C     P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AR DIN                                                 fe           ns W     DP   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P                           R/ IN
                               de        fe        W                                                                N                                                        de       fe       W                   CD                                                                                                     de           fe          W                                                NA D
                          No         de                                                                          DI                                                     No        de                                                                                 DIN                                             No             de                                                         DI
                                 No                                                                                                                                            No                                                                                                                                          No



                     (d) Cifar-100 – global model                                                                                                                   (e) CelebA – global model                                                                                                        (f) Purchase100 – global model

                                                                                    .0
                                                                                 65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    54
                                                                                    .5
                                                                                 62                                                                                                                                                           53         53          53        53                                                                     53

                                                                                    .0                                                                                                                                                                                               52   52        52               52        52
                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    52
                                                                Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                              58        58
                                                                                    .5
                                                                                 57                               56     56
                                                                                                                                                                              55                                                                                                                                                         50                 50
                                                                                      .0                                                                                                      54                                    50
                                                                                 55

                                                                                    . 5
                                                                                 52                                               51   51
                                                                                                                                                    50              50              50              50                              48
                                                                                      .0
                                                                                 50

                                                                                    .5
                                                                                 47                                                                                                                                                 46

                                                                                      .0
                                                                                 45                                                                                                                                                                                + P      + DP      + DP
                                                                                                    ns
                                                                                                       e       + P
                                                                                                              e D
                                                                                                                        + DP      + DP     + GC                                     SA            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                /D A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ns
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                + GC                                        SA            DP AR
                                                                                                 fe         ns W     DP   L
                                                                                                                             LD
                                                                                                                                P   C    P
                                                                                                                                                                                              AR DIN                                               fe           ns W     DP   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P                                                         R/ IN
                                                                                              de         fe        W                   CD                                                                                                     de           fe          W                                                                              NA D
                                                                                           No        de                                                                                  DIN                                             No             de                                                                                       DI
                                                                                                No                                                                                                                                             No



                                                             (g) Speech Commands – local                                                                                                                                             (h) GTSRB – local models
                                                             models
                                                                                 60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    54
                                                                                 58
                                                                                                       57                                                                           57                                                                   53
                                                                                            56                           56
                                                                                 56                                                                                                                                                                                            52         52                         52
                                                                Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    52
                                                                                                                 54                                                                                                                           51                     51                             51                                   51           51
                                                                                 54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50                                        50                           50
                                                                                                                                       52                                                                                           50
                                                                                 52

                                                                                                                               50                 50              50          50              50    50
                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    48

                                                                                 48

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    46
                                                                                 46

                                                                                                 se          + P     + DP      + DP      + GC                                       SA         DP AR                                                   e           + P      + DP      + DP      + GC                                        SA            DP AR
                                                                                               en           e D   DP   L     P   C     P                                                     R/ IN                                                   ns           e D    DP   L     P   C     P                                                         R/ IN
                                                                                              f           ns W            LD        CD                                                                                                             fe           ns W             LD        CD
                                                                                            de         fe        W                                                                         NA D                                               de           fe          W                                                                              NA D
                                                                                      No           de                                                                                    DI                                              No             de                                                                                       DI
                                                                                              No                                                                                                                                               No



                                                             (i) Speech Commands – global                                                                                                                                            (j) GTSRB – global model
                                                             model

Figure 8: Privacy leakage with D INAR and state-of-the-art protection mechanisms with Cifar-10–
The horizontal dashed line represents the optimal value of attack AUC (50%)


E                     A PPENDIX – A DDITIONAL E VALUATION OF P RIVACY P ROTECTION

In the following, we provide extended results for the experimental scenario described for Cifar-10
in §5.2, for all considered datasets. We provide our results in Figure 8 for other datasets, showing
a similar tendency; Differential Privacy based solutions provide a visible protection but limited in
some cases, in particular on local models. For instance, even if LDP and CDP reduce the Attack
AUC to 50% for the Purchase100 dataset, they still struggle in the cases of Cifar-100, CelebA,
GTSRB and Speech Commands. In exchange, D INAR provides the best privacy protection in all


                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


cases, by reducing the attack AUC to 50%, corresponding to the optimal protection value. These
results confirm our analysis of the behaviour of D INAR on Cifar-10, that remains constant for all
datasets. These results corroborate our initial observation that D INAR remains the most efficient
protection technique in case the objective is to protect both local and global models.

F                           A PPENDIX – P RIVACY P ROTECTION UNDER N ON -IID FL S ETTINGS
In the following, we consider different non-IID FL settings, and evaluate their impact on the actual
privacy protection achieved by different protection methods. We vary the non-IID FL dataset distri-
bution using the Dirichlet function (Kotz et al., 2004) and its α parameter. The lower the Dirichlet’s
α value is, the more non-IID FL distribution is. Figure 9 presents the results of the evaluation of
different non-IID distributions of the GTSRB dataset, and compares the utility and the resilience of
clients’ models to membership inference attacks when different privacy protection methods are ap-
plied, as well as when no defense is applied. Overall, for all cases but D INAR, the lower the non-IID
distribution is, the higher the attack success rate is since the membership inference shadow model
is able to better learn on such data. In the case of D INAR, the privacy protection is independent
from the underlying non-IID setting and remains minimal at 50%. When it comes to model utility,
obviously, the lower the non-IID distribution is, the higher the model utility is, although, D INAR
reaches the highest model accuracy when protecting the model.

                 58                                                                                     58                                                                                      58                                                                                     62
                                                                  No Defense +                                                                           No Defense +                                                                            No Defense +                                                                                 No defense +
                                                                  WDP +                                                                                  WDP +                                                                                   WDP +                                                                                        CDP +
                                                                  LDP +                                                                                  LDP +                                                                                   LDP +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60                                                     LDP +
                 56                                               CDP +                                 56                                               CDP +                                  56                                               CDP +                                                                                        WDP +
                                                                  DINAR                                                                                  DINAR                                                                                   DINAR                                 58                                                     DINAR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Attack AUC (%)
Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                       Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                                                                                                               Attack AUC (%)


                 54                                                                                     54                                                                                      54                                                                                     56

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       54
                 52                                                                                     52                                                                                      52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       52
                 50                                                                                     50                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50

                 48                                                                                     48                                                                                      48                                                                                     48
                      30         40          50         60        70              80                         30         40          50         60        70              80                          30         40          50         60        70              80                               30          40         50             60           70
                                       Model accuracy (%)                                                                     Model accuracy (%)                                                                      Model accuracy (%)                                                                      Model accuracy (%)

                                 (a) α = 0.8                                                                             (b) α = 2                                                                                   (c) α = 5                                                          (d) α = ∞ (i.e., IID)

        Figure 9: Privacy leakage vs. model utility under different non-IID FL settings – GTSRB dataset

G                           A PPENDIX – P RIVACY P ROTECTION UNDER D IFFERENT N UMBERS OF
                            C LIENTS
We evaluate the impact of different numbers of FL clients on the actual performance of D INAR.
Figure 10 reports the attack AUC vs. the client model accuracy, comparing D INAR against the no
defense baseline. In each case, the whole Purchase100 dataset was splitted into subsets for the
different FL clients. Obviously, the fewer the clients are, the higher the client model accuracy is,
since fewer clients implies more data per client. However, and independently from the number of
clients, D INAR is able to counter MIAs with an attack AUC of 50%.

                 100                                                                                    100                                                                                     100                                                                                    100
                                                                   No defense +                                                                           No defense +                                                                            No defense +                                                                                No defense +
                                                                   DINAR                                                                                  DINAR                                                                                   DINAR                                                                                       DINAR
                  90                                                                                     90                                                                                      90                                                                                     90
Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                       Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                                                                                                               Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Attack AUC (%)


                  80                                                                                     80                                                                                      80                                                                                     80


                  70                                                                                     70                                                                                      70                                                                                     70


                  60                                                                                     60                                                                                      60                                                                                     60


                  50                                                                                     50                                                                                      50                                                                                     50
                       55   56    57    58        59   60    61   62    63        64                          55   56    57    58        59   60    61   62    63        64                           55   56    57    58        59   60    61   62    63        64                          55    56    57    58   59        60   61        62    63        64
                                       Model accuracy (%)                                                                     Model accuracy (%)                                                                      Model accuracy (%)                                                                      Model accuracy (%)

                                 (a) 10 clients                                                                     (b) 15 clients                                                                              (c) 20 clients                                                                          (d) 25 clients

  Figure 10: Privacy leakage vs. model utility under different numbers of FL clients – Purchase100

H                           A PPENDIX – P RIVACY P ROTECTION OF M ORE OR L ESS V ULNERABLE
                            DATA S AMPLES
In the following, we evaluate the actual privacy achieved by different protection mechanisms by
considering more specifically, on the one hand, data points that are easier to infer by the membership


                                                                                                                                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


inference attacker5 , and on the other hand, data points that are more difficult to infer by the attacker.
Figure 11 presents the attack AUC vs. the client model accuracy of such an evaluation with the
Purchase100 dataset. Obviously, the attack is more efficient on the most vulnerable data points
with no defense, reaching an attack AUC approaching 100%. Privacy protection techniques based
on gradient compression and WDP+ also provide less protection for more vulnerable data points,
compared to less vulnerable ones. In contrast, D INAR as well as the other protection methods
(i.e., secure aggregation, and other DP-based methods) provide good protection independently from
the level of vulnerability of data points, although the former provides better model utility.


                                    100                                                                          100
                                               No Defense +                                                                                                                      No Defense +
                                               LDP +                                                                                                                             LDP +
                                     90        CDP +                                                              90                                                             CDP +
                                               WDP +                                                                                                                             WDP +
                                               GC +                                                                                                                              GC +
                                               SA +                                                                                                                              SA +
                   Attack AUC (%)


                                                                                                Attack AUC (%)
                                     80        DINAR                                                              80                                                             DINAR

                                     70                                                                           70

                                     60                                                                           60

                                     50                                                                           50

                                          30   35     40      45   50   55      60   65   70                           30   35   40     45                 50          55   60       65         70
                                                           Model accuracy (%)                                                         Model accuracy (%)
                                    (a) More vulnerable data points                                               (b) Less vulnerable data points

Figure 11: Privacy leakage vs. model utility for more or less vulnerable data points – Purchase100


I    A PPENDIX – P RIVACY P ROTECTION WITH D IFFERENT P RIVACY B UDGETS

                                                                   100
In the following, we consider the recent PrivateFL-LDP differ-           No defense +
                                                                         PrivateFL- LDP ( =0.05)
ential privacy-based method (Yang et al., 2023), with different     90
                                                                         PrivateFL- LDP ( =0.2)
                                                                         PrivateFL- LDP ( =1)
                                                                         PrivateFL- LDP ( =2.2)
privacy budgets. We evaluate its actual resilience to member-            DINAR
                                                                                                                                             Attack AUC (%)


                                                                    80
ship inference attacks, and the model accuracy. We also com-
pare PrivateFL-LDP against D INAR and against the case where        70

no defense is applied. Figure 12 presents these results. Obvi-      60
ously, small privacy budgets provide better privacy. However,
in order to reach the best privacy protection of 50%, PrivateFL-    50
                                                                       0  10         20       30 40    50 60 70
LDP drastically degrades the model accuracy to 13%. Whereas                           Model accuracy (%)
D INAR is able to keep a high model accuracy close to the no
defense baseline, while effectively protecting against the MIAs. Figure 12: Privacy leakage vs.
                                                                 model utility under different DP
                                                                 privacy budgets – Purchase100
J    A PPENDIX – A BLATION S TUDY
                                                                                                                                                                  63

In order to evaluate the actual impact of the adaptive gradient                                                            62
                                                                    62
descent in D INAR on the performance of the model, we report
                                                                                                                                             Model accuracy (%)


an ablation study where D INAR uses other state-of-the-art gra-     61
dient descent optimizers, such as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015a),                                                  60
                                                                    60
ADGD (Malitsky & Mishchenko, 2020), and AdaMax (Kingma
& Ba, 2015a). Figure 13 presents the highest membership in-                    59              59
                                                                    59
ference attack AUC against the models. Moreover, although not
                                                                    58
shown in the figure, all considered gradient descent techniques                  AdaG
                                                                                      rad
                                                                                                 AdaG
                                                                                                      rad
                                                                                                                 AdaGx
                                                                                                                      rad DINA
                                                                                                                               R

provide the same privacy protection level (i.e., an attack AUC of          R w/oAdam INAR ww/o/ ADGD INAR w/ /oAdaMa
                                                                       DINA w/          D               D w
50%).                                                             Figure 13: Ablation study – Pur-
                                                                  chase100
   5
     Data points with a high inference confidence score by the attacker, i.e., a confidence score above the
quantile of 0.8.


                                                                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K     A PPENDIX – M EMORY-R ELATED C OST OF FL P RIVACY-P RESERVING
      M ECHANISMS
Our study delves deep into the realm of GPU memory usage in privacy-preserving federated
learning, unraveling captivating insights. Through meticulous analysis, we unveil the impact
of various privacy mechanisms, including LDP, CDP, WDP, GC and SA on memory consump-
tion during local model training. They show that in that case, running differential privacy
algorithms increases the GPU Memory usage by 168% compared to a no defense scenario.
In exchange, D INAR does not introduce any computational com-
parable operation by definition, resulting in having no significant    10
impact on GPU memory usage. Our findings paint a compelling
                                                                        8                7.5
picture, showcasing a systematic increase in GPU memory usage                        7.2     7.2  7.2


                                                                               Memory Usage (GB)
with the implementation of these privacy measures. First, the ad-       6
dition of calibrated noise, a fundamental technique in differential
                                                                        4
privacy, requires storing the noise values, which increases mem-             2.8                      2.8   2.8     2.8
ory usage. Second, tracking and managing the privacy budget,            2
which represents the maximum allowable privacy loss, neces-
                                                                        0
sitates additional memory to maintain the budget information.                       e P
                                                                                 ens WD  LDP CD
                                                                                                P  GC  SA        DP AR
                                                                                                              AR/ DIN
                                                                             def                          DIN
Lastly, the need for maintaining an aggregation buffer to col-            No

lect model updates before applying privacy mechanisms adds to
the memory requirements. This reasonably explains why D INAR Figure 14: Cost of FL privacy-
is optimal from the perspective of GPU memory in comparison preserving mechanisms in terms
with differential privacy, as it doesn’t involve noise addition nor of memory usage – GTSRB with
privacy budget management.                                          VGG11


                                                          18
