Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H ARNESSING THE P OWER OF F EDERATED L EARNING
IN F EDERATED C ONTEXTUAL BANDITS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Federated contextual bandits (FCB), a pivotal integration of federated learning
         (FL) and sequential decision-making, has garnered significant attention in recent
         years. Prior research on FCB can be understood as specific instantiations of a
         unified design principle articulated in this paper: вҖңFCB = FL + CBвҖқ. Here, FL
         enhances agentsвҖҷ performance by aggregating the information of other agentsвҖҷ
         local data to better contextual bandits (CB) policies. Nevertheless, it is evident that
         existing approaches largely employ tailored FL protocols, often deviating from the
         canonical FL framework. Consequently, even renowned algorithms like FedAvg
         remain underutilized in FCB, let alone other FL advancements. To bridge this
         gap between the canonical FL study and the FL component in FCB, our work
         introduces a novel FCB design, termed FedIGW, that incorporates inverse gap
         weighting as the CB algorithm. This design permits the integration of versatile FL
         protocols as long as they can solve a standard FL problem. With this flexible FL
         choice, FedIGW advances FCB research by enabling the utilization of the entire
         spectrum of FL innovations, encompassing canonical algorithmic designs (e.g.,
         FedAvg and SCAFFOLD), convergence analyses, and valuable extensions (such
         as personalization, robustness, and privacy). We substantiate these claims through
         rigorous theoretical analyses and empirical evaluations.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Federated learning (FL), initially proposed by McMahan et al. (2017); KonecМҢnyМҖ et al. (2016), has
garnered significant attention for its effectiveness in enabling distributed machine learning with het-
erogeneous agents (Li et al., 2020a; Kairouz et al., 2021). As FL has gained popularity, numerous
endeavors have sought to extend its applicability beyond the original realm of supervised learn-
ing, e.g., to unsupervised and semi-supervised learning (Zhang et al., 2020; van Berlo et al., 2020;
Zhuang et al., 2022; Lubana et al., 2022). Among these directions, the exploration of federated
contextual bandits (FCB) has emerged as a particularly compelling area of research, representing a
pivotal fusion of FL and sequential decision-making, which has found various practical applications
in cognitive radio and recommendation systems, among others.
Over the past several years, substantial progress has been achieved in the field of FCB (Wang et al.,
2019; Li & Wang, 2022b; Li et al., 2022; 2023; Dai et al., 2023), particularly those involving varying
function approximations (e.g., linear models, as discussed in Huang et al. (2021b); Dubey & Pent-
land (2020); Li & Wang (2022a); He et al. (2022); Amani et al. (2022)). Given the depth of existing
research, it has become imperative to distill insights to guide future investigations. Consequently,
this work first encapsulates the existing body of research under the seemingly straightforward yet
overarching principle: вҖңFCB = FL + CB.вҖқ This principle asserts that one FCB design is functional
provided that its employed FL protocol can update the parameters required by its adopted contextual
bandits (CB) algorithm through the locally collected CB interaction data.
Through the lens of this вҖңFCB = FL + CBвҖқ principle, the FL component in the previous FCB works
is largely over-simplified. The FL protocol in many of these works is one-shot aggregation of some
compressed local data per epoch (e.g., combining local estimates and local covariance matrices
in the study of federated linear bandits). Admittedly, for some simple cases, such straightforward
aggregation is sufficient. However, it limits the potential development of FCB for solving more
complicated problems. In contrast, the canonical FL framework takes an optimization view of in-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


corporating the local data through multi-round aggregation of model parameters (such as gradients).
Recognizing this significant gap, this work aims to utilize the canonical FL framework as the FL
component of FCB so as to harness the full power of FL studies in FCB.
We propose FedIGW вҖ“ a pioneering design that demonstrates the ability to leverage a compre-
hensive array of FL advancements, encompassing canonical algorithmic approaches (like FedAvg
(McMahan et al., 2017) and SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020)), rigorous convergence analy-
ses, and critical appendages (such as personalization, robustness, and privacy). To the best of our
knowledge, this marks the inaugural report of such a close connection between FL and FCB. The
distinctive contributions of FedIGW can be succinctly summarized as follows:
вҖў In the FCB setting with stochastic contexts and a realizable reward function, FedIGW employs
the inverse gap weighting (IGW) algorithm for CB while versatile FL protocols can be incorpo-
rated, provided they can solve a standard FL problem (e.g., FedAvg and SCAFFOLD). These two
parts iterate according to designed epochs: FL, drawing from previously gathered interaction data,
supplies estimated reward functions for forthcoming IGW interactions. A pivotal advantage is that
the flexible FL component in FedIGW provides substantial adaptability, meaning that existing and
future FL protocols can be seamlessly leveraged.
вҖў A general theoretical analysis of FedIGW is developed to demonstrate its provably efficient per-
formance. The influence of the adopted FL protocol is captured through its optimization error,
delineating the excess risk of the learned reward function. Notably, any theoretical breakthroughs
in FL convergence rates can be immediately integrated into the obtained analysis and supply corre-
sponding guarantees of FedIGW. Concretized results are further provided through demonstrations of
the utilization of FedAvg and SCAFFOLD in FedIGW. Experimental results using real-world data
with several different FL choices also corroborate the practicability and flexibility of FedIGW.
вҖў Beyond its inherent generality and efficiency, FedIGW exhibits exceptional extensibility. Vari-
ous appendages from FL studies can be flexibly integrated without necessitating alterations to the
CB component. We explore the extension of FedIGW to personalized learning and the incorpora-
tion of privacy and robustness guarantees. Similar investigations in prior FCB works would entail
substantial algorithmic modifications, while FedIGW can effortlessly leverage corresponding FL
advancements to obtain these appealing attributes.
Key related works. Most of the previous studies on FCB are discussed in Sec. 2.2, and more com-
prehensively reviewed in Appendix B. We note that these FCB designs with tailored FL protocols in
previous works sometimes can achieve near-optimal performance bounds in specific settings, while
our proposed FedIGW is more practical and extendable. We believe these two types of designs are
valuable supplements to each other. Additionally, while this work was being developed, the paper
(Agarwal et al., 2023) was posted, which also proposes to have decoupled components of CB and
FL in FCB. However, Agarwal et al. (2023) mainly focuses on empirical investigations, while our
work offers valuable complementary contributions by conducting thorough theoretical analyses.

2     F EDERATED C ONTEXTUAL BANDITS
This section introduces the problem of federated contextual bandits (FCB). A concise formulation
is first provided. Then, the existing works are re-visited and a key principle of вҖңFCB = FL + CBвҖқ is
summarized, which reveals the major deficiency of existing works in connecting FL and FCB.

2.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Agents. In the FCB setting, a total of M agents simultaneously participate in solving a contextual
bandit (CB) problem. For generality, we consider an asynchronous system: each of the M agents has
a clock indicating her time step, which is denoted as tm = 1, 2, В· В· В· for agent m. For convenience,
we also introduce a global time step t. Denote by tm (t) the agent mвҖҷs local time step when the
global time is t, and t(tm , m) the global time step when the agent mвҖҷs local time is tm .
Agent m at each of her local time step tm = 1, 2, В· В· В· observes a context xm,tm , selects an action
am,tm from an action set Am,tm , and then receives the associated reward rm,tm (am,tm ) (possibly
depends on both xm,tm and am,tm ) as in the standard CB (Lattimore & SzepesvaМҒri, 2020). Each
agentвҖҷs goal is to collect as many rewards as possible given a time horizon.


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Table 1: A compact summary of investigations on FCB with their adopted FL and CB components;
                           a more comprehensive review is in Appendix B.

                                      Design Principle: FCB = FL + CB
                    Reference                       Setting                   FL               CB
                                  Globally Shared Full Model (See Section 3)
                 Wang et al. (2019)                 Tabular           Mean Averaging           AE
      Wang et al. (2019); Huang et al. (2021b)       Linear          Linear Regression         AE
       Li & Wang (2022a); He et al. (2022)           Linear           Ridge Regression        UCB
                Li & Wang (2022b)                Gen. Linear          Distributed AGD         UCB
               Li et al. (2022; 2023)               Kernel        NystroМҲm Approximation      UCB
                  Dai et al. (2023)                 Neural          NTK Approximation         UCB
               FedIGW (this work)                 Realizable       Flexible (e.g., FedAvg)    IGW
                                Globally Shared Partial Model (see Section 6.1)
                Li & Wang (2022a)                    Linear       Alternating Minimization     UCB
               Agarwal et al. (2020)              Realizable            FedRes.SGD           Оө-greedy
               FedIGW (this work)                 Realizable     Flexible (e.g., LSGD-PFL)     IGW
       AE: arm elimination; Gen. Linear: generalized linear model; AGD: accelerated gradient descent
Federation. While many efficient single-agent (centralized) algorithms have been proposed for CB
(Lattimore & SzepesvaМҒri, 2020), FCB targets building a federation among agents to perform collab-
orative learning such that the performance can be improved from learning independently. Especially,
common interests shared among agents motivate their collaboration. Thus, FCB studies typically
assume that the agentsвҖҷ environments are either fully (Wang et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2021b; Dubey
& Pentland, 2020; He et al., 2022; Amani et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Li & Wang, 2022b; Dai et al.,
2023) or partially (Li & Wang, 2022a; Agarwal et al., 2020) shared in the global federation.
In federated learning, the following two modes are commonly considered: (1) There exists a central
server in the system, and the agents can share information with the server, which can then broadcast
aggregated information back to the agents; and (2) There exists a communication graph between
agents, who can share information with their neighbors in the graph. In the later discussions, we
mainly consider the first scenario, i.e., collaborating through the server, which is also the main focus
in FL, while both modes can be effectively encompassed in the proposed FedIGW design.

2.2   T HE C URRENT D ISCONNECTION B ETWEEN FCB AND FL

The exploration of FCB traces its origins to distributed multi-armed bandits (Wang et al., 2019).
Since then, FCB research has predominantly focused on enhancing performance in broader problem
domains, encompassing various types of reward functions, such as linear (Wang et al., 2019; Huang
et al., 2021b; Dubey & Pentland, 2020), kernelized (Li et al., 2022; 2023), generalized linear (Li &
Wang, 2022b) and neural (Dai et al., 2023) (see Appendix B for a comprehensive review).
Upon a holistic review of these works, it becomes apparent that each of them focuses on a specific
CB algorithm and employs a particular FL protocol to update the parameters required by CB. We
thus can summarize a unified principle that вҖңFCB = FL + CBвҖқ: as long as two CB and FL com-
ponents are compatible with each other, their integration results in a functional FCB design. In
particular, the chosen FL protocol should possess the capability to effectively update the necessary
parameterization in the employed CB algorithm. Conversely, the CB algorithm should provide ap-
propriate datasets to facilitate the execution of the FL protocol. To be more specific, a periodically
alternating design between CB and FL is commonly adopted: CB (collects one epoch of data in
parallel) вҶ’ FL (proceeds with CB data together and outputs CBвҖҷs parameterization) вҶ’ updated CB
(collects another epoch of data in parallel) вҶ’ В· В· В· . A compact summary, including the components
of FL and CB employed in previous FCB works, is presented in Table 1.
With this abstract principle, we can re-examine the existing works from a unified perspective to
effectively guide future FCB designs. We particularly recognize that the FL components in the pre-
vious FCB works are not well investigated and even have some mismatches from canonical FL de-
signs (McMahan et al., 2017; KonecМҢnyМҖ et al., 2016). For example, in federated linear bandits (Wang
et al., 2019; Dubey & Pentland, 2020; Li & Wang, 2022a; He et al., 2022; Amani et al., 2022) and
its extensions (Li et al., 2022; 2023; Li & Wang, 2022b; Dai et al., 2023), the adopted FL protocols
typically involve the direct transmission and aggregation of local reward aggregates and covariance
matrices, constituting a one-shot aggregation of compressed local data per epoch (albeit with subtle


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


variations, such as synchronous or asynchronous communications). Due to both efficiency and pri-
vacy concerns, such choices are rare (and even undesirable) in canonical FL studies, where agents
typically communicate and aggregate their model parameters (e.g., gradients) over multiple rounds.
Consequently, none of the existing FCB designs can seamlessly leverage the advancements in FL
studies, including the renowned FedAvg algorithm (McMahan et al., 2017).
This disparity represents a significant drawback in current FCB studies, as it limits the connection
between FL and FCB to merely philosophical, i.e., benefiting individual learning by collaborating
through a federation, while vast FL studies cannot be leveraged to benefit FCB. Driven by this critical
gap, this work aims to establish a closer relationship between FCB and FL through the introduction
of a novel design, FedIGW, that is detailed in the subsequent sections. This approach provides the
flexibility to integrate any FL protocol following the standard FL framework, which allows us to
effectively harness the progress made in FL studies, encompassing canonical algorithmic designs,
convergence analyses, and useful appendages.

3     F ED IGW: F LEXIBLE I NCORPORATION OF FL P ROTOCOLS
In this section, we present FedIGW, a novel FCB algorithm proposed in this work. Before delving
into the algorithmic details, a more concrete system model with stochastic contexts and a realizable
reward function is introduced. Subsequently, we outline the specifics of FedIGW, emphasizing its
principal strength in seamlessly integrating canonical FL protocols.

3.1   S YSTEM M ODEL

Built on the formulation in Sec. 2, for each agent m вҲҲ [M ], denote Xm a context space, and Am a
finite set of Km actions. At each time step tm of each agent m, the environment samples a context
xm,tm вҲҲ Xm and a context-dependent reward vector rm,tm вҲҲ [0, 1]Am according to a fixed but
unknown distribution Dm . The agent m, as in Sec. 2, then observes the context xm,tm , picks an
action am,tm вҲҲ Am , and receives the reward rm,tm (am,tm ). The expected reward of playing action
am given context xm is denoted as Вөm (xm , am ) := E[rm,tm (am )|xm,tm = xm ].
With no prior information about the rewards, the agents gradually learn their optimal policies, de-
            вҲ—
noted by ПҖm   (xm ) := arg maxam вҲҲAm Вөm (xm , am ) for agent m with context xm . Following a
standard notation (Wang et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2021b; Dubey & Pentland, 2020; Li & Wang,
2022a; He et al., 2022; Amani et al., 2022; Li & Wang, 2022b; Li et al., 2022; 2023; Dai et al.,
2023), the overall regret of M agents in this environment is
                     X         X
                                                          вҲ—

     Reg(T ) := E                            Вөm (xm,tm , ПҖm (xm,tm )) вҲ’ Вөm (xm,tm , am,tm ) ,
                         mвҲҲ[M ]     tm вҲҲ[Tm ]

where Tm = tm (T ) is the effective time horizon for agent m given a global horizon T and the
expectation is taken over the randomness in contexts and rewards and the agentsвҖҷ algorithms. This
overall regret can be interpreted as the sum of each agent mвҖҷs individual regret with respect to (w.r.t.)
                        вҲ—
her optimal strategy ПҖm   . Hence, it is ideal to be sub-linear w.r.t. the number of agents M , which
indicates the agentsвҖҷ learning processes are accelerated on average due to federation.
Realizablilty. Despite not knowing the true expected reward functions, we consider the scenario
that they are the same across agents and are within a function class F, to which the agents have
access. This assumption, rigorously stated in the following, is often referred to as the realizability
assumption.
Assumption 3.1 (Realizability). There exists f вҲ— in F such that f вҲ— (xm , am ) = Вөm (xm , am ) for all
m вҲҲ [M ], xm вҲҲ Xm and am вҲҲ Am .
This assumption is a natural extension from its commonly-adopted single-agent version (Agarwal
et al., 2012; Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2022; Xu & Zeevi, 2020; Sen et al., 2021) to a federated one. Note
that it does not imply that the agentsвҖҷ environments are the same since they may face different con-
                                           Xm           Xm
texts Xm , arms Am , and distributions Dm      , where Dm    is the marginal distribution of the joint
distribution Dm on the context space Xm . We study a general FCB setting only with this assump-
tion, which incorporates many previously studied FCB scenarios as special cases. For example, the
federated linear bandits (Huang et al., 2021b; Dubey & Pentland, 2020; Li & Wang, 2022a; He et al.,
2022; Amani et al., 2022) are with a linear function class F.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 FedIGW (Agent m)
                                               l                             l
Input: epoch number l = 1, reward function fbm   (В·, В·) = 0, local dataset Sm    =вҲ…
1: for time step tm = 1, 2, В· В· В· do
2:     observe context xm,tm                                                                        в–· CB: IGW
3:     compute baвҲ—m = arg maxam вҲҲAm fbl (am , xm,tm ) and action selection distribution
                                 (
            l                      1/ Km + Оі l fbl (b aвҲ—m , xm,tm ) вҲ’ fbl (am , xm,tm )             aвҲ—m
                                                                                           if am Мё= b
           pm (am |xm,tm ) вҶҗ
                                   1 вҲ’ aвҖІ Мё=abвҲ— plm (aвҖІm |xm,tm )                                   aвҲ—m
                                      P
                                                                                           if am = b
                                           m       m


 4:    select action am,tm вҲј plm (В·|xm,tm ); observe reward rm,tm (am,tm )
                                 l      l
 5:    update the local dataset Sm вҶҗ Sm   вҲӘ {(xm,tm , am,tm , rm,tm (am,tm ))}
 6:    if tm = tm (П„ l ) then                                                                           в–· FL
 7:        perform FL fbl+1 вҶҗ FLroutine(Sm      l
                                                  )
                             l+1
 8:        update dataset Sm вҶҗ вҲ…; update epoch l вҶҗ l + 1
 9:    end if
10: end for


3.2   A LGORITHM D ESIGN

The FedIGW algorithm proceeds in epochs, which are separated at time slots П„ 1 , П„ 2 , В· В· В· w.r.t. the
global time step t, i.e., the l-th epoch starts from t = П„ lвҲ’1 +1 and ends at t = П„ l . The overall number
of epochs is denoted as l(T ). In each epoch l, we describe the FL and CB components as follows,
while emphasizing that the FL component is decoupled and follows the standard FL framework.
CB: Inverse Gap Weighting (IGW). For CB, we use inverse gap weighting (Abe & Long, 1999),
which has received growing interest in the single-agent setting recently (Foster & Rakhlin, 2020;
Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2022; Krishnamurthy et al., 2021; Ghosh et al., 2021) but has not been fully
investigated in the federated setting. At any time step in epoch l, when encountering the context xm ,
agent m first identifies the optimal arm by b  aвҲ—m = arg maxam вҲҲAm fbl (xm , am ) from an estimated
                   l
reward function f (provided by the to-be-discussed FL component). Then, she randomly selects
                  b
her action am according to the following distribution, which is inversely proportional to each actionвҖҷs
estimated reward gap from the identified optimal action b   aвҲ—m :
                            (
                                            l bl вҲ—
                              1/   K m +  Оі    f (b
                                                  am , xm ) вҲ’  bl (am , xm )
                                                               f                        aвҲ—m
                                                                               if am Мё= b
          plm (am |xm ) вҶҗ                                                                   ,
                              1 вҲ’ aвҖІ Мё=baвҲ— plm (aвҖІm |xm )                               aвҲ—m
                                   P
                                                                               if am = b
                                       m       m

        l
where Оі is the learning rate in epoch l that controls the exploration-exploitation tradeoff.
Besides being a valuable supplement to the currently dominating UCB-based studies in FCB, the
main merit of leveraging IGW as the CB component is that it only requires an estimated reward
function instead of other complicated data analytics, e.g., upper confidence bounds.
FL: Flexible Choices. By IGW, each agent m performs local stochastic arm sampling and collects
                         l
a set of data samples Sm    := {(xm,tm , am,tm , rm,tm : tm вҲҲ [tm (П„ lвҲ’1 ) + 1, tm (П„ l )])} in epoch l.
In order to enhance the performance of IGW in the subsequent epoch l + 1, an improved estimate
fbl+1 based on all agentsвҖҷ data is desired. This objective aligns precisely with the aim of canonical
FL studies, which aggregates local data for better global estimates (McMahan et al., 2017; KonecМҢnyМҖ
et al., 2016). Thus, the agents can target solving the following standard FL problem:
                                                X
                                 b ; S l ) :=
                       minf вҲҲF L(f                                             l
                                                           (nm /n) В· Lbm (f ; Sm ),                 (1)
                                       [M ]            mвҲҲ[M ]
                l                                         l
                                                                         P
where nm := |Sm   | is the number of samples in dataset Sm    , n := mвҲҲ[M ] nm is the total number
                          l                                i
of samples, and Lm (f ; Sm ) := (1/nm ) В· iвҲҲ[nm ] в„“m (f (xm , aim ); rm
                                                                      i
                                         P
                b                                                       ) is the empirical local loss of
                          2                                  i    i   i                           l
agent m with в„“m (В·; В·) : R вҶ’ R as the loss function and (xm , am , rm ) as the i-th sample in Sm    .
As Eqn. (1) exactly follows the standard formulation of FL, the agents and the server can employ
any protocol in canonical FL studies to solve this optimization, such as FedAvg (McMahan et al.,
2017), SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020) and FedProx (Li et al., 2020a). These wildly-adopted

                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FL protocols typically perform iterative communications of local model parameters (e.g., gradients),
instead of one-shot aggregations of compressed local data in previous FCB studies. To highlight the
                                                                                             l
remarkable flexibility, we denote the adopted FL protocol as FLroutine(В·). With datasets S[M     ] :=
   l                                                                   l+1                     l
{S : m вҲҲ [M ]}, the output function of this FL process, denoted as f
    m
                                                                      b    вҶҗ FLroutine(S ),            [M ]
is used as the estimated reward function for IGW sampling in the next epoch l + 1.
The FedIGW algorithm for agent m is summarized in Alg. 1. The key, as aforementioned, is that the
component of FL in FedIGW is highly flexible as it only requires an estimated reward function for
later IGW interactions. In particular, any existing or forthcoming FL protocol following the standard
FL framework in Eqn. (1) can be leveraged as the FLroutine(В·) in FedIGW.

4       T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS : M ODULARIZED P LUG - IN OF FL A NALYSES
In this section, we theoretically analyze the performance of the FedIGW algorithm, where the impact
of the adopted FL choice is modularized as a plug-in component of its optimization error.

4.1     A G ENERAL G UARANTEE
            l
Denoting Em   := tm (П„ l )вҲ’tm (П„ lвҲ’1 ) as the length of epoch l for agent m, E[Ml          l
                                                                                  ] := {Em : m вҲҲ [M ]}
                                                         l      lвҲ’1                                l     lвҲ’1
as the epoch length set, c := minmвҲҲ[M ],lвҲҲ[2,l(T )] Em     /Em      , c := maxmвҲҲ[M ],lвҲҲ[2,l(T )] Em  /Em
and c := c/c, the following global regret guarantee can be established.
                                                  qP
                                                                    lвҲ’1                 lвҲ’1       lвҲ’1
Theorem 4.1. Using a learning rate Оі l = O
                                                                              P
                                                        mвҲҲ[M ]   E m    K m /( mвҲҲ[M ] E m    E(E [M ] ))   in
                     l                 l                    l
                          P                     P
epoch l, denoting KМ„ := mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km / mвҲҲ[M ] Em , the regret of FedIGW can be bounded as
                         X                                      q
                                                              5
                                             X                                 X
                                         1                            l    lвҲ’1             l
          Reg(T ) = O                 Em +                 c  2   KМ„ E(E[M ] )           Em .             (2)
                               mвҲҲ[M ]             lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]                      mвҲҲ[M ]
        l                                 l
Here E(E[M ] ) (abbreviated from E(F; E[M ] )) denotes the excess risk of the output from the adopted
                l                          l
FLroutine(S[M     ] ) using the datasets S[M ] , whose formal definition is deferred to Definition C.1.

It can be observed that in Eqn. (2), the first term bounds the regret in the first epoch. The obtained
bounds for the regrets incurred within each later epoch (i.e., the term inside the sum over l in the sec-
ond epoch) can be interpreted as the epoch length times the expected per-step suboptimality, which
                                                            lвҲ’1
then relates to the estimation quality of fbl and thus E(E[M           bl
                                                                ] ) as f is learned with the interaction
data collected from epoch l вҲ’ 1.

4.2     S OME C ONCRETIZED D ISCUSSIONS

Theorem 4.1 is notably general in the sense that a corresponding regret can be established as long as
                                        lвҲ’1
an upper bound on the excess risk E(E[M    ] ) can be obtained for a certain class of reward functions
and the adopted FL protocol. In the following, we provide several more concrete illustrations, and
especially, a modularized framework to leverage FL convergence analyses. To ease the notation, we
discuss synchronous systems with a shared number of arms in the following, i.e., tm = t, вҲҖm вҲҲ [M ],
and Km = K, вҲҖm вҲҲ [M ], while noting similar results can be easily obtained for general systems.
                                              l
With this simplification, we can unify all Em   as E l and KМ„ l as K.
To initiate the concretized discussions, we start with considering a finite function class F, i.e.,
|F| < вҲһ, which can be extended to a function class F with a finite covering number of the metric
space (F, lвҲһ ). In particular, the following corollary can be established via establishing E(n[M ] ) =
O(log(|F|n)/n) in the considered case as in Lemma D.2.
Corollary 4.2 (A Finite Function Class). If |F| < вҲһ and the adopted FL protocol provides an exact
minimizer
   p        for Eqn. (1) with quadratic losses, with П„ l = 2l , FedIGW incurs a regret of Reg(T ) =
O( KM T log(|F|M T )) and a total O(log(T )) calls of the adopted FL protocol.
                                                                    p
We note that the obtained regret approaches the optimal regret в„Ұ( KM T log(|F|)/ log(K)) of a
single agent playing for M T rounds (Agarwal et al., 2012) up to logarithmic factors, which demon-
strates the statistical efficiency of the proposed FedIGW. Moreover, the total O(log(T )) times call


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of the FL protocol indicates that only a limited number of agents-server information-sharing are
required, which further illustrates its communication efficiency.
As the finite function class is not often practically useful, we then focus on the canonical FL setting
that each f вҲҲ F is parameterized by a d-dimensional parameter Пү вҲҲ Rd as fПү , e.g., a neural network.
To facilitate discussions, we abbreviate S := S[M ] while denoting ПүSвҲ— := arg minПү L(f   b Пү ; S) as the
empirical optimal parameter given a fixed dataset S and Пү   bS as the output of the adopted FL protocol.
We further assume f вҲ— is parameterized by the true model parameter Пү вҲ— , and for a fixed Пү, define
L(fПү ) := ES [L(f
                b Пү ; S)] as its expected loss w.r.t. the data distribution.
Following standard learning-theoretic analyses, the key task excess risk E(F; n[M ] ) can be bounded
via a combination of errors stemming from optimization and generalization.
Lemma 4.3. If the loss function lm (В·; В·) is Вөf -strongly convex in its   first coordinate for all m вҲҲ
[M ], it holds that E(F; n[M ] ) вүӨ 2 Оөopt (F; n[M ] ) + Оөgen (F; n[M ] ) /Вөf , where Оөgen (F; n[M ] ) :=
ES,Оҫ [L(fПүbS ) вҲ’ L(f
                 b Пүb ; S)] and Оөopt (F; n[M ] ) := ES,Оҫ [L(f
                      S
                                                          b Пүb ; S) вҲ’ L(f
                                                               S
                                                                         b ПүвҲ— ; S)].
                                                                              S


For the generalization error term Оөgen (F; n[M ] ), we can utilize standard results in learning the-
ory (e.g., uniform convergence). For the sake of simplicity, we here leverage a distributional-
independent upper bound on the Rademacher complexity, denoted as R(F; n[M ] ) (rigorously de-
fined in Eqn. (4)), which provides that Оөgen (F; n[M ] ) вүӨ 2R(F; n[M ] ) using the classical uniform
convergence result (see Lemma D.5). We do not further particularize this upper bound while noting
it can be specified following standard procedures (Mohri et al., 2018; Bartlett et al., 2005).
On the other hand, the optimization error term Оөopt (F; n[M ] ) is exactly the standard convergence
error in the analysis of FL protocols. Thus, once any theoretical breakthrough on the convergence of
one FL protocol is reported, the obtained result can be immediately incorporated into our analysis
framework to characterize the performance of FedIGW using that FL protocol. In particular, the
following corollary is established to demonstrate the modularized plug-in of analyses of different
FL protocols, where FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) and SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020)
are adopted as further specific instances. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that
convergence analyses of FL protocols can directly benefit the analysis of FCB designs.
Corollary 4.4 (Modularized Plug-in of FL Analyses; A Simplified Version of Corollary D.6). Under
the condition of Lemma 4.3, the regret of FedIGW can be bounded as
                                        X           q
                                    1                                             l
                                                                     l

                Reg(T ) = O M E +                      K R   lвҲ’1  + Оөopt ) /Вөf M E ,
                                            lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]

where Rl := R(F; {E l : m вҲҲ [M ]}) and using ПҒl rounds of communications (i.e., global aggrega-
tions) and Оәl rounds of local updates in epoch l, under a few other standard conditions,
вҖў with FedAvg as the adopted FLroutine(В·), it holds that Оөlopt вүӨ OМғ((ПҒl Оәl M )вҲ’1 + (ПҒl )вҲ’2 );
вҖў with SCAFFOLD as the adopted FLroutine(В·), it holds that Оөlopt вүӨ OМғ((ПҒl Оәl M )вҲ’1 ).

From this corollary, we can see that FedIGW enables a general analysis framework to seamlessly
leverage theoretical advances in FL, in particular, convergence analyses. Thus, besides FedAvg and
SCAFFOLD, when switching the FL component in FedIGW to FedProx (Li et al., 2020a), FedOPT
(Reddi et al., 2020), and other existing or forthcoming FL designs, we can effortlessly plug in their
optimization errors to obtain corresponding performance guarantees of FedIGW. This convenience
highlights the theoretically intimate relationship between FedIGW and canonical FL studies.
Moreover, Corollary 4.4 can also guide how to perform the adopted FL protocol. As the generaliza-
tion error is an inherent property that cannot be bypassed by better optimization results, there is no
need to further proceed with the iterative FL process as long as the optimization error does not dom-
inate the generalization error, which is reflected in a more particularized corollary in Corollary D.7.
Remark 4.5 (A Linear Reward Function Class). As a more specified instance, we consider linear
reward functions as in federated linear bandits, i.e., fПү (В·) = вҹЁПү, П•(В·)вҹ© and f вҲ— (В·) = вҹЁПү вҲ— , П•(В·)вҹ©,
where П•(В·) вҲҲ Rd is a known feature mapping. In this case, the FL problem can be formulated as
                                                                                      2
a standard ridge regression with в„“m (fПү (xm , am ); rm ) := (вҹЁПү, П•(xm , am )вҹ© вҲ’ rm ) + О»вҲҘПүвҲҘ22 . With
a properly chosen regularization parameter О» = O(1/n), the generalization error can be bounded
as Оөgen (n[M ] ) = OМғ(d/n) (Hsu et al., 2012), while a same-order optimization error can be achieved


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                           вҲҡ
by many efficient distributed algorithms (Nesterov, 2003) with roughly O( n log(n/d)) rounds of
communications.
       вҲҡ            Then, with an вҲҡexponentially growing epoch length, FedIGW can have a regret
of OМғ( dM KT ) with at most OМғ( M T ) rounds of communications as illustrated in Appendix D.3,
both of which are efficient with sublinear dependencies on the number of agents M and time horizon
T . It is worth noting that during this process, no raw or compressed data is communicated вҖ“ only
processed model parameters (e.g., gradients) are exchanged. This aligns with FL studies while is
distinctive from previous designs for federated linear bandits (Dubey & Pentland, 2020; Li & Wang,
2022a; He et al., 2022), which often communicate covariance matrices or aggregated rewards.

5     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we report the empirical performances of FedIGW on two real-world datasets: Bibtex
(Katakis et al., 2008) and Delicious (Tsoumakas et al., 2008). For both experiments, we use 2-
layered MLPs to approximate reward functions and adopt several different FL protocols in FedIGW,
including FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020), and FedProx
(Li et al., 2020a). This is the first time, to the best of our knowledge, FedAvg is practically integrated
with FCB experiments, let alone other FL protocols. Additional experimental details are discussed
in Appendix G with more results provided, including error bars, performances with varying numbers
of involved agents, and comparisons with FN-UCB (Dai et al., 2023).
The reported Fig. 1 compares the averaged rewards collected by FedIGW using different FL choices
and M = 10 agents with two single-agent designs, where FALCON (Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2022)
can be viewed as the single-agent version of FedIGW and AGR (Cortes, 2018) is an alternative
strong single-agent CB baseline. It can be observed that on both datasets, FedIGW achieves better
performance than the single-agent baselines with more rewards collected by each agent on average,
which validates its effectiveness in leveraging agentsвҖҷ collaborations. Also, it can be observed that
using the more developed SCAFFOLD and FedProx provides improved performance compared with
the basic FedAvg, demonstrating FedIGWвҖҷs capability of harnessing advances in FL protocols.


      Figure 1: Experiments with Bibtex (left) and Delicious (right).   Figure 2: Flexible FL appendages

6     F LEXIBLE E XTENSIONS : S EAMLESS I NTEGRATION OF FL A PPENDAGES
Another notable advantage offered by the flexible FL choices is to bring appealing appendages from
FL studies to directly benefit FCB, as illustrated in Fig. 2. In the following, we discuss how to
leverage techniques of personalization, robustness, and privacy from FL in FedIGW.

6.1    P ERSONALIZED L EARNING

In many cases, each agentвҖҷs true reward function is not globally realizable as in Assumption 3.1, but
instead only locally realizable in her own function class as in the following assumption.
                                                                                  вҲ—
Assumption 6.1 (Local Realizability). For each m вҲҲ [M ], there exists fm            in Fm such that
  вҲ—
fm (xm , am ) = Вөm (xm , am ) for all xm вҲҲ Xm and am вҲҲ Am
Following discussions in Sec. 4.2, we consider that each function f in Fm is parameterized by
a dm -dimensional parameter Пүm вҲҲ Rdm , which is denoted as fПүm . Correspondingly, the true
                  вҲ—                      вҲ—
reward function fm  is parameterized by Пүm  and denoted as fПүm
                                                             вҲ— . To still motivate the collaboration

and motivated by popular personalized FL studies (Hanzely et al., 2021; Agarwal et al., 2020), we
study a middle case where only partial parameters are globally shared among {fПүm    вҲ— : m вҲҲ [M ]}

while other parameters are potentially heterogeneous among agents, which can be formulated via
the following assumption.


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       вҲ—
Assumption 6.2. For all m вҲҲ [M ], the true parameter Пүm  can be decomposed as [Пү Оұ,вҲ— , Пүm
                                                                                        ОІ,вҲ—
                                                                                            ] with
  Оұ,вҲ—     dОұ       ОІ,вҲ—      dОІ          Оұ                      ОІ             Оұ
Пү     вҲҲ R and Пүm вҲҲ R , where d вүӨ minmвҲҲ[M ] dm and dm := dm вҲ’ d . In other words,
                             m

                                                             вҲ—
there are dОұ -dimensional globally shared parameters among {Пүm  : m вҲҲ [M ]}.

A similar setting is studied in Li & Wang (2022a) for linear reward functions and in Agarwal et al.
(2020) for realizable cases with a naive Оө-greedy design for CB. For FedIGW, we can directly adopt
a personalized FL protocol (such as LSGD-PFL in Hanzely et al. (2021)) to solve a standard per-
sonalized FL problem: minПүОұ ,ПүОІ L(f   b Оұ ОІ ; S[M ] ) := P
                                                              mвҲҲ[M ] nm Lm (fПү Оұ ,Пүm
                                                                                   ОІ ; Sm )/n. With
                                                                         b
                                  [M ]
                                         Пү ,Пү [M ]
                   ОІ
outputs Пүb Оұ and Пү
                 b[M  ] , the corresponding M functions {fПү
                                                          b Оұ ,b
                                                               ПүmОІ : m вҲҲ [M ]} (instead of the single


one fb in Sec. 3.2) can be used by the M agents, separately, for their CB interactions following the
IGW algorithm. Concrete results and more details can be found in Appendix E.1.
Remark 6.3 (A Linear Reward Function Class). Similar to Remark 4.5, we also consider linear
                                                    вҲ—           вҲ—               вҲ—
reward functions for the personalized setting with fm (В·) := вҹЁПүm         and {Пүm
                                                                  , П•(В·)вҹ©p        : m вҲҲ [M ]} sat-
                                                                                           вҲҡ
isfying Assumption 6.2. Then, FedIGW still can achieve a regret of OМғ( dM  Лң KT ) with OМғ( M T )
rounds of communications, where dЛң := dОұ +             dОІ ; see more details in Appendix E.1.1.
                                              P
                                                     mвҲҲ[M ]   m


6.2   ROBUSTNESS , P RIVACY, AND B EYOND

Another important direction in FCB studies is to improve robustness against malicious attacks and
provide privacy guarantees for local agents. A few progresses have been achieved in attaining these
desirable attributes for FCB but they typically require substantial modifications to their base FCB
designs, such as robustness in Demirel et al. (2022); Jadbabaie et al. (2022); Mitra et al. (2022) and
privacy guarantees in Dubey & Pentland (2020); Zhou & Chowdhury (2023); Li & Song (2022).
With FedIGW, it is more convenient to achieve these attributes as suitable techniques from FL studies
can be seamlessly applied. Especially, robustness and privacy protection have been extensively
studied for FL in Yin et al. (2018); Pillutla et al. (2022); Fu et al. (2019) and Wei et al. (2020); Yin
et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2022), respectively, among other works. As long as such FL protocols can
provide an estimated function (which is the canonical goal of FL), they can be adopted in FedIGW
to achieve additional robustness and privacy guarantees in FCB; see more details in Appendix E.2.
Other Possibilities. There have been many studies on fairness guarantees (Mohri et al., 2019;
Du et al., 2021), client selections (Balakrishnan et al., 2022; Fraboni et al., 2021), and practical
communication designs (Chen et al., 2021; Wei & Shen, 2022; Zheng et al., 2020) in FL among
many other directions, which are all conceivably applicable in FedIGW. In addition, a recent work
(Marfoq et al., 2023) studies FL with data streams, i.e., data comes sequentially instead of being
static, which is a suitable design for FCB as CB essentially provides data streams. If similar ideas
can be leveraged in FCB, the two components of CB and FL can truly be parallel.

7     C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we studied the problem of federated contextual bandits (FCB). From the perspective of
the summarized principle: вҖңFCB = FL + CBвҖқ, we recognized that existing FCB designs are largely
disconnected from canonical FL studies in their adopted FL protocols, which hinders the integration
of crucial FL advancements. To bridge this gap, we introduced a novel design, FedIGW, capable of
accommodating a wide range of FL protocols, provided they address a standard FL problem. A com-
prehensive theoretical performance guarantee was provided for FedIGW, highlighting its efficiency
and versatility. Notably, we demonstrated the modularized incorporation of convergence analysis
from FL by employing examples of the renowned FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) and SCAFFOLD
(Karimireddy et al., 2020). Empirical validations on real-world datasets further underscored its
practicality and flexibility. Moreover, we explored how advancements in FL can seamlessly be-
stow additional desirable attributes upon FedIGW. Specifically, we delved into the incorporation of
personalization, robustness, and privacy, presenting intriguing opportunities for future research.
It would be valuable to pursue further exploration of alternative CB algorithms within FCB, e.g.,
Xu & Zeevi (2020); Foster et al. (2020); Wei & Luo (2021), and investigate whether the FedIGW
design can be extended to more general federated RL (Dubey & Pentland, 2021; Min et al., 2023).


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, DaМҒvid PaМҒl, and Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.
Naoki Abe and Philip M Long. Associative reinforcement learning using linear probabilistic con-
  cepts. In ICML, pp. 3вҖ“11. Citeseer, 1999.
Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav DudДұМҒk, Satyen Kale, John Langford, and Robert Schapire. Contextual ban-
  dit learning with predictable rewards. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 19вҖ“26. PMLR,
  2012.
Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Chen-Yu Wei. Federated residual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.12880, 2020.
Alekh Agarwal, H Brendan McMahan, and Zheng Xu. An empirical evaluation of federated con-
  textual bandit algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10218, 2023.
Sanae Amani, Tor Lattimore, AndraМҒs GyoМҲrgy, and Lin F Yang. Distributed contextual linear bandits
  with minimax optimal communication cost. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13170, 2022.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E Schapire. The nonstochastic multi-
  armed bandit problem. SIAM journal on computing, 32(1):48вҖ“77, 2002.
Ravikumar Balakrishnan, Tian Li, Tianyi Zhou, Nageen Himayat, Virginia Smith, and Jeff Bilmes.
  Diverse client selection for federated learning via submodular maximization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Peter Bartlett, Olivier Bousquet, and Shahar Mendelson. Local rademacher complexities. Annals of
  Statistics, 33(4):1497вҖ“1537, 2005.
Etienne Boursier and Vianney Perchet. Sic-mmab: synchronisation involves communication in
  multiplayer multi-armed bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  12071вҖ“12080, 2019.
Deepayan Chakrabarti, Ravi Kumar, Filip Radlinski, and Eli Upfal. Mortal multi-armed bandits.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008.
Jeffrey Chan, Aldo Pacchiano, Nilesh Tripuraneni, Yun S Song, Peter Bartlett, and Michael I Jordan.
   Parallelizing contextual bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.10590, 2021.
Mingzhe Chen, Deniz GuМҲnduМҲz, Kaibin Huang, Walid Saad, Mehdi Bennis, Aneta Vulgarakis Fel-
 jan, and H Vincent Poor. Distributed learning in wireless networks: Recent progress and future
 challenges. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 39(12):3579вҖ“3605, 2021.
Zhirui Chen, PN Karthik, Vincent YF Tan, and Yeow Meng Chee. Federated best arm identification
  with heterogeneous clients. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07780, 2022.
Chi-Ning Chou, Juspreet Singh Sandhu, Mien Brabeeba Wang, and Tiancheng Yu. A general frame-
  work for analyzing stochastic dynamics in learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.06171,
  2020.
Pedro Cisneros-Velarde, Boxiang Lyu, Sanmi Koyejo, and Mladen Kolar. One policy is enough:
  Parallel exploration with a single policy is near-optimal for reward-free reinforcement learning.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1965вҖ“2001. PMLR, 2023.
David Cortes. Adapting multi-armed bandits policies to contextual bandits scenarios. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1811.04383, 2018.
Zhongxiang Dai, Yao Shu, Arun Verma, Flint Xiaofeng Fan, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Patrick
  Jaillet. Federated neural bandit. The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2023.
Ilker Demirel, Yigit Yildirim, and Cem Tekin. Federated multi-armed bandits under byzantine
   attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04134, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wei Du, Depeng Xu, Xintao Wu, and Hanghang Tong. Fairness-aware agnostic federated learning.
 In Proceedings of the 2021 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM), pp. 181вҖ“189.
 SIAM, 2021.

Abhimanyu Dubey and Alex Pentland. Differentially-private federated linear bandits. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6003вҖ“6014, 2020.

Abhimanyu Dubey and Alex Pentland. Provably efficient cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
  learning with function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.04972, 2021.

Xiaofeng Fan, Yining Ma, Zhongxiang Dai, Wei Jing, Cheston Tan, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low.
  Fault-tolerant federated reinforcement learning with theoretical guarantee. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:1007вҖ“1021, 2021.

Dylan Foster and Alexander Rakhlin. Beyond ucb: Optimal and efficient contextual bandits with
  regression oracles. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3199вҖ“3210. PMLR,
  2020.

Dylan J Foster, Alexander Rakhlin, David Simchi-Levi, and Yunzong Xu. Instance-dependent
  complexity of contextual bandits and reinforcement learning: A disagreement-based perspective.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03104, 2020.

Yann Fraboni, Richard Vidal, Laetitia Kameni, and Marco Lorenzi. Clustered sampling: Low-
  variance and improved representativity for clients selection in federated learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3407вҖ“3416. PMLR, 2021.

Shuhao Fu, Chulin Xie, Bo Li, and Qifeng Chen. Attack-resistant federated learning with residual-
  based reweighting. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11464, 2019.

Avishek Ghosh, Abishek Sankararaman, and Kannan Ramchandran. Model selection for generic
  contextual bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03455, 2021.

Antonious Girgis, Deepesh Data, Suhas Diggavi, Peter Kairouz, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Shuf-
  fled model of differential privacy in federated learning. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2521вҖ“2529. PMLR, 2021.

Yanjun Han, Zhengqing Zhou, Zhengyuan Zhou, Jose Blanchet, Peter W Glynn, and Yinyu
  Ye. Sequential batch learning in finite-action linear contextual bandits. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2004.06321, 2020.

Filip Hanzely, Boxin Zhao, and Mladen Kolar. Personalized federated learning: A unified frame-
   work and universal optimization techniques. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09743, 2021.

Jiafan He, Tianhao Wang, Yifei Min, and Quanquan Gu. A simple and provably efficient algorithm
   for asynchronous federated contextual linear bandits. Advances in neural information processing
   systems, 2022.

Eshcar Hillel, Zohar S Karnin, Tomer Koren, Ronny Lempel, and Oren Somekh. Distributed explo-
  ration in multi-armed bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.

Daniel Hsu, Sham M Kakade, and Tong Zhang. Random design analysis of ridge regression. In
  Conference on learning theory, pp. 9вҖ“1. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2012.

Baihe Huang, Xiaoxiao Li, Zhao Song, and Xin Yang. Fl-ntk: A neural tangent kernel-based frame-
  work for federated learning analysis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  4423вҖ“4434. PMLR, 2021a.

Ruiquan Huang, Weiqiang Wu, Jing Yang, and Cong Shen. Federated linear contextual bandits.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:27057вҖ“27068, 2021b.

Ali Jadbabaie, Haochuan Li, Jian Qian, and Yi Tian. Byzantine-robust federated linear bandits. In
  2022 IEEE 61st Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 5206вҖ“5213. IEEE, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hao Jin, Yang Peng, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. Federated reinforcement
  learning with environment heterogeneity. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 18вҖ“37. PMLR, 2022.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, AureМҒlien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and TrendsВ® in Machine Learning,
  14(1вҖ“2):1вҖ“210, 2021.
Amin Karbasi, Vahab Mirrokni, and Mohammad Shadravan. Parallelizing thompson sampling. Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:10535вҖ“10548, 2021.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5132вҖ“5143. PMLR, 2020.
Ioannis Katakis, Grigorios Tsoumakas, and Ioannis Vlahavas. Multilabel text classification for
  automated tag suggestion. ECML PKDD discovery challenge, 75:2008, 2008.
Jakub KonecМҢnyМҖ, H Brendan McMahan, Daniel Ramage, and Peter RichtaМҒrik. Federated optimization:
  Distributed machine learning for on-device intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02527, 2016.
Sanath Kumar Krishnamurthy, Vitor Hadad, and Susan Athey. Adapting to misspecification in con-
  textual bandits with offline regression oracles. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5805вҖ“5814. PMLR, 2021.
Peter Landgren, Vaibhav Srivastava, and Naomi Ehrich Leonard. On distributed cooperative
  decision-making in multiarmed bandits. In 2016 European Control Conference (ECC), pp. 243вҖ“
  248. IEEE, 2016.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Chuanhao Li and Hongning Wang. Asynchronous upper confidence bound algorithms for federated
  linear bandits. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 6529вҖ“
  6553. PMLR, 2022a.
Chuanhao Li and Hongning Wang. Communication efficient federated learning for generalized
  linear bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022b.
Chuanhao Li, Huazheng Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Hongning Wang. Communication efficient dis-
  tributed learning for kernelized contextual bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022.
Chuanhao Li, Huazheng Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Hongning Wang. Learning kernelized contextual
  bandits in a distributed and asynchronous environment. The Eleventh International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023.
Tan Li and Linqi Song. Privacy-preserving communication-efficient federated multi-armed bandits.
  IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 40(3):773вҖ“787, 2022.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
  methods, and future directions. IEEE signal processing magazine, 37(3):50вҖ“60, 2020a.
Tian Li, Shengyuan Hu, Ahmad Beirami, and Virginia Smith. Ditto: Fair and robust federated
  learning through personalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6357вҖ“
  6368. PMLR, 2021.
Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of
  fedavg on non-iid data. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Jiabin Lin and Shana Moothedath. Federated stochastic bandit learning with unobserved context.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17043, 2023.
Keqin Liu and Qing Zhao. Distributed learning in multi-armed bandit with multiple players. IEEE
  Transactions on Signal Processing, 58(11):5667вҖ“5681, 2010.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ziyao Liu, Jiale Guo, Wenzhuo Yang, Jiani Fan, Kwok-Yan Lam, and Jun Zhao. Privacy-preserving
  aggregation in federated learning: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 2022.
Ekdeep Lubana, Chi Ian Tang, Fahim Kawsar, Robert Dick, and Akhil Mathur. Orchestra: Un-
  supervised federated learning via globally consistent clustering. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 14461вҖ“14484. PMLR, 2022.
Othmane Marfoq, Giovanni Neglia, Laetitia Kameni, and Richard Vidal. Federated learning for data
  streams. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.01542, 2023.
David MartДұМҒnez-Rubio, Varun Kanade, and Patrick Rebeschini. Decentralized cooperative stochastic
  bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273вҖ“1282. PMLR, 2017.
Yifei Min, Jiafan He, Tianhao Wang, and Quanquan Gu. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Asyn-
  chronous communication and linear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06446,
  2023.
Aritra Mitra, Arman Adibi, George J Pappas, and Hamed Hassani. Collaborative linear bandits
  with adversarial agents: Near-optimal regret bounds. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 2022.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning.
 MIT press, 2018.
Mehryar Mohri, Gary Sivek, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Agnostic federated learning. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4615вҖ“4625. PMLR, 2019.
Yurii Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex optimization: A basic course, volume 87. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2003.
Gergely Neu and Julia Olkhovskaya. Efficient and robust algorithms for adversarial linear contextual
  bandits. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3049вҖ“3068. PMLR, 2020.
Krishna Pillutla, Sham M Kakade, and Zaid Harchaoui. Robust aggregation for federated learning.
  IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 70:1142вҖ“1154, 2022.
CleМҒmence ReМҒda, Sattar Vakili, and Emilie Kaufmann. Near-optimal collaborative learning in bandits.
  In NeurIPS 2022-36th Conference on Neural Information Processing System, 2022.
Sashank Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub KonecМҢnyМҖ,
  Sanjiv Kumar, and H Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.00295, 2020.
Sudeep Salgia and Qing Zhao. Distributed linear bandits under communication constraints. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.02212, 2022.
Rajat Sen, Alexander Rakhlin, Lexing Ying, Rahul Kidambi, Dean Foster, Daniel N Hill, and Inder-
  jit S Dhillon. Top-k extreme contextual bandits with arm hierarchy. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 9422вҖ“9433. PMLR, 2021.
Chengshuai Shi and Cong Shen. Federated multi-armed bandits. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 9603вҖ“9611, 2021.
Chengshuai Shi, Cong Shen, and Jing Yang. Federated multi-armed bandits with personalization. In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2917вҖ“2925. PMLR, 2021.
David Simchi-Levi and Yunzong Xu. Bypassing the monster: A faster and simpler optimal algorithm
  for contextual bandits under realizability. Mathematics of Operations Research, 47(3):1904вҖ“
  1931, 2022.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Balazs Szorenyi, RoМҒbert Busa-Fekete, IstvaМҒn Hegedus, RoМҒbert OrmaМҒndi, MaМҒrk Jelasity, and BalaМҒzs
  KeМҒgl. Gossip-based distributed stochastic bandit algorithms. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 19вҖ“27. PMLR, 2013.

Grigorios Tsoumakas, Ioannis Katakis, and Ioannis Vlahavas. Effective and efficient multilabel
  classification in domains with large number of labels. In Proc. ECML/PKDD 2008 Workshop on
  Mining Multidimensional Data (MMDвҖҷ08), volume 21, pp. 53вҖ“59, 2008.

Bram van Berlo, Aaqib Saeed, and Tanir Ozcelebi. Towards federated unsupervised representation
  learning. In Proceedings of the third ACM international workshop on edge systems, analytics and
  networking, pp. 31вҖ“36, 2020.

Yuanhao Wang, Jiachen Hu, Xiaoyu Chen, and Liwei Wang. Distributed bandit learning: Near-
  optimal regret with efficient communication. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.06309, 2019.

Chen-Yu Wei and Haipeng Luo. Non-stationary reinforcement learning without prior knowledge:
  An optimal black-box approach. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4300вҖ“4354. PMLR,
  2021.

Kang Wei, Jun Li, Ming Ding, Chuan Ma, Howard H Yang, Farhad Farokhi, Shi Jin, Tony QS Quek,
  and H Vincent Poor. Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms and performance
  analysis. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 15:3454вҖ“3469, 2020.

Kang Wei, Jun Li, Ming Ding, Chuan Ma, Hang Su, Bo Zhang, and H Vincent Poor. User-level
  privacy-preserving federated learning: Analysis and performance optimization. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Mobile Computing, 21(9):3388вҖ“3401, 2021.

Xizixiang Wei and Cong Shen. Federated learning over noisy channels: Convergence analysis and
  design examples. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, 8(2):1253вҖ“
  1268, 2022.

Ran Xin, Usman A Khan, and Soummya Kar. Variance-reduced decentralized stochastic optimiza-
  tion with accelerated convergence. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 68:6255вҖ“6271,
  2020.

Yunbei Xu and Assaf Zeevi. Upper counterfactual confidence bounds: a new optimism principle for
  contextual bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07876, 2020.

Haishan Ye, Wei Xiong, and Tong Zhang. Pmgt-vr: A decentralized proximal-gradient algorithmic
  framework with variance reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15010, 2020.

Jialin Yi and Milan VojnovicМҒ.        Doubly adversarial federated bandits.         arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2301.09223, 2023.

Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Ramchandran Kannan, and Peter Bartlett. Byzantine-robust distributed
  learning: Towards optimal statistical rates. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5650вҖ“5659. PMLR, 2018.

Xuefei Yin, Yanming Zhu, and Jiankun Hu. A comprehensive survey of privacy-preserving federated
  learning: A taxonomy, review, and future directions. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(6):
  1вҖ“36, 2021.

Fengda Zhang, Kun Kuang, Zhaoyang You, Tao Shen, Jun Xiao, Yin Zhang, Chao Wu, Yuet-
  ing Zhuang, and Xiaolin Li. Federated unsupervised representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.08982, 2020.

Tong Zhang. Mathematical Analysis of Machine Learning Algorithms. Cambridge University Press,
  2023.

Sihui Zheng, Cong Shen, and Xiang Chen. Design and analysis of uplink and downlink commu-
  nications for federated learning. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 39(7):
  2150вҖ“2167, 2020.

                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dongruo Zhou, Lihong Li, and Quanquan Gu. Neural contextual bandits with ucb-based exploration.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11492вҖ“11502. PMLR, 2020.
Xingyu Zhou and Sayak Ray Chowdhury. On differentially private federated linear contextual ban-
  dits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13945, 2023.
Banghua Zhu, Lun Wang, Qi Pang, Shuai Wang, Jiantao Jiao, Dawn Song, and Michael I Jordan.
  Byzantine-robust federated learning with optimal statistical rates. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3151вҖ“3178. PMLR, 2023.
Yinglun Zhu, Dylan J Foster, John Langford, and Paul Mineiro. Contextual bandits with large action
  spaces: Made practical. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 27428вҖ“27453.
  PMLR, 2022.
Zhaowei Zhu, Jingxuan Zhu, Ji Liu, and Yang Liu. Federated bandit: A gossiping approach. In
  Abstract Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGMETRICS/International Conference on Measurement
  and Modeling of Computer Systems, pp. 3вҖ“4, 2021.
Weiming Zhuang, Yonggang Wen, and Shuai Zhang. Divergence-aware federated self-supervised
 learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.04385, 2022.
Lukas Zierahn, Dirk van der Hoeven, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Gergely Neu. Nonstochastic contex-
  tual combinatorial bandits. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 8771вҖ“8813. PMLR, 2023.


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSIONS

A.1   S OCIETAL I MPACTS

This work focuses on providing a new design for federated contextual bandits (FCB), which estab-
lishes a close relationship between FCB and FL. We do not foresee major negative societal impacts
as FCB is a well-established research domain and this work largely investigates its theoretical as-
pects. Moreover, as discussed in Section 6.2, FedIGW can conveniently incorporate appendages
from FL studies to obtain appealing properties of privacy, robustness, fairness, and beyond, which
we believe can contribute to a positive societal impact.

A.2   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORKS

While this work proposes a novel, broadly applicable FCB design, i.e., FedIGW, there are still many
interesting directions that are worth further exploring.
вҖў Paralleling CB and FL. As mentioned in Section 2.2, the current FL studies largely focus on
learning from batched and static datasets. To accommodate such protocols, FCB designs typically
follow a periodically alternating scheme as shown in Fig. 3(a), which is thus the focus of this work.
While such alternating designs are capable of achieving statistical and communication efficiency,
there is still room for improvement: (1) the CB interactions need to wait for the completeness of a full
FL process, which may be slow when computation resources are limited and communication delays
are large; (2) it is desirable to use the CB data in a more timely fashion instead of accumulating to
the end of an epoch.
As one variant of periodically alternating, we can have FedIGW interleave CB and FL as shown
in Fig. 3(b). This approach provides some buffer to perform FL without agents waiting for its
completeness. Especially, in epoch l, on one hand, the agents perform FL with datasets from epoch
l вҲ’ 1; on the other hand, they perform CB interactions following IGW with an estimated function
fblвҲ’2 learned during epoch l вҲ’ 1 via datasets from epoch l вҲ’ 2. In other words, there will be one
epoch delay compared with the basic form of FedIGW, while this delay is used for the FL process.
Furthermore, a better approach is to have FL and CB fully paralleled as shown in Fig. 3(c). Then,
neither of them needs to wait for the other part, while CB data can be processed more timely. As
mentioned in Section 6.2, we believe that the framework of FL with data streams proposed in a recent
work of Marfoq et al. (2023) could be a suitable tool, as the sequential CB interactions essentially
provide data steams. We believe this direction is not only worth further exploring in FCB but perhaps
more importantly, calls for more investigation in FL with data streams, where FCB can also serve as
an important motivation application.


            (a) Periodically Alternating                              (b) Interleaving


                                           (c) Fully Paralleling

                       Figure 3: Different Styles of Connecting FL and CB in FCB.

                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


вҖў Incorporating other FL advances. Given the flexible FL choice in FedIGW, although this work
has provided detailed discussions on incorporating many aspects of FL advancements (including
canonical algorithmic designs, convergence analysis, and useful appendages), there are still many
directions worth further exploration. For example, as mentioned in Section 2.1, this work and most
FCB investigations are focused on collaborating through a central server, while the case of commu-
nicating via a connected graph is less explored, where certain consensus errors commonly appear
(Xin et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2020). It is worth noting that the design and analysis framework of
FedIGW are both applicable in the later setting. Especially, the consensus error can be modeled as
one part of the optimization error in Lemma 4.3. This further validates the value of the proposed
FedIGW design and the general analysis framework while further specifications are left for future
works.
Also, it would be great to leverage extra tools to save computations in the adopted FL protocol.
Using local updates as in Chou et al. (2020) is one promising direction. These approaches are all
feasible in FedIGW as long as the agents can obtain a learned reward function to perform IGW
interactions. Their specific impacts can be captured via the established analysis framework through
their own optimization errors.
вҖў Leveraging other CB designs. With previous FCB studies largely focused on the CB component,
this work is motivated to incorporate more advances from FL. Thus, we propose the FedIGW design
which can leverage canonical protocols, convergence analyses, and flexible appendages from FL.
However, we also note that there are still many CB algorithms that remain under-explored in FCB,
where UCB-based designs are dominating. For example, the simple greedy algorithm is shown to be
efficient when the context generation contains certain exploration capabilities in (Han et al., 2020).
Moreover, varying attempts have been made in Xu & Zeevi (2020); Foster & Rakhlin (2020); Foster
et al. (2020); Zhu et al. (2022) to design generally applicable CB algorithms with tight performance
guarantees, e.g., handling infinite arms. It would be interesting to investigate how to bring these de-
signs to the federated setting and whether such connections provide new opportunities and insights.
вҖў Complex environments. This work is focused on a stationary environment with stochastic re-
wards, which is well motivated by practical applications and commonly adopted in FCB studies. To
further broaden the applicability of FCB, we believe that it is also important to study adversarial
or non-stationary environments. Many advances have been made in standard single-agent bandits,
e.g., Auer et al. (2002); Neu & Olkhovskaya (2020); Zierahn et al. (2023); Wei & Luo (2021), and a
recent work (Yi & VojnovicМҒ, 2023) investigates the federated adversarial environment in the tabular
setting. The summarized principle of вҖңFCB = FL + CBвҖқ is conceivably still applicable, although
further investigations are required to provide concrete designs and analyses.
вҖў Extension to RL. It would also be meaningful to extend the current study of FCB to federated
reinforcement learning (RL) as a further step in understanding the combination of FL and sequential
decision-making. Some results have been reported in Dubey & Pentland (2021); Min et al. (2023);
Jin et al. (2022); Fan et al. (2021); Cisneros-Velarde et al. (2023). We hope this work can serve as a
starting point for more principled and generally applicable studies in federated RL.


B    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS

The studies on federated multi-armed bandits (FMAB) and federated contextual bandits (FCB) can
be viewed as a version of the general multi-agent bandits (Liu & Zhao, 2010; Boursier & Perchet,
2019) and parallelizing bandits (Chan et al., 2021; Karbasi et al., 2021) that is more suitable for
modern applications. We provide a more detailed review in the following.
вҖў Tabular. There have been many studies on cooperative designs in multi-armed bandits (i.e., the
tabular setting), e.g., Hillel et al. (2013); Szorenyi et al. (2013); Landgren et al. (2016); MartДұМҒnez-
Rubio et al. (2019), focusing on different learning targets and different communication protocols
(e.g., through a communication graph or with some randomly selected peers). Notably, in Wang et al.
(2019), communication-efficient designs are proposed via periodically aggregating local estimates
and performing arm elimination globally. We here also discuss another line of works on FMAB
(Shi & Shen, 2021; Shi et al., 2021; ReМҒda et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022). In their
considered setting, the global rewards are (weighted) averages of local observations; however the
former is not directly observable. With maximizing global rewards as the learning target, the agents


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


need to collaboratively perform explorations and aggregate local information. Despite the model
differences, the design principle of вҖңFCB = FL + CBвҖқ still characterizes this setting. Especially,
Shi & Shen (2021); Shi et al. (2021); ReМҒda et al. (2022); Zhu et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2022) all
commonly employ UCB-based exploration designs while the adopted FL protocol is to average local
sample means as global ones and to construct global confidence bounds.
вҖў Linear. The most commonly studied FCB setting is federated linear bandits. There have been
many investigations in this direction. Especially, different environments have been tackled in differ-
ent works, e.g., the finite-armed fixed-context setting (Wang et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2021b), the
finite-armed stochastic-context setting (Amani et al., 2022), the infinite-armed fixed-context setting
(Salgia & Zhao, 2022), and the infinite-armed adversarial-context setting (Wang et al., 2019; Dubey
& Pentland, 2020; Li & Wang, 2022a; He et al., 2022). Furthermore, many other settings, e.g.,
unobserved context (Lin & Moothedath, 2023), and additional properties, e.g., privacy (Dubey &
Pentland, 2020; Zhou & Chowdhury, 2023), robustness (Jadbabaie et al., 2022), have been investi-
gated. As summarized in the main paper, these works mainly select arm elimination (AE) (Lattimore
& SzepesvaМҒri, 2020) or LinUCB (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) as their CB designs, which require
both model estimates and confidence bounds. Thus, in their designed FL protocols, compressed
local data (e.g., aggregated local rewards and covariance matrices) are often directly shared to solve
a global ridge regression and to construct tighter confidence bounds. Compared with these studies,
FedIGW can effectively solve the finite-armed stochastic-context setting without sharing any raw or
compressed local data but only communicate processed model parameters (e.g., gradients). More
detailed discussions and concrete results are provided in Appendix D.3.
A detailed comparison of the obtained regrets and the amounts of communicated real numbers is
provided in Table 2. It can be observed that adapting FedIGW to the specific case of linear bandits
does not provide the same near-optimal performance as in previous works. This is not a surprise
as during our pursuit of generality and extendability, intuitively, certain theoretical optimalities may
be inevitably sacrificed compared with previous tailored designs. Especially, the previous works
are specifically optimized for the linear class of reward functions while FedIGW can handle any
realizable class of realizable reward functions, which is much more general.

Table 2: A comparison of settings and results of federated linear bandits; note that FedIGW is not specifically
              designed and optimized to handle linear reward functions as previous designs.

        Reference            Arms       Context           Regret
                                                            вҲҡ             # of Numbers Communicated
     Wang et al. (2019)     Infinite     Fixed         OМғ(dвҲҡM T )        O((dM + d log log(d)) log(T ))
      He et al. (2022)      Infinite   Adversarial     OМғ(dвҲҡ MT )              O(d3 M 2 log(M T ))
    Huang et al. (2021b)     Finite      Fixed         OМғ(вҲҡdM T )           O(d2 + dK)M log(T ))
    Amani et al. (2022)вҖ      Finite    Stochastic      OМғ(вҲҡ dM T )            O(dM log log(M T ))
        FedIGWвҖЎ              Finite    Stochastic     OМғ(вҲҡdKM T )               O(d2 M log(T
                                                                                          вҲҡ ))
        FedIGWвҷӯ              Finite    Stochastic     OМғ( dKM T )              O(d log(d) M 3 T )
                   вҖ : assuming a homogeneous and known context distribution for all agents;
вҖЎ: solving the global ridge regression via directly sharing aggregated local rewards and covariance matrices as
                                             in the other listed works;
               вҷӯ: solving the global ridge regression via distributed accelerated gradient descent;
вҖў Generalized Linear and Kernelized. As extensions of the linear reward functions, Li & Wang
(2022b) considers the generalized-linear class, and Li et al. (2022; 2023) study the kernelized one.
The adopted basic techniques are similar to the aforementioned ones in federated linear bandits,
while efforts are focused on fine-tuning communications (e.g., via NystroМҲm approximation (Li et al.,
2022; 2023)). It is worth noting that Li & Wang (2022b) invokes the distributed accelerated gradient
descent algorithm to solve their considered distributed optimization with a generalized linear func-
tion class, which can be viewed as a preliminary attempt of involving FL or distributed optimization
designs in FCB. However, the motivation there is the lack of a closed-form solution as in the linear
case, while Li & Wang (2022b) additionally needs to share the local covariance matrices to construct
better confidence bounds. This work, instead, formally proposed FedIGW which can rely only on
canonical FL framework and accommodate flexible FL choices.
вҖў Neural. A recent work of Dai et al. (2023) extends the advances on single-agent neural bandits
(Zhou et al., 2020) to the federated setting, where the neural tangent kernel (NTK) analyses are in-
corporated. With NTK to вҖңlinearizeвҖқ the considered over-parameterized neural network, Dai et al.


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(2023) still largely follows the designs in the aforementioned federated linear bandits while some
additional attempts have been made, e.g., an extra one-round averaging of model parameters besides
aggregating NTK. This work, instead, takes a step further to fully leverage FL protocols, which often
perform multiple (instead of one) rounds of model aggregations that are often necessary to guarantee
convergence. Also, the optimization and generalization errors of a FedAvg variant with overparam-
eterized neural networks are provided in Huang et al. (2021a), which is conceivably compatible with
FedIGW for the corresponding analyses. Moreover, as shown by the additional experimental results
in Appendix G.4, FedIGW empirically outperforms FN-UCB (Dai et al., 2023) on different tasks
and is more computationally efficient.

C     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4.1
C.1   N OTATIONS

We first introduce notations that are repeatedly used in the proofs. For the output function from the
adopted FL protocol, we characterize its performance via the following definition of its excess risk,
which is commonly adopted in the analysis of IGW-type CB algorithms (Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2022;
Sen et al., 2021; Ghosh et al., 2021).
Definition C.1. Let p[M ] := {pm : m вҲҲ [M ]} be a set of M arbitrary independent arm selection
distributions. Given an overall dataset S[M ] := {Sm : m вҲҲ [M ]} where each dataset Sm con-
sists of nm training samples of the form (xm , am ; rm (am )) independently and identically drawn
according to (xm , rm ) вҲј Dm , am вҲј pm (В·|xm ), the federated protocol FLroutine(S[M ] ) =
{FLroutinem (Sm ) : m вҲҲ [M ]} returns a predictor fb(В·), and its excess risk is defined as
                           X                                                                         2
                                     nm                                                 вҲ—
E(F; n[M ] ) := ES[M ] ,Оҫ                В· Exm вҲјDmXm
                                                     ,am вҲјpm (В·|xm )    f (xm , am ) вҲ’ f (xm , am )
                                                                        b                                 ,
                             mвҲҲ[M ] n

where n[M ] := {nm : m вҲҲ [M ]} and Оҫ denotes the random source in the potentially stochastic FL
algorithm. We often abbreviate E(F; n[M ] ) as E(n[M ] ) to simplify notations.

This definition measures in expectation (w.r.t. the random data generation and the stochastic FL
process) how far the output of the adopted FL protocol is from the true reward function on the
weighted data distribution of all agents. Note that the excess risk bound E(n[M ] ) would typically
rely on some other parameters in the adopted FL protocol (e.g., the step size and the number of
iterations in gradient-based approaches), which are currently not specified for generality.
Then, let ОҘl denote the sigma-algebra generated by the history up to epoch l, i.e.,
{(xm,tm , am,tm , rm,tm ) : m вҲҲ [M ], tm вҲҲ [tm (П„ l )]}, and the randomness in the adopted FL pro-
tocol up to epoch l, i.e., {Оҫi : i вҲҲ [l]}, where Оҫi denotes the random source in epoch i. Then,
we denote lm (tm ) := min{l вҲҲ N : tm вүӨ tm (П„ l )} as the epoch that agent mвҖҷs tm belongs to.
Also, let ОЁm := AX  m denote the set of deterministic functions from Xm to Am for agent m and
                       m

ОЁ[M ] := Г—mвҲҲ[M ] ОЁm the Cartesian product of {ОЁm : m вҲҲ [M ]}. Furthermore, for any action
selection kernel p[M ] = {pm : m вҲҲ [M ]}, where pm (am |xm ) is the probability of selecting action
am вҲҲ A given context xm , and any policy ПҖ[M ] = {ПҖm : m вҲҲ [M ]} вҲҲ ОЁ, we define

                                                                1
                        Vm (pm , ПҖm ) := Exm вҲјDm
                                               Xm                           ,
                                                      pm (ПҖm (xm )|xm )
                                                       вҲ—
                           Rm (ПҖm ) := Exm вҲјDm Xm [f (xm , ПҖm (xm ))] ,
                                                   h                           i
                   Rb l (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) := E      Xm    fbl (xm , ПҖm (xm )) | ОҘlвҲ’1 ,
                      m                   xm вҲјDm
                                             вҲ—
                          Regm (ПҖm ) := Rm (ПҖm ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm ),
                      l
                 d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) := R
                 Reg               b lm,t (b
                                           ПҖml
                                               | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ R
                                                          b lm,t (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ).
                    m                    m                      m

        l
where ПҖ
      bm  (xm ) := arg maxam вҲҲAm fbl (xm , am ) for a given fbl (determined by ОҘlвҲ’1 ).
The following proofs are largely inspired by the single-agent contextual bandits work (Simchi-Levi
& Xu, 2022), while major changes have been made to accommodate the more complex federated
system considered in this work.


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2    P ROOFS OF T HEOREM 4.1

First, the following lemma characterizes the relation between the excess errors and the selected
learning rates.
Lemma C.2. For all l > 1, it holds that
        пЈ®                                                                                                пЈ№
                        lвҲ’1

          X           Em                                                                           2
EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°         P            lвҲ’1
                                   В· Exm вҲјDmXm
                                               ,am вҲјplвҲ’1
                                                     m (В·|xm )
                                                                  fbl (xm , am ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xm , am ) | ОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ»
         mвҲҲ[M ]     вҖІ      E
                   m вҲҲ[M ] m   вҖІ


                                  lвҲ’1
                    P
            lвҲ’1        mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km
 вүӨ E(F; E[M ] ) = P              lвҲ’1 l 2
                                          .
                       mвҲҲ[M ] Em (Оі )


Proof. The first inequality is from the Assumption C.1, while the second is based on the choice of
Оі l in Theorem 4.1, i.e.,
                                      v
                                      u     P          lвҲ’1
                                              mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km
                                      u
                                  l
                                 Оі = Pt
                                                   lвҲ’1       lвҲ’1
                                                                  ,
                                           mвҲҲ[M ] Em E(F; E[M ] )

which leads to the lemma.

Then, the following lemma bounds the estimated rewards Rb lm and true rewards Rm .
Lemma C.3. For any epoch l > 1, for any ПҖm вҲҲ ОЁm , conditioned on ОҘlвҲ’1 , it holds that
                                            q                         q
                 l      lвҲ’1                         lвҲ’1          lвҲ’1     lвҲ’1
              Rm (ПҖm | ОҘ ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm ) вүӨ Vm (pm , ПҖm | ОҘ ) Em
               b                                                             (ОҘlвҲ’1 ),

                                                                                             2
       lвҲ’1                                                                    вҲ—
where Em   (ОҘlвҲ’1 ) := Exm вҲјDm
                            Xm
                               ,alвҲ’1 lвҲ’1
                                 m вҲјpm (В·|xm )
                                                            fbl (xm , alвҲ’1            lвҲ’1
                                                                       m ) вҲ’ f (xm , am )        | ОҘlвҲ’1 .


Proof. For simplicity, we abbreviate Exm вҲјDm
                                           Xm
                                              ,alвҲ’1 lвҲ’1
                                                m вҲјpm (В·|xm )
                                                              [В·] as Exm ,alвҲ’1
                                                                           m
                                                                               [В·], and for any policy
ПҖm вҲҲ ОЁm , and any epoch l > 1, we define
                          вҲҶlm (ПҖm (xm )) := fbl (xm , ПҖm (xm )) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xm , ПҖm (xm ))
which indicates that
                   b lm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm ) = Ex вҲҶlm (ПҖm (xm ) | ОҘlвҲ’1 ,

                   R                                m

and
                  h                2         i     h                                 2       i
      Exm ,alвҲ’1
            m
                      вҲҶlm (alвҲ’1
                            m )        | ОҘlвҲ’1 вүҘ Exm plвҲ’1               l
                                                     m (ПҖm (xm )|xm ) вҲҶm (ПҖm (xm ))    | ОҘlвҲ’1 .

Furthermore, conditioned on ОҘlвҲ’1 , we can obtain that
                                           h                          i
                                                      lвҲ’1 2
       Vm (plвҲ’1          lвҲ’1                    l                 lвҲ’1

             m , ПҖm | ОҘ      ) В· Exm ,alвҲ’1
                                       m
                                             вҲҶ  m  (a m   )   | ОҘ

                           1               lвҲ’1
                                                             h               2        i
        = Exm lвҲ’1                       |ОҘ        Exm ,amlвҲ’1    вҲҶlm (alвҲ’1
                                                                        m )    | ОҘlвҲ’1
                 pm (ПҖm (xm )|xm )
                 "s                                                            #!2
                                 1                  h
                                                              lвҲ’1
                                                                    2 i    lвҲ’1
        вүҘ Exm                               EalвҲ’1      вҲҶlm (am )        |ОҘ
                      plвҲ’1
                       m (ПҖm (xm )|xm )
                                               m

                 "s                                                                         #!2
                                 1           lвҲ’1                                     2  lвҲ’1
        вүҘ Exm                               pm (ПҖm (xm )|xm ) (вҲҶlm (ПҖm (xm ))) | ОҘ
                      plвҲ’1
                       m (ПҖm (xm )|xm )
                                              2
        = Exm вҲҶlm (ПҖm (xm )) | ОҘlвҲ’1


                                                 2
            b lm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm ) .
          вүҘ R


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As a result, it holds that
                                                         q                         q
                  b lm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm ) вүӨ
                  R                                            Vm (plвҲ’1
                                                                    m , ПҖm | ОҘ
                                                                              lвҲ’1 ) E lвҲ’1 (ОҘlвҲ’1 ),
                                                                                     m

where the last step we use the definition that
                                                                         2
                 lвҲ’1  lвҲ’1                    l       lвҲ’1    вҲ—       lвҲ’1     lвҲ’1
               Em (ОҘ ) = Exm ,alвҲ’1   m
                                            f (xm , am ) вҲ’ f (xm , am ) | ОҘ
                                            b                                     .

This concludes the proof.

Furthermore, the following lemma provides a characterization of the relation between the virtual
         l
     d and the true loss Regl .
loss Reg    m                           m
Lemma C.4. For any epochs l вүҘ 1, for any policies ПҖ[M ] вҲҲ ОЁ[M ] , it holds that
                                                            l
            X                          X                h                    i
                   l                          l           d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) + О· l ,
                 Em  Regm (ПҖm ) вүӨ 2         Em  EОҘlвҲ’1 Reg   m
                   mвҲҲ[M ]                        mвҲҲ[M ]
                                             l
                    X                   h               i    X
                             l            d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вүӨ 2    l
                            Em EОҘlвҲ’1     Reg m                 Em Regm (ПҖm ) + О· l ,
                   mвҲҲ[M ]                                             mвҲҲ[M ]

with
                                                      9c2 X
                                             О· l :=          l
                                                            Em Km .
                                                       Оіl
                                                          mвҲҲ[M ]


Proof. First, we note that for l = 1, it holds that
                   X                           X                   X
                            1                        1
                         Em   Regm (ПҖm ) вүӨ          Em вүӨ О· 1 = 9c2    1
                                                                     Em Km ;
                         mвҲҲ[M ]                       mвҲҲ[M ]                     mвҲҲ[M ]

                                   1 dl
                          X                                            X
                                  Em Regm (ПҖm ) = 0 вүӨ О· 1 = 9c2                 1
                                                                               Em Km ,
                         mвҲҲ[M ]                                       mвҲҲ[M ]

which means the lemma holds for the first epoch.
We then perform an inductive proof and start by assuming that for epoch l вҲ’ 1 and any policies
ПҖm вҲҲ ОЁm , it holds that
                                                            lвҲ’1
            X                          X               h                   i
                    lвҲ’1                       lвҲ’1        d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’2 ) + О· lвҲ’1
                 Em     Regm (ПҖm ) вүӨ 2      Em    EОҘlвҲ’2 Reg m
                mвҲҲ[M ]                          mвҲҲ[M ]
                                           lвҲ’1
                 X                    h               i    X
                          lвҲ’1           d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’2 ) вүӨ 2    lвҲ’1
                         Em   EОҘlвҲ’2    Reg m                 Em   Regm (ПҖm ) + О· lвҲ’1 .
                mвҲҲ[M ]                                                mвҲҲ[M ]


Then, it can be observed that
                            l
                  d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )
    Regm (ПҖm ) вҲ’ Regm

            вҲ—                  b lm (b l
    = Rm (ПҖm ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm ) вҲ’ R        ПҖm  | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ R
                                                    b lm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )

            вҲ—                  b lm (ПҖmвҲ—
    вүӨ Rm (ПҖm   ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm ) вҲ’ R          | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ R
                                                    b lm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )
              вҲ—           вҲ—
                   b lm (ПҖm
       = Rm (ПҖm )вҲ’R          | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) + R
                                        b lm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm )
       (a)
           q                     q                 q                      q
       вүӨ Vm (plвҲ’1     вҲ—
                m , ПҖm | ОҘ
                            lвҲ’1 ) E lвҲ’1 (ОҘlвҲ’1 ) +
                                     m               Vm (plвҲ’1
                                                           m , ПҖm | ОҘ
                                                                     lвҲ’1 ) E lвҲ’1 (ОҘlвҲ’1 )
                                                                            m
                     вҲ—
           Vm (plвҲ’1
                m , ПҖm | ОҘ
                           lвҲ’1
                               ) Vm (plвҲ’1
                                      m , ПҖm | ОҘ
                                                 lвҲ’1
                                                     )
       вүӨ               l
                                +            l
                                                       + 4cОі l Em
                                                                lвҲ’1
                                                                    (ОҘlвҲ’1 )
                   8cОі                   8cОі
                                lвҲ’1                                     lвҲ’1
                     lвҲ’1 d       вҲ—
       (b) K
               m+Оі        Regm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) Km + Оі lвҲ’1 Reg
                                                       d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )
       вүӨ                                   +              m
                                                                      + 4cОі l Em
                                                                               lвҲ’1
                                                                                   (ОҘlвҲ’1 ),
                           8cОі l                        8cОі l

                                                           21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where inequality (a) is from Lemma C.3 and inequality (b) is from Lemma C.10.
Then, summing over all M agents, we can obtain that
      пЈ®                                              пЈ№
                                    l
         X
               l                 d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) пЈ»
EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°      Em    Regm (ПҖm ) вҲ’ Reg m
            mвҲҲ[M ]
                    l
       P
           mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km   Оі lвҲ’1                             lвҲ’1 вҲ—
                                        X               h                 i
                                                 l
вүӨ                       +                       Em        d (ПҖm
                                                   EОҘlвҲ’1 Regm     | ОҘlвҲ’1 )
              4cОі l       8cОі l
                                       mвҲҲ[M ]

     Оі lвҲ’1 X         l
                             h    lвҲ’1           lвҲ’1
                                                     i          X
                                                       + 4cОі l          l
                                                                                 lвҲ’1 lвҲ’1
   +     l
                   E   E
                     m ОҘ lвҲ’1   Reg
                               d
                                  m   (ПҖ m  | ОҘ     )                 Em  EОҘlвҲ’1 Em  (ОҘ )
     8cОі
            mвҲҲ[M ]                                             mвҲҲ[M ]
                 l
    P
      mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km       cОі lвҲ’1 X
(d)                                                   h    lвҲ’1 вҲ—
                                                                             i
                                          lвҲ’1                           lвҲ’1
вүӨ                      +               E  m   E ОҘ lвҲ’1   Reg
                                                        d
                                                           m   (ПҖ m | ОҘ     )
           4cОі l          8cОі l
                                         mвҲҲ[M ]
            lвҲ’1
     cОі             X
                      lвҲ’1           lвҲ’1
                                        h             i
                                 d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) + 4cОі l
                                                                 X
                                                                        l
                                                                                 lвҲ’1 lвҲ’1
     +              E m   EОҘ lвҲ’1 Reg
                                    m                                  Em EОҘlвҲ’1 Em  (ОҘ )
      8cОі l
             mвҲҲ[M ]                                             mвҲҲ[M ]
                 l
    P
      mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km        cОі lвҲ’1 X                          cОі lвҲ’1 lвҲ’1
(e)
                                          lвҲ’1
вүӨ                      +                Em    Regm (ПҖm  ) +        В·О·
           4cОі l           4cОі l                             4cОі l
                                 mвҲҲ[M ]
            X
   + 4cОі l          l
                               lвҲ’1 lвҲ’1
                   Em EОҘlвҲ’1 Em    (ОҘ )
              mвҲҲ[M ]
                    l
                                                                  9c2             l
                                                                                         4c2                l
       P                                                                P                        P
           mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km                                                   mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km              mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km
(f )                      1           X
                                               l
 вүӨ                      +                     Em Regm (ПҖm ) +                          +                         ,
              4cОі l       4                                                4Оі l                       Оіl
                                     mвҲҲ[M ]
                                                                        l    lвҲ’1
where inequality (d) is from the definition c := maxmвҲҲ[M ],lвҲҲ[2,l(T )] Em /Em    . Inequality (e) is
from the induction assumption that
                              lвҲ’1 вҲ—                                        lвҲ’1 вҲ—
        X                 h                   i   X                   h                    i
               lвҲ’1
             Em    EОҘlвҲ’1 Regd (ПҖm
                              m       | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) =      EmlвҲ’1
                                                             EОҘlвҲ’2 Reg  d (ПҖm
                                                                           m       | ОҘlвҲ’2 )
           mвҲҲ[M ]                                                mвҲҲ[M ]
                                                                   X
                                                                             lвҲ’1        вҲ—
                                                            вүӨ2              Em   Regm (ПҖm ) + О· lвҲ’1 = О· lвҲ’1 ,
                                                                  mвҲҲ[M ]
                                        lвҲ’1                                             lвҲ’1
            X                    h                      i         X                 h               i
                     lвҲ’1             d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )                        lвҲ’1        d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’2 )
                    Em   EОҘlвҲ’1       Regm                   =             Em   EОҘlвҲ’2 Regm
           mвҲҲ[M ]                                                mвҲҲ[M ]
                                                                   X
                                                                             lвҲ’1
                                                            вүӨ2              Em   Regm (ПҖm ) + О· lвҲ’1 .
                                                                  mвҲҲ[M ]
                                                                          l     lвҲ’1
Inequality (f) is based on the definition c := minmвҲҲ[M ],lвҲҲ[2,l(T )] Em      /Em    , c := c/c and О· l :=
9c2 mвҲҲ[M ] Em   l
                  Km /Оі l , also the assumption that Оі l вүҘ Оі lвҲ’1 and Lemma C.2, which indicates that
    P
                              пЈ®                          пЈ№ P
                                                                            lвҲ’1
                                                                 mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km
                                 X
                                         lвҲ’1 lвҲ’1
                      EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°          Em   Em (ОҘlвҲ’1 )пЈ» вүӨ                            .
                                                                     (Оі l )2
                                      mвҲҲ[M ]

Thus, we can obtain that
                                                                             l
                                                                   P
      3 X                                           l               mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km
                                X              h               i
                l                      l                   lвҲ’1
               Em Regm (ПҖm ) вүӨ        Em EОҘlвҲ’1 Regm (ПҖm | ОҘ ) +
                                                 d
      4                                                                4cОі l
        mвҲҲ[M ]                 mвҲҲ[M ]

                               25c2 mвҲҲ[M ] Em l
                                   P
                                                 Km
                             +              l
                                         4Оі
                                                                             El K
                                                                    P
         X
                l              4  X
                                          l
                                                 h    l
                                                   d (ПҖm | ОҘ ) + mвҲҲ[M ] m m
                                                             lвҲ’1
                                                                 i
    вҮ’          Em Regm (ПҖm ) вүӨ         Em EОҘlвҲ’1 Reg   m
                               3                                         3cОі l
            mвҲҲ[M ]                             mвҲҲ[M ]


                                                            22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       25c2           l
                                              P
                                              mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km
                                   +
                                               4Оі l
                                                              l
                                         X                h               i
                                                   l        d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) + О· l
                                   вүӨ2             Em EОҘlвҲ’1 Regm
                                        mвҲҲ[M ]


Also, it similarly holds that
         l
    d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ Reg (ПҖm )
    Regm                       m
         l                                              вҲ—
    = Rm (b
       b    ПҖm | ОҘ ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ (Rm (ПҖm
              l     lвҲ’1     b l
                                                          ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm ))
         l    l     lвҲ’1       l          lвҲ’1            l

    вүӨ Rm (b
       b    ПҖm | ОҘ ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm | ОҘ ) вҲ’ Rm (b
                            b                        ПҖm ) вҲ’ Rm (ПҖm )
    =R b l (b l     lвҲ’1           l                  b l (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )
         m ПҖm | ОҘ       ) вҲ’ Rm (bПҖm ) + Rm (ПҖm ) вҲ’ R   m
      q                          q                 q                         q
                lвҲ’1   l | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) E  lвҲ’1    lвҲ’1 ) +         lвҲ’1          lвҲ’1 ) E lвҲ’1 (ОҘlвҲ’1 )
    вүӨ Vm (pm , ПҖ    bm              m   (ОҘ          V m m(p    , ПҖm | ОҘ        m
                            lвҲ’1                                  lвҲ’1
         Km + Оі lвҲ’1 Reg
                    d (b   l
                        m ПҖm | ОҘ
                                lвҲ’1
                                    ) Km + Оі lвҲ’1 Reg
                                                 d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )
    вүӨ                    l
                                     +              m
                                                                + 4cОі l Em
                                                                         lвҲ’1
                                                                             (ОҘlвҲ’1 ).
                     8cОі                          8cОі l

Then, summing over M agents, we can obtain that
          пЈ®                                         пЈ№
                          l
            X
                   l   d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ Reg (ПҖm ) пЈ»
    EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°      Em    Regm                     m
               mвҲҲ[M ]
                      l
         P
             mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km   cОі lвҲ’1                              lвҲ’1 l
                                          X                 h                 i
                                                   lвҲ’1                   lвҲ’1
     вүӨ                    +                       Em            m ПҖm | ОҘ
                                                              d (b
                                                       EОҘlвҲ’1 Reg             )
                4cОі l        8cОі l
                                         mвҲҲ[M ]
             lвҲ’1
         cОі         X
                            lвҲ’1
                                     h    lвҲ’1
                                                     i
                                       d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) + 4cОі l
                                                              X
                                                                 l
                                                                          lвҲ’1 lвҲ’1
     +                     Em   EОҘlвҲ’1 Reg m                     Em EОҘlвҲ’1 Em  (ОҘ )
          8cОі l
                mвҲҲ[M ]                                                 mвҲҲ[M ]
                    l
         P
            mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km          cОі lвҲ’1 X  lвҲ’1               l
                                                                | ОҘlвҲ’1 )

     вүӨ                        +            Em   EОҘlвҲ’1 Regm (b
                                                            ПҖm
                   4cОі l           4cОі l
                                         mвҲҲ[M ]
             lвҲ’1
         cОі      X
                          lвҲ’1                cОі lвҲ’1 lвҲ’1          X
                                                        + 4cОі l         l
                                                                                 lвҲ’1 lвҲ’1
     +        l
                        Em    Reg m (ПҖ m ) +      l
                                                    В·О·                 Em EОҘlвҲ’1 Em  (ОҘ )
          4cОі                                 4cОі
                mвҲҲ[M ]                                          mвҲҲ[M ]
                      l
          P
            mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km        Оі lвҲ’1 l Оі lвҲ’1 X
     (g)
                                                         l
     вүӨ                        +        В·О· +             Em Regm (ПҖm )
                4cОі l            4Оі l          4Оі l
                                                      mвҲҲ[M ]
             lвҲ’1
       cОі                         X
              В· О· lвҲ’1 + 4cОі l         l
                                                    lвҲ’1 lвҲ’1
     +                               Em  EОҘlвҲ’1 Em      (ОҘ )
        4cОі l
                              mвҲҲ[M ]
                    l
                              9c2 mвҲҲ[M ] Em     l
       P                         P
          mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km                             Km    1 X       l
     вүӨ                     +                           +          Em Regm (ПҖm )
              4cОі l                     4Оі l             4
                                                           mвҲҲ[M ]

       9c2 mвҲҲ[M ] Em    l
                                 4c2 mвҲҲ[M ] Em      l
           P                          P
                          Km                          Km
     +                         +                         ,
                 4Оі l                        Оіl
where inequality (g) is from the previous derivation that
                                                         l dl
           X                                     X
                   lвҲ’1         l
                 Em    Regm (bПҖm  | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вүӨ 2c        Em  Regm (b
                                                                 ПҖml
                                                                     | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) + cО· l = cО· l
             mвҲҲ[M ]                                   mвҲҲ[M ]


Thus, it holds that
          X              h    lвҲ’1 l
                                            i 5 X
                 l                     lвҲ’1         l
                Em            m ПҖm | ОҘ     ) вүӨ
                           d (b
                    EОҘlвҲ’1 Reg                     Em Regm (ПҖm )
                                               4
         mвҲҲ[M ]                                             mвҲҲ[M ]


                                                       23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     l
                                                                                           17c2                         l
                                                                        P                                   P
                                                                            mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km                        mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km
                                                                  +                      +
                                                                               4cОі l                             2Оі l
                              lвҲ’1 l
         X               h                  i   X
                  l                    lвҲ’1         l
    вҮ’            Em           m ПҖm | ОҘ
                           d (b
                    EОҘlвҲ’1 Reg              ) вүӨ2   Em Regm (ПҖm ) + О· l .
        mвҲҲ[M ]                                                             mвҲҲ[M ]


With these two parts, the lemma can be obtained by induction.

Furthermore, the following lemma provides a characterization of the per-epoch loss of the federation.
Lemma C.5. For every epoch l > 1, conditioned on ОҘlвҲ’1 , it holds that
               пЈ®                                                пЈ№
                   X
                          l
                              X                                      11c2 X
        EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°         Em         Qlm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )Regm (ПҖm )пЈ» вүӨ l               Em l
                                                                                      Km ,
                                                                       Оі
                    mвҲҲ[M ]              ПҖm вҲҲОЁm                                                         mвҲҲ[M ]

where Ql (В·|ОҘlвҲ’1 ) is a probability measure on ОЁm defined in Lemma C.7

Proof. For any probability measures {QМғlm (В·) : m вҲҲ [M ]}, where QМғlm (В·) is on ОЁM , it holds that
                X          X
                       l
                     Em         QМғlm (ПҖm )Regm (ПҖm )
                 mвҲҲ[M ]             ПҖm вҲҲОЁm
                                    пЈ®                                                                       пЈ№
                  (a)                       X                          X
                  вүӨ 2EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°                           QМғl (ПҖ[M ] )               l d
                                                                                 Em Regm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )пЈ» + О· l
                                        ПҖ[M ] вҲҲОЁ[M ]                  mвҲҲ[M ]
                                    пЈ®                                                                 пЈ№
                                        X                X
                                                 l
                  = 2EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°                    Em              QМғlm (ПҖm )Reg
                                                                          d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )пЈ» + О· l ,
                                                                              m
                                       mвҲҲ[M ]          ПҖm вҲҲОЁm

where inequality (a) is from Lemma C.4 and QМғl (ПҖ[M ] ) := mвҲҲ[M ] QМғlm (ПҖm ). Thus, we can obtain
                                                          Q

that
                   пЈ®                                             пЈ№
                       X        X
                              l         l          lвҲ’1
            EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°         Em        Qm (ПҖm | ОҘ )Regm (ПҖm )пЈ»
                              mвҲҲ[M ]         ПҖm вҲҲОЁm
                                пЈ®                                                                               пЈ№
                                    X                  X
                                              l
              вүӨ 2EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°                     Em               Qlm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )Reg
                                                                              d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )пЈ» + О· l
                                                                                 m
                                  mвҲҲ[M ]          ПҖm вҲҲОЁm
              (b)   2 X  l     9c2 X  l
              вүӨ       l
                        Em Km + l    Em Km
                    Оі           Оі
                        mвҲҲ[M ]                             mвҲҲ[M ]
                          2
                    11c        X
                                         l
              вүӨ                         Em Km ,
                     Оіl
                              mвҲҲ[M ]

where inequality (b) is from Lemma C.9.

With the previous lemmas, we can obtain the final Theorem 4.1, which is restated in the following.
Theorem C.6 (Restatement of Theorem 4.1). Using a learning rate
                            пЈ«v
                             u                    пЈ«                      пЈ¶пЈ¶
                             u X                     X
                                        lвҲ’1                 lвҲ’1    lвҲ’1 пЈёпЈ·
                    Оі l = O пЈӯt        Em    Km / пЈӯ        Em    E(E[M ]) пЈё
                            пЈ¬u
                                              mвҲҲ[M ]                        mвҲҲ[M ]

in epoch l, denoting KМ„ l :=                      l                           l
                                        P                        P
                                          mвҲҲ[M ] Em Km /              mвҲҲ[M ] Em , the regret of FedIGW can be bounded
as
                                        пЈ«                                                                        пЈ¶
                                             X                   X           5
                                                                               q                    X
                                                      1                                    lвҲ’1               l пЈё
                 Reg(T ) = O пЈӯ                       Em +                   c2     KМ„ l E(E[M ])            Em   .
                                            mвҲҲ[M ]            lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]                          mвҲҲ[M ]



                                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Theorem 4.1. The expected regret can be bounded as
             пЈ®                                                                пЈ№
               X      X
Reg(T ) = E пЈ°               (f вҲ— (xm,tm , ПҖm
                                           вҲ—
                                             (xm,tm )) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xm,tm , am,tm ))пЈ»
                      mвҲҲ[M ] tm вҲҲ[Tm ]
        пЈ®                                                                                                     пЈ№
              X           X                   X                                                                       X
вүӨ EпЈ°                                                         (f вҲ— (xm,tm , ПҖm
                                                                            вҲ—
                                                                              (xm,tm )) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xm,tm , am,tm ))пЈ» +             1
                                                                                                                              Em
          lвҲҲ[2,l(T )] mвҲҲ[M ] tm вҲҲ[tm (П„ lвҲ’1 )+1,tm (П„ l )]                                                           mвҲҲ[M ]
                            пЈ®            пЈ®                                                           пЈ№        пЈ№
         X                                    X                                                                        X
=                   EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°Exm ,alm пЈ°                 l
                                                     Em (f вҲ— (xm , ПҖm
                                                                    вҲ—
                                                                      (xm )) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xm , am )) | ОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ» | ОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ» +             1
                                                                                                                              Em
      lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]                           mвҲҲ[M ]                                                                   mвҲҲ[M ]
                             пЈ®                                                              пЈ№
(a)       X                      X
                                          l
                                               X                                                  X
 =                  EОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ°              Em            Qlm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )Regm (ПҖm ) | ОҘlвҲ’1 пЈ» +              1
                                                                                                         Em
      lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]               mвҲҲ[M ]        ПҖm вҲҲОЁm                                            mвҲҲ[M ]
(b)                     2
         X          11c      X
                                      l
                                                     X
                                                            1
вүӨ                                    Em Km +               Em
                     Оіl
      lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]           mвҲҲ[M ]                mвҲҲ[M ]
                     vP
                               lвҲ’1        lвҲ’1
                                   E(F; E[M
                     u
(c)    X             u mвҲҲ[M ] Em            ])
                                                X              X
                    2t                                 l              1
=               11c     P           lвҲ’1
                                                      Em Km +        Em
    lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]           mвҲҲ[M ] mE     Km     mвҲҲ[M ]         mвҲҲ[M ]
      X              q             X             X
                             lвҲ’1
вүӨ              11c2 KE(F; E[M  ])
                                          lвҲ’1
                                         Em   +        Em1
                                                           ,
      lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]                              mвҲҲ[M ]            mвҲҲ[M ]

where equality (a) is from Lemma C.8, inequality (b) is from Lemma C.5, and inequality (c) is from
the choice of Оі l . The proof is then concluded.

C.3       S UPPORTING L EMMAS

The following supporting lemmas can be similarly obtained by the corresponding proofs in Simchi-
Levi & Xu (2022).
Lemma C.7 (Lemma 3, Simchi-Levi & Xu (2022)). For any epoch l вҲҲ N, conditioned on ОҘlвҲ’1 ,
there exists a probability measure Qlm (В·|ОҘlвҲ’1 ) on ОЁm such that
                                                        X
  вҲҖam вҲҲ Am , вҲҖxm вҲҲ Xm ,          plm (am |xm , ОҘlвҲ’1 ) =       1{ПҖm (xm ) = am }Qlm (ПҖm |ОҘlвҲ’1 ).
                                                                         ПҖm вҲҲОЁm

Lemma C.8 (Lemma 4, Simchi-Levi & Xu (2022)). Fix any epoch l вҲҲ N, we have
                                         вҲ—       вҲ—           вҲ—       l       lвҲ’1

             Exm вҲјDm
                   Xm
                      ,alm вҲјplm (В·|xm ) f (xm , ПҖm (xm )) вҲ’ f (xm , am ) | ОҘ
                                              X
                                           =        Qlm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )Regm (ПҖm ).
                                                                ПҖm вҲҲОЁm

Lemma C.9 (Lemma 5, Simchi-Levi & Xu (2022)). Fix any epoch l вҲҲ N, conditioned on ОҘlвҲ’1 , we
have
                                         d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вүӨ Km .
                     X                      l
                         Qlm (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 )Regm
                                                               Оіl
                                     ПҖвҲҲОЁm

Lemma C.10 (Lemma 6, Simchi-Levi & Xu (2022)). Fix any epoch l вҲҲ N, for any policy ПҖm вҲҲ ОЁm ,
we have
                                                                              l
                                  Vm (plm , ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ) вүӨ Km + Оі l Reg
                                                                   d (ПҖm | ОҘlвҲ’1 ).
                                                                      m


D       P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4.2
D.1       P ROOFS OF C OROLLARY 4.2

First, with realizability, i.e., Assumption 3.1, the following characterization can be obtained.


                                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma D.1 (Lemma 4.2, Agarwal et al. (2012)). Fix a function f вҲҲ F. Suppose we sample xm , rm
from the data distribution Dm , and an action am from an arbitrary distribution such that rm and
am are conditionally independent given xm . Define the random variable
                                                            2                               2
                 в„“m (f ) := (f (xm , am ) вҲ’ rm (am )) вҲ’ (f вҲ— (xm , am ) вҲ’ rm (am )) .
Then, we have
                                                  h                                 i
                                                                                  2
                   Exm ,rm ,am [в„“m (f )] = Exm ,am (f (xm , am ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xm , am ))

and
                               Vxm ,rm ,am [в„“m (f )] вүӨ 4Exm ,rm ,am [в„“m (f )] ,
where V[В·] denotes the variance of a random variable.

Then, we establish an upper bound for the excess risk bound required in Definition C.1 via the
following lemma
Lemma D.2. Under the setup of Assumption C.1, if the adopted FL protocol provides an exact
minimizer for the optimization problem in Eqn. (1) with quadratic losses, i.e.,
                                     1 X X                              i 2
                                                      f (xim , aim ) вҲ’ ym

                        fb = arg min                                        ,
                               f вҲҲF  n
                                              mвҲҲ[M ] iвҲҲ[nm ]

then, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, it holds that
       X nm                                                                 2   25 log(|F|/Оҙ)
                                                                вҲ—
                В· Exm вҲјDm  Xm
                              ,am вҲјpm (В·|xm )   f (xm , am ) вҲ’ f (xm , am )
                                                 b                             вүӨ              .
              n                                                                       n
       mвҲҲ[M ]

As a result, Definition C.1 holds with
                                       E(Оҙ, n[M ] ) вүӨ O (log(|F|n)/n) .

Proof. For simplicity, we abbreviate the quadratic loss associated with a fixed function f вҲҲ F as
                                                                      i 2
             в„“im (f ) = в„“m (f (xim , aim ); rm
                                             i
                                               ) := f (xim , aim ) вҲ’ rm

                                                                          , вҲҖm вҲҲ [M ].
Then, with a probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for a fixed f вҲҲ F, it holds that
          X      X                                             X X
                                                       вҲ—
                                                                          в„“im (f ) вҲ’ в„“im (f вҲ— )
                                       i          i

                        Exim ,rm
                               i ,ai
                                   m
                                      в„“m  (f ) вҲ’ в„“m (f   )   вҲ’
          mвҲҲ[M ] im вҲҲ[nm ]                                         mвҲҲ[M ] iвҲҲ[nm ]
           (a)                                                                        4
                 s X          X
           вүӨ 2                              i ,ai [в„“
                                     Vxim ,rm        i (f ) вҲ’ в„“i (f вҲ— )] log(1/Оҙ) +     log(1/Оҙ)
                                                     m         m
                                                m
                                                                                      3
                  mвҲҲ[M ] im вҲҲ[nm ]

           (b)                                                                        4
               s X           X
           вүӨ4                               i ,ai [в„“
                                     Exim ,rm       i (f ) вҲ’ в„“i (f вҲ— )] log(1/Оҙ) +      log(1/Оҙ),
                                                    m         m
                                                m
                                                                                      3
                 mвҲҲ[M ] im вҲҲ[nm ]

where inequality (a) leverages BernsteinвҖҷs inequality and inequality (b) is based on Lemma D.1.
With
                                       s X         X
                             X(f ) =                               i ,ai [в„“
                                                                           i (f ) вҲ’ в„“      вҲ—
                                                            Exim ,rm   m   m         m,i (f )];
                                         mвҲҲ[M ] im вҲҲ[nm ]
                              X        X                                         p
                                          в„“im (f ) вҲ’ в„“m,i (f вҲ— ) ;

                 Z(f ) =                                                   C=     log(1/Оҙ),
                             mвҲҲ[M ] iвҲҲ[nm ]

applying a union bound to the above inequality indicates that with probability 1 вҲ’ |F|Оҙ, for all
f вҲҲ F, it holds that
                                      4                                                         16 2
            X(f )2 вҲ’ Z(f ) вүӨ 4CX(f ) + C 2              вҮ’       (X(f ) вҲ’ 2C)2 вҲ’ Z(f ) вүӨ           C .
                                      3                                                         3


                                                       26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since fb satisfies that Z(fb) вүӨ 0, we can obtain that

                                                     X(fb)2 вүӨ 25C 2 ,
In other words, with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, it holds that
                                                              2
                                                                                    i 2
             X       X
                                            b(xi , ai ) вҲ’ ri        вҲ— i     i

                           Exim ,rm
                                  i ,ai
                                      m
                                           f   m m         m    вҲ’ f  (x  ,
                                                                        m ma  ) вҲ’ rm
             mвҲҲ[M ] im вҲҲ[nm ]
                   X                                                                2
              =            nm Exim ,aim        fb(xim , aim ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xim , aim )          вүӨ 25 log(|F|/Оҙ),
                  mвҲҲ[M ]

where the equality is from the realizability in Assumption 3.1. The first half of the lemma is then
proved.
With Оҙ = 1/n, the second half can be obtained as
             пЈ®                                                     пЈ№
               X nm                                             2
      ES[M ] пЈ°          В· Exm ,am fb(xm , am ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (xm , am )    пЈ» вүӨ 25 log(|F|n) + 1 ,
                     n                                                       n        n
                mвҲҲ[M ]

which concludes the proof.

Based on the established excess risk bound, Corollary 4.2 can be obtained as follows.
Corollary D.3 (Restatement of Corollary 4.2). If |F| < вҲһ and the adopted FL protocol provides
an exact minimizer for Eqn. (1) with quadratic losses, with П„ l = 2l , FedIGW incurs a regret of
                                            p
                              Reg(T ) = O( KM T log(|F|M T ))
and a total O(log(T )) calls of the adopted FL protocol.

Proof of Corollary 4.2. With Theorem 4.1 and Lemma D.2, under the choice of П„ l = 2l , the regret
can be bounded as
                               пЈ«                                        пЈ¶
                                            X q
                   Reg(T ) = O пЈӯM E 1 +           KM E l log(|F|M E l )пЈё
                                                        lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]
                                        пЈ«                                                    пЈ¶
                                                   X           q
                                 = OпЈӯ                               KM 2l log(|F|M T )пЈё
                                           lвҲҲ[2,вҢҲlog2 (T )вҢү]
                                     p
                                 =O   KM T log(|F|M T ) ,

and the exponentially growing epoch length naturally leads to O(log(T )) calls of the adopted FL
protocol, which concludes the proof.

D.2   P ROOFS OF C OROLLARY 4.4 AND A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In the following, we first prove Lemma 4.3 while also noting that this result is general and does
not rely on the specific parameterization of F, although we presented it with the d-dimensional
parameterization considered in Section 4.2.
Lemma D.4 (Complete Version of Lemma 4.3). If the loss function lm (В·; В·) is Вөf -strongly convex in
its first coordinate for all m вҲҲ [M ], i.e.,
                                      dlm (z1 ; z2 )                 Вөf вҖІ
   lm (z1вҖІ ; z2 ) вҲ’ lm (z1 ; z2 ) вүҘ                  В· (z1вҖІ вҲ’ z1 ) +   (z вҲ’ z1 )2 ,              for any z1 , z1вҖІ and z2 ,
                                          dz1                         2 1
and
             inf Erm [lm (y, rm (am ))|xm , am ] = Erm [l(fПүвҲ— (xm , am ), rm (am ))|xm , am ]                                (3)
            yвҲҲR



                                                               27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all m вҲҲ [M ], (xm , am ) вҲҲ Xm Г— Am , Definition C.1 holds with

                         E(F; n[M ] ) вүҘ 2 Оөopt (F; n[M ] ) + Оөgen (F; n[M ] ) /Вөf ,
where
                                Оөgen (F; n[M ] ) := ES,Оҫ [L(fПүbS ) вҲ’ L(f
                                                                     b Пүb ; S)];
                                                                         S

                             Оөopt (F; n[M ] ) := ES,Оҫ [L(f
                                                       b Пүb ; S) вҲ’ L(f
                                                           S
                                                                     b ПүвҲ— ; S)].
                                                                          S



Proof. First, for any Пү
                      bS , it holds that
        L(fПүbS ) вҲ’ L(fПүвҲ— )
             X nm
        =             Exm,i ,am,i ,rm,i [в„“(fПүbS (xm,i , am,i ); rm,i ) вҲ’ в„“(fПүвҲ— (xm,i , am,i ); rm,i )]
                   n
           mвҲҲ[M ]
           Вөf X nm                     h
                                                                                  2
                                                                                    i
        вүҘ                 Exm,i ,am,i (fПүbS (xm,i , am,i ) вҲ’ fПүвҲ— (xm,i , am,i ))
            2          n
                mвҲҲ[M ]

where the inequality is due to the strong convexity of в„“(В·; В·) w.r.t. its first coordinate and the opti-
mality of fПүвҲ— assumed in Eqn. (3). Thus, we obtain that
      X nm                h
                                                                     2
                                                                       i   2
               Exm,i ,am,i (fПүbS (xm,i , am,i ) вҲ’ fПүвҲ— (xm,i , am,i )) вүӨ       (L(fПүbS ) вҲ’ L(fПүвҲ— )) .
            n                                                             Вөf
    mвҲҲ[M ]

Furthermore, it holds that
         ES,Оҫ [L(fПүbS )] вҲ’ L(fПүвҲ— )
                                  h          i      h          i
          = ES,Оҫ [L(fПүbS )] вҲ’ ES,Оҫ L(f
                                    b Пүb ; S) + ES,Оҫ L(f
                                        S
                                                      b Пүb ; S) вҲ’ L(fПүвҲ— )
                                                          S
                                  h          i      h          i      h          i
          вүӨ ES,Оҫ [L(fПүbS )] вҲ’ ES,Оҫ L(f
                                    b Пүb ; S) + ES,Оҫ L(f
                                        S
                                                      b Пүb ; S) вҲ’ ES,Оҫ L(f
                                                          S
                                                                        b ПүвҲ— ; S) ,
                                                                           S


where the last inequality is due to
                                         h          i    h          i
                             L(fПүвҲ— ) = ES L(f
                                           b ПүвҲ— ; S) вүҘ ES L(f
                                                           b ПүвҲ— ; S) .
                                                              S


The proof is then concluded.

Then, for the generalization error analyses, the following lemma can be obtained via standard proofs
(e.g., Theorem 6.4 in Zhang (2023); Theorem 3.3 in Mohri et al. (2018)).
Lemma D.5. It holds that
                    Оөgen (F; n[M ] ) := ES,Оҫ [L(fПүbS ) вҲ’ L(f
                                                         b Пүb ; S)] вүӨ 2R(F; n[M ] ).
                                                             S


Here, the distributional-independent upper bound R(F; n[M ] ) on the Rademacher complexity is
defined as
                      пЈұ         пЈ®    пЈұ                                                  пЈјпЈ№пЈј
                      пЈІ              пЈІ X 1 X                                            пЈҪ пЈҪ
 R(F; n[M ] ) := sup ES[M ] ,Пғ пЈ°sup                 Пғm,i В· в„“m (fПү (xm,i , am,i ); rm,i ) пЈ» , (4)
                      пЈі           Пү пЈі        n                                          пЈҫ пЈҫ
                                            mвҲҲ[M ]    iвҲҲ[nm ]

where the outside supremum is over possible distributions of dataset S defined in Definition C.1 and
the expectation is w.r.t. the generation of dataset S[M ] following a fixed distribution and independent
Rademacher random variables Пғ := {Пғm,i : m вҲҲ [M ], i вҲҲ [nm ]}.

The optimization error of FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) and SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al.,
2020) are presented in Appendices F.1 and F.2. Combining the generalization error and optimization
error via Lemma 4.3 into Theorem 4.1, Corollary 4.4 can be obtained, which is restated in the
following.


                                                     28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary D.6 (Restatement of Corollary 4.4). Under the condition of Lemma 4.3, the regret of
FedIGW can be bounded as
                                   X           q
             Reg(T ) = O M E 1 +                 K RlвҲ’1 + Оөlopt ) /Вөf M E l ,

                                                    lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]

where R := R(F; {E : m вҲҲ [M ]}) and using ПҒl rounds of agents-server communications (i.e.,
         l                l

global aggregations) and Оәl rounds of local updates in epoch l, under certain assumptions,
                                                     l
вҖў with FedAvg as FLroutine(В·), if Lbm (fПү ; S[M        ] ) is ВөПү -strongly convex and ОІПү -smooth w.r.t. Пү
  for all m вҲҲ [M ] while the gradients are unbiased, have a Пғb2 -bounded variance and have a Gb -
  bounded dissimilarity, the output fПүb l satisfies that Оөlopt := Оөopt (F; nl[M ] ) вүӨ OМғ(Пғb2 (ВөПү ПҒl Оәl M )вҲ’1 +
  ОІПү G2b (ВөПү ПҒl )вҲ’2 ), when ПҒl вүҘ в„Ұ(ОІПү /ВөПү ) (see Lemma F.1 for the full statement);
                                                         l
вҖў with SCAFFOLD as FLroutine(В·), if Lbm (fПү ; S[M           ] ) is ВөПү -strongly convex and ОІПү -smooth w.r.t.
  Пү for all m вҲҲ [M ] while the gradients are unbiased and have a Пғb2 -bounded variance, the output
  fПүb l satisfies that Оөlopt := Оөopt (F; nl[M ] ) вүӨ OМғ(Пғb2 (ВөПү ПҒl Оәl M )вҲ’1 ), when ПҒl вүҘ в„Ұ(ОІПү /ВөПү ) (see
  Lemma F.6 for the full statement);.
By further setting a suitable number of global aggregations for each epoch such that the optimization
error is on the same order as the generalization error, the following more specific corollary can
obtained for FedAvg and SCAFFOLD, which can be easily extended for other FL designs.
Corollary D.7. Under the conditions of Lemma 4.3 and Corollary D.6, FedIGW incurs a regret of
                                              X           q
                                          1                       lвҲ’1        l
                      Reg(T ) = O M E +                      KR /Вөf M E
                                                           lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]

with the following bounds on the rounds of communications
                    пЈ«                               s        пЈ¶
                       X ОІПү               2           ОІ  G 2
                                        Пғ b             Пү bпЈё
                 OМғ пЈӯ             +             +                   (using FedAvg);
                               ВөПү   ВөПү Rl Оәl M        Вө2Пү Rl
                     lвҲҲ[l(T )]
                           пЈ«                           пЈ¶
                                X ОІПү              2
                                                Пғb
                        OМғ пЈӯ            +              пЈё       (using SCAFFOLD),
                                    ВөПү      ВөПү Rl Оәl M
                                   lвҲҲ[l(T )]

where R := R(F[M ] , {E : m вҲҲ [M ]}) and Оәl is the number of local updates in epoch l.
         l                    l


Proof. From Corollary D.6, when using FedAvg as the adopted FL protocol in FedIGW, the opti-
mization error in epoch l of form
                                           Пғb2       ОІПү G2b

                                  OМғ              +              ,
                                       ВөПү ПҒl Оәl M   Вө2Пү (ПҒl )2
when ПҒl = в„Ұ(ОІПү /ВөПү ). Thus, if the communication rounds
                                                                          s            !
                                               ОІПү       Пғb2                   ОІПү G2b
                                   ПҒl = ОҳМғ        +            +                           .
                                               ВөПү   ВөПү Rl Оәl M                Вө2Пү Rl
we are guaranteed to have the optimization error on the order of O(Rl ).
Then, the regret in Corollary 4.4 is of order
                                              X                          q
                     Reg(T ) = O M E 1 +                                    lвҲ’1
                                                                          KR /Вөf M E l
                                                           lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]

while the overall communication rounds can be bounded as
                                  пЈ«                           s        пЈ¶
                                     X ОІПү             2              2
                                                                ОІПү G b пЈё
                     X                               Пғb
                          ПҒl = OМғ пЈӯ            +            +            ,
                                           ВөПү    ВөПү Rl Оәl M     Вө2Пү Rl
                       lвҲҲ[l(T )]               lвҲҲ[l(T )]

which concludes the proof for FedAvg. The result of using SCAFFOLD can be similarly obtained.



                                                           29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3     A L INEAR R EWARD F UNCTION C LASS

We here provide a detailed discussion on the linear reward function class considered in Remark 4.5 at
the end of Section 4.2. Especially, following standard assumptions in linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2011) and federated linear bandits (Li & Wang, 2022a; He et al., 2022; Amani et al., 2022), we
consider Вөm (xm , am ) = вҹЁП•(xm , am ), Пү вҲ— вҹ©, where П•(В·) is a known d-dimensional mapping and Пү вҲ—
is an unknown d-dimensional system parameter. Then, it is sufficient to consider a linear function
class F, where fПү (В·) = вҹЁПү, П•(В·)вҹ© and f вҲ— (В·) = вҹЁПү вҲ— , П•(В·)вҹ©. Moreover, for convenience, we assume
that вҲҘП•(xm , am )вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 and вҲҘПү вҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1.
As mentioned in Remark 4.5, the FL problem can be formulated as a standard ridge regression with
                                                                        2
                   в„“m (fПү (xm , am ); rm ) := (вҹЁПү, П•(xm , am )вҹ© вҲ’ rm ) + О»вҲҘПүвҲҘ22 .
In other words, Eqn. (1) can be restated as
                                   X 1 X                                        2
               min L(f
                    b Пү ; S) :=                      вҹЁПү, П•(xim , aim )вҹ© вҲ’ rm
                                                                           i
                                                                                    + О»вҲҘПүвҲҘ22 ,             (5)
              ПүвҲҲRd                       n
                                  mвҲҲ[M ]   iвҲҲ[nm ]

which has an exact minimizer as
        пЈ«                                                 пЈ¶вҲ’1 пЈ«                                        пЈ¶
           1  X     X                                           1 X                 X
 ПүSвҲ— = пЈӯ                 П•(xim , aim )П•(xim , aim )вҠӨ + О»I пЈё пЈӯ                           П•(xim , aim )rm
                                                                                                      i пЈё
                                                                                                          .
          n                                                     n
             mвҲҲ[M ] iвҲҲ[nm ]                                           mвҲҲ[M ] iвҲҲ[nm ]
                                                                                                           (6)

We provide an excess risk bound required in Definition C.1 through the following decomposition:
        пЈ®                                                                  пЈ№
           X nm                                                          2
   ES,Оҫ пЈ°            Exm ,am (вҹЁbПүS , П•(xm , am )вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁПү вҲ— , П•(xm , am )вҹ©) пЈ»
                  n
          mвҲҲ[M ]
             пЈ®                                                                  пЈ№
                X nm                                                          2
    вүӨ 2ES,Оҫ пЈ°             Exm ,am (вҹЁbПүS , П•(xm , am )вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁПүSвҲ— , П•(xm , am )вҹ©) пЈ»
                       n
               mвҲҲ[M ]
               пЈ®                                                                   пЈ№
                  X nm                                                           2
      + 2ES,Оҫ пЈ°              Exm ,am (вҹЁПүSвҲ— , П•(xm , am )вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁПү вҲ— , П•(xm , am )вҹ©) пЈ»
                          n
                 mвҲҲ[M ]
             h               i
                           2
    = 2ES,Оҫ вҲҘb  ПүS вҲ’ ПүSвҲ— вҲҘОЈ
              пЈ®                                                                 пЈ№
                 X nm                                                         2
      + 2ES пЈ°              Exm ,am (вҹЁПүSвҲ— , П•(xm , am )вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁПү вҲ— , П•(xm , am )вҹ©) пЈ»
                        n
               mвҲҲ[M ]
             h                         i
                                     2
    вүӨ 2ES,Оҫ О»max (ОЈ) вҲҘb   ПүS вҲ’ ПүSвҲ— вҲҘ2                                                =: term (A)
              пЈ®                                                                 пЈ№
                 X nm                                                         2
      + 2ES пЈ°              Exm ,am (вҹЁПүSвҲ— , П•(xm , am )вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁПү вҲ— , П•(xm , am )вҹ©) пЈ»     =: term (B)
                        n
                mвҲҲ[M ]

where
                                 X nm
                                      Exm ,am П•(xm , am )П•(xm , am )вҠӨ

                         ОЈ :=
                                    n
                                mвҲҲ[M ]

and О»max (ОЈ) denotes the maximum eigenvalue of ОЈ. With вҲҘП•(x, a)вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1, it can be verified that
О»max (ОЈ) вүӨ 1. In the above decomposition, term (A) can be interpreted as the optimization error,
while term (B) is the generalization error.
We can then plug in the aforementioned explicit formula of ПүSвҲ— into term (B) and demonstrate that
term (B) = OМғ(d/n) with О» = 1/n under the assumption that вҲҘПү вҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 and rm вҲҲ [0, 1] (e.g.,
following Theorem 9.35 in Zhang (2023)).


                                                 30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the ridge regression problem in Eqn. (5), previous designs on federated linear bandits typically
(Wang et al., 2019; Dubey & Pentland, 2020; Li & Wang, 2022a; He et al., 2022; Amani et al.,
2022) have agents collaboratively provide the   P exact minimizer in     Eqn. (6) via directly communi-
cating their local rewards aggregates, i.e., iвҲҲ[nm ] П•(xim , aim )rm  i
                                                                        , and local covariance matrices,
i.e., iвҲҲ[nm ] П•(xim , aim )П•(xim , aim )вҠӨ . Thus, one round of agent-server communication is sufficient,
     P

where O(M d2 ) real numbers are shared. However, directly sharing such compressed data is often
undesired in FL studies due to privacy concerns. We refer to this protocol as the вҖңdirect methodвҖқ
for simplicity in the following discussions.
With the flexible FL choice in FedIGW, it can accommodate many other efficient optimization algo-
rithms. In particular,
               вҲҡ       a distributed version of accelerated gradient descent (AGD) (Nesterov, 2003)
takes only O( Оә log(1/ОөвҖІ )) rounds of communications of gradients to have an optimization error of
ОөвҖІ , where Оә is the condition number (i.e., the ratio between the smooth and strongly
                                                                                вҲҡ convex parame-
ter in the considered problem). With О» = 1/n, it holds that Оә = O(n); thus O( n log(d/n)) rounds
of communications of gradients are sufficient to obtain an optimization error of order OМғ(d/n), where
each agentsвҖҷ gradients are intuitively d-dimensional.
With the above illustration, the following corollary regarding the performance FedIGW with a linear
reward function class is then a straightforward extension from Theorem 4.1.
Corollary D.8. In the considered linear reward function class with shared true parameters, using
the direct method or distributed AGD as the adopted FL protocol to solve the FL problem in Eqn. (5)
and П„ l = 2l , FedIGW obtains a regret of
                                 пЈ«                         пЈ¶
                                     X
                                             r
                                                Kd                  вҲҡ
                                                          lпЈё
                    Reg(T ) = OМғ пЈӯ                    M 2    =  OМғ     M  KdT
                                               M 2lвҲ’1
                                             lвҲҲ[log2 (T )]

and the amount of real numbers communicated can be bounded as
                       пЈ«              пЈ¶
                           X
                    OпЈӯ           M d2 пЈё = O(M d2 log(T ))                         (using the direct method);
                                 lвҲҲ[log2 (T )]
    пЈ«                                                пЈ¶
            X              вҲҡ                                 вҲҡ
OпЈӯ                      M d M 2l log(d/(M 2l ))пЈё = O(d log(d) M 3 T )             (using distributed AGD).
        lвҲҲ[log2 (T )]


E       D ETAILS OF S ECTION 6

E.1       P ERSONALIZED L EARNING : D ETAILS OF S ECTION 6.1

Additional details for the personalized learning setting in Section 6.1 are discussed here. In partic-
ular, the overall algorithm structure still follows Algorithm 1, while the major difference is that a
personalized FL problem is considered:
                                                     X nm
                       min L(f  b Оұ ОІ ; S[M ] ) :=
                                  Пү ,Пү                                   ОІ ; Sm ),
                                                              Lbm (fПүОұ ,Пүm
                           ОІ
                     Пү Оұ ,Пү[M         [M ]                  n
                              ]                                   mвҲҲ[M ]

where
                                                    1 X               i    i     i
                            Lbm (fПүОұ ,Пүm
                                       ОІ ; Sm ) :=      в„“m (fПүОұ ,Пүm
                                                                  ОІ (xm , am ); rm ).
                                                   nm
                                                              iвҲҲ[nm ]


Furthermore, to bound the generalization error, similar to the Rademacher complexity in Eqn. (4), a
slightly different Rademacher complexity is introduced as
                          пЈұ     пЈ®          пЈұ                                                   пЈјпЈ№пЈј
                          пЈІ                пЈІ X 1 X                                             пЈҪ пЈҪ
   P(F[M ] ; n[M ] ) = sup ES,Пғ пЈ° sup                         Пғm,i В· в„“m (fПүm (xim , aim ); rm
                                                                                            i
                                                                                              ) пЈ» ,
                          пЈі       Пү Оұ ,Пү ОІ
                                           пЈі        n                                          пЈҫ пЈҫ
                                                   [M ]      mвҲҲ[M ]     iвҲҲ[nm ]



                                                                31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                  ОІ
which is suitable for the considered personalized setting with parameters [Пү Оұ , Пү[M ] ] involved. A
similar notation is also adopted in Mohri et al. (2019).
The following corollary can then be established for the personalized version of FedIGW with the
LSGD-PFL algorithm (Hanzely et al., 2021) adopted to solve the personalized FL task.
Corollary E.1. Under the conditions of Lemmas 4.3 and F.7, with LSGD-PFL as the adopted per-
sonalized FL protocol, FedIGW incurs a regret of
                                            X           q
                                       1                      lвҲ’1          l
                   Reg(T ) = O M E +                      KP /Вөf M E
                                                    lвҲҲ[2,l(T )]

with
     X                                                                     q
                                l вҲ’1
 OМғ                   max{ОІПүОІ (Оә )     , ОІПүОұ }ВөвҲ’1   2      l   l вҲ’1
                                               Пү + Пғb (ВөПү Оә M P )   +          ОІПүОұ (G2 + Пғ 2 )(Вө2Пү Pl )вҲ’1
          lвҲҲ[l(T )]

rounds of communications, where Pl := P(F[M ] , {E l : m вҲҲ [M ]}) and Оәl is the number of local
updates in epoch l.

The proof largely follows that of Corollary D.7: decomposing excess risk to generalization and
optimization errors; using Rademacher complexity to characterize the generalization error; using
FL convergence analyses to characterize the optimization error; and combining them together such
that the optimization error does not dominate the generalization error. As the LSGD-PFL protocol
(Hanzely et al., 2021) is adopted to solve the personalized FL task as an illustration, its correspond-
ing convergence analyses should be incorporated, which is presented in Lemma F.7.

E.1.1    A L INEAR R EWARD F UNCTION C LASS
As an extension of the linear reward function in Appendix D.3, we consider that
                                            вҲ—
             Вөm (xm , am ) = вҹЁП•(xm , am ), Пүm вҹ©,          вҲҖm вҲҲ [M ], (xm , am ) вҲҲ Xm Г— Am ,
                                  вҲ—                                           вҲ—             вҲ—,ОІ
and the true model parameters {Пүm   : m вҲҲ [M ]} follow Assumption 6.2, i.e., Пүm = [Пү Оұ,вҲ— , Пүm   ]
with Пү Оұ,вҲ— shared among all agents.
It can be further realized                                                      Лң
                           that the above problem setting is identical to a d-dimensional linear system,
        Лң      Оұ
                    P          ОІ
where d := d + mвҲҲ[M ] dm : the overall true model parameter is
                                         h                             i
                                                                            Лң
                                   ПүМғ вҲ— = Пү вҲ—,Оұ , Пү1вҲ—,ОІ , В· В· В· , ПүM
                                                                   вҲ—,ОІ
                                                                         вҲҲ Rd .

and a correspondingly feature mapping П•Мғ(В·) is
                h                                                                                            i
  П•Мғ(xm , am ) = П•(xm , am )[1:dОұ ] , OdОІ , В· В· В· , OdОІ    , П•(xm , am )[dОұ +1:dm ] , OdОІ    , В· В· В· , OdОІ       ,
                                           1         mвҲ’1                               m+1              M


i.e., an expanded version of the original feature, where П•(xm , am )[i:j] вҲҲ RjвҲ’i+1 denotes the sub-
vector containing [i : j]-th elements in П•(xm , am ) and Oi вҲҲ Ri an i-dimensional null vector.
With this reformulated problem, discussions from Appendix D.3 can be directly leveraged. Espe-
cially, Corollary D.8 indicates the following result.
Corollary E.2. In the considered linear reward function class with partially true parameters, using
distributed AGD as the adopted FL protocol to solve the FL problem in Eqn. (5) with reformulated
feature mapping П•Мғ(В·) and П„ l = 2l , FedIGW incurs a regret of
                                                    p
                                      Reg(T ) = OМғ    M K dTЛң
                                                                                 вҲҡ
and the amount of real numbers communicated can be bounded as O(dОұ log(dОұ ) M 3 T ).

E.2     ROBUSTNESS , P RIVACY, AND B EYOND : D ETAILS OF S ECTION 6.2

We here provide some additional discussions on incorporating appendages in FL studies to provide
robustness and privacy guarantees for FedIGW among some other directions, e.g., fairness guaran-
tees (Mohri et al., 2019; Du et al., 2021), client selections (Balakrishnan et al., 2022; Fraboni et al.,


                                                    32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2021), and practical communication designs (Chen et al., 2021; Wei & Shen, 2022; Zheng et al.,
2020). Following the unified principle that вҖңFCB = FL + CBвҖқ, we can develop the corresponding
versions of FedIGW and the associated theoretical analyses following the comprehensive example
of involving personalized learning in Section 6.1.
The key is that as long as one FL protocol can provide an estimated function fb (which is used in
IGW interactions), it can be adopted in FedIGW; thus the desirable properties of the selected FL
protocol are naturally inherited to FedIGW. For example, Yin et al. (2018); Pillutla et al. (2022);
Fu et al. (2019); Li et al. (2021); Zhu et al. (2023) studied how to handle malicious agents, who
can deviate arbitrarily from the FL protocol and tamper with their own updates, during learning.
The commonly adopted approach is to invoke certain robust estimators (e.g., median and trimmed
mean). Under suitable assumptions, existing approaches have shown that as long as the proportion of
malicious agents does not exceed a threshold (typically, 1/2), the estimators calculated by federation
can still converge within certain amounts of error due to the malicious agents. A recent work (Zhu
et al., 2023) provides a summary of convergence rates with different robust estimators, which can
be leveraged to establish theoretical understandings of FedIGW with robustness.
On the privacy side, many mechanisms have also been studied in FL (Wei et al., 2020; Yin et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022), to guarantee differential privacy (DP), where the most common approach
is to insert noises of suitable scales. Convergence rates have also been established under suitable
assumptions, e.g., in Wei et al. (2020); Girgis et al. (2021); Wei et al. (2021). With those analyses,
the theoretical behavior of FedIGW with DP can also be similarly established as Corollaries D.7 and
E.1.


F     A LGORITHM S KETCHES AND C ONVERGENCE A NALYSES OF FL D ESIGNS

F.1   F EDAVG

The FedAvg algorithm (McMahan et al., 2017) is one of the most standard and well-adopted FL
protocol. Following it, agents perform local stochastic gradient descents (SGD) with their local ob-
jective functions for certain steps and then communicate the updated local models to the server; the
server aggregates local models to a global one via a weighted average, which is then communicated
to the agents to perform further local SGDs.
Many theoretical analyses have been provided for FedAvg (e.g., Li et al. (2020b)). We adopt the one
from Karimireddy et al. (2020) in the following.
Lemma F.1 (Theorem V in Karimireddy et al. (2020) without client sampling). For any dataset S,
if

       вҖў Lbm (fПү ; Sm ) is ВөПү -strongly convex w.r.t. Пү (see Definition F.2) for all m вҲҲ [M ];

       вҖў Lbm (fПү ; Sm ) is ОІПү -smooth w.r.t. Пү (see Definition F.3) for all m вҲҲ [M ];
       вҖў the stochastic gradients are unbiased and have a Пғb2 -bounded variance (see Definition F.4);
       вҖў the gradients have Gb -bounded dissimilarity (see Definition F.5),

with FedAvg as the adopted FL protocol, the output Пү
                                                   b satisfies that
                                               Пғb2   ОІПү G2b

                                                                    0 вҲ— 2      ВөПү ПҒ
  EОҫ [L(fПүbS ; S) вҲ’ L(fПүSвҲ— ; S) | S] вүӨ OМғ
      b             b                              + 2 2 + ВөПү вҲҘПү вҲ’ ПүS вҲҘ2 exp вҲ’
                                            ВөПү ПҒОәM   ВөПү ПҒ                      16ОІПү

when ПҒ вүҘ 8ОІ ВөПү , where ПҒ denotes the round of communications (i.e., number of global aggregations),
             Пү


Оә is the number of local updates (i.e., SGD) between each communication, and Пү 0 is the initializa-
tion. Note that the last term which decays exponentially w.r.t. ПҒ is omitted in Corollary D.6 and the
following derivations for simplicity.

A few definitions used above are made precise in the following, which are inherited from Karim-
ireddy et al. (2020) and presented here for completeness:


                                                  33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition F.2 (Strongly Convex). Lbm (fПү ; S) is ВөПү -strongly convex w.r.t. Пү for ВөПү > 0 if
                                D                        E Вө
                                                                Пү           2
  Lbm (fПүвҖІ ; S) вҲ’ Lbm (fПү ; S) вүҘ вҲҮПү Lbm (fПү ; S), Пү вҖІ вҲ’ Пү +       вҲҘПү вҖІ вҲ’ ПүвҲҘ2 , for any Пү and Пү вҖІ .
                                                               2
Definition F.3 (Smooth). Lm (fПү ; S) is ОІПү -smooth w.r.t. Пү for ОІПү > 0 if
                             b
                                   D                          E ОІ
                                                                     Пү          2
    Lbm (fПүвҖІ ; S) вҲ’ Lbm (fПү ; S) вүӨ вҲҮПү Lbm (fПү ; S), Пү вҖІ вҲ’ Пү +          вҲҘПү вҖІ вҲ’ ПүвҲҘ2 , for any Пү and Пү вҖІ .
                                                                    2
Definition F.4 (Stochastic Gradients with Bounded Variances). The stochastic gradients have a
Пғb2 -bounded variance if
          1 X                                                          2
                      вҲҮПү в„“m (fПү (xim , aim ); rm
                                               i
                                                 ) вҲ’ вҲҮПү Lbm (fПү ; Sm ) вүӨ Пғb2 , for any Пү and m.
         nm                                                            2
           iвҲҲ[nm ]

Definition F.5 (Gradients with Bounded Dissimilarity). The gradients have a Gb -bounded dissimi-
larity if
                         1 X                        2
                                   вҲҮПү Lbm (fПү ; Sm ) вүӨ G2b , for any Пү.
                        M                           2
                             mвҲҲ[M ]


F.2   SCAFFOLD

The SCAFFOLD algorithm is proposed in Karimireddy et al. (2020), which enhances FedAvg via
leveraging variance reduction to correct drifts in heterogenous agentsвҖҷ local updates. The following
result is established in Karimireddy et al. (2020) to characterize the convergence of the SCAFFOLD
protocol.
Lemma F.6 (Theorem VII in Karimireddy et al. (2020) without client sampling). For any dataset
S, if

       вҖў Lbm (fПү ; Sm ) is ВөПү -strongly convex w.r.t. Пү (see Definition F.2) for all m вҲҲ [M ];

       вҖў Lbm (fПү ; Sm ) is ОІПү -smooth w.r.t. Пү (see Definition F.3) for all m вҲҲ [M ];
       вҖў the stochastic gradients are unbiased and have a Пғb2 -bounded variance (see Definition F.4),

with SCAFFOLD as the adopted FL protocol, the output Пү   b satisfies that
                                                   2

                                                  Пғb         2              ПҒ ВөПү ПҒ
     EОҫ [L(fПүbS ; S) вҲ’ L(fПүSвҲ— ; S) | S] вүӨ OМғ
         b             b                              + ВөПү DМғ exp вҲ’ min       ,
                                               ВөПү ПҒОәM                       30 162ОІПү
when ПҒ вүҘ max{ 162ОІ
               ВөПү , 30}, where ПҒ denotes the round of communications (i.e., number of global
                  Пү


aggregations), Оә is the number of local updates (i.e., SGD) between each communication, DМғ2 is a
distant measure w.r.t. the initialization defined in Karimireddy et al. (2020). Note that the last term
which decays exponentially w.r.t. ПҒ is omitted in Corollary D.6 and the following derivations for
simplicity.

F.3   LSGD-PFL

The LSGD-PFL protocol is summarized in Hanzely et al. (2021), which is a general design for
personalized federated learning problems. It largely follows FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), while
only the globally shared parameters are communicated and aggregated. The following lemma is
provided in Hanzely et al. (2021) to characterize the convergence of LSGD-PFL.
Lemma F.7 (Theorem 1 in Hanzely et al. (2021)). For any dataset S, if

       вҖў Lbm (fПүm ; Sm ) is ВөПү -strongly convex w.r.t. Пүm (see Definition F.2) for all m вҲҲ [M ];
                                                      Оұ                           ОІ
       вҖў Lbm (fПүОұ ,Пүm
                    ОІ ; Sm ) is ОІПү Оұ -smooth w.r.t. Пү   and M ОІПүОІ -smooth w.r.t. Пүm (see Definition F.3)
         for all m вҲҲ [M ];


                                                  34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       вҖў the stochastic gradients w.r.t. Пү Оұ is unbiased and have a Пғb2 -bounded variance (see Defini-
         tion F.4);
                                           ОІ
       вҖў the stochastic gradients w.r.t. {Пүm : m вҲҲ [M ]} is unbiased and have a Пғb2 -bounded
         variance (see Definition F.4);
       вҖў the gradients w.r.t. Пү have Gb bounded dissimilarity (see Definition F.5),
                                                     b has Оөopt (F[M ] ; n[M ] ) вүӨ ОөвҖІ after
with LSGD-PFL as the adopted FL protocol, the output Пү
                                                          r                      !
                   max{ОІПүОІ ОәвҲ’1 , ОІПүОұ }        Пғb2       1    ОІПүОұ (G2 + Пғ 2 )
              OМғ                       +             +
                           ВөПү              ВөПү ОәM ОөвҖІ    ВөПү            ОөвҖІ
rounds of communications, where Оә is the number of local updates.

G     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS AND A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
This section first provides a comprehensive description of the experimental settings and procedures.
The codes and detailed instructions have been uploaded in the supplementary materials so as
to execute the experiments and reproduce the results.
Additional results are also provided to deepen the understanding of the impact of adopting different
FL protocols in FedIGW and the effect of involving different numbers of agents. Moreover, a
performance comparison between FedIGW and the state-of-the-art FCB design, FN-UCB (Dai et al.,
2023), is reported. These results reveal that our proposed FedIGW not only outperforms the single-
agent designs but also supersedes the strong FCB baselines.

G.1   E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

In the following, we report a comprehensive description of the experimental details adopted in the
simulations.
Datasets. Our experiments employ two distinct real-world multi-label classification datasets, Bibtex
(Katakis et al., 2008) and Delicious (Tsoumakas et al., 2008), which are also used in other practical
CB investigations such as Cortes (2018). The aim of CB is considered to be recommending one
of the correct labels at any given time. Especially, in the experiments, at each time step, a context
is randomly sampled from the dataset while the true labels are concealed from the agents. The
agents then determine which label to select (i.e., pull one arm) with their CB algorithms; thus the
number of arms is the number of possible labels in each dataset. Upon pulling one arm, a reward of
1 is granted if the pulled arm corresponds to one of the true labels, while a reward of 0 is granted
otherwise. Details of each task are listed in Table 3, from which we can observe that these scenarios
are challenging given their high-dimensional contexts and large numbers of arms.

                Table 3: The context dimension and number of arms in Bibtex and Delicious

                           Task       Context dimension      Number of arms
                          Bibtex            1835                 159
                         Delicious           500                 983

Environments. In the experiments, the environments sample contexts for all agents from the same
set of datasets described above. For simplicity, the system is also designed as a synchronous one,
i.e., tm (t) = t, вҲҖm вҲҲ [M ].
FedIGW. As described in Section 5, for both tasks, two-layer multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) with
a hidden layer having a constant 256 width are used to approximate the reward functions in FedIGW.
Moreover, multiple standard FL protocols including FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), SCAFFOLD
(Karimireddy et al., 2020) and FedProx (Li et al., 2020a) are adopted as the FL component in
FedIGW. During each FL process, the local batch size, the number of communications, and the
local learning rate are specified in Table 4. Moreover, the epoch length is designed to be growing
exponentially as in Corollaries 4.2, D.8 and E.2, i.e., П„ l = 2l , while culminating at an upper limit of
4096 to maintain timely updates.


                                                   35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Additionally, for practical conveniences, instead of selecting a theoretically-sound but sophisticated
choice of Оі as in Theorem 4.1, we set it as a constant hyper-parameter and perform some preliminary
manual selections with the final adopted values reported in Table 4. We believe this approach is more
practically appealing as it does not need to scale Оі consistently; a similar choice of using constant
ОівҖҷs is also adopted in Agarwal et al. (2023).
                   Table 4: Hyperparameter choices for FedIGW in Bibtex and Delicious

             Task        Learning Rate     Batch Size     Communications       Parameter Оі
            Bibtex            0.1              64             100                 7000
           Delicious          0.2              64             100                 7000


  Figure 4: Averaged rewards and error bars on Bibtex from two single-agent baselines and FedIGW using
FedAvg, FedProx, and SCAFFOLD as its FL protocol. The continuous curves represent the empirical average
                        values, and the shadowed areas are the standard deviations.
Single-agent baseline: AGR. The adaptive greedy (AGR) algorithm (Chakrabarti et al., 2008) is
selected as one of the single-agent baselines due to its strong empirical performance on Bibtex and
Delicious reported in Cortes (2018). The algorithmic details can be found in Cortes (2018), and we
also leveraged the code provided in Cortes (2018) to build this baseline.
Single-agent baseline: FALCON. The other single-agent baseline, FALCON, is proposed in
Simchi-Levi & Xu (2022), which is essentially the single-agent version of FedIGW. We still adopt
the same algorithmic configurations as FedIGW (i.e., epoch length, parameter Оі, local batch size,
and local learning rate) except that the MLP is optimized locally instead of in a federation, i.e., there
are no communications.
Performance evaluation. All the reported results except Fig. 9 are averaged from 10 independent
runs, whose error bars are further provided. In Fig. 9, the unpractical long running time of the
baseline algorithm prohibits us from performing repeated experiments as discussed in the following
description of computing resources.
Computing Resources. The computational requirement is relatively low for testing the two single-
agent baselines (AGR and FALCON) and our proposed FedIGW. Specifically, we use a dual Nvidia-


                                                   36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 5: Averaged rewards and error bars on Delicious from two single-agent baselines and FedIGW using
FedAvg, FedProx, and SCAFFOLD as its FL protocol. The continuous curves represent the empirical average
                        values, and the shadowed areas are the standard deviations.

RTX 3090 workstation with an overall 20 GB RAM, which is more than needed as only 2 GB RAM
is occupied during the experiments of AGR, FALCON, and FedIGW using the aforementioned MLP
having a hidden layer with width 256. However, as illustrated later in Section G.4, when testing FN-
UCB (Dai et al., 2023), the overall 20 GB RAM is not sufficient for running it when the MLP hidden
layer has a width larger than 10; thus, we down-scaled the width to be 5 for smooth testing.

G.2   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS : VARYING FL C HOICES

We here provide additional details of Fig. 1 in Figs. 4 and 5, especially with error bars, and numer-
ically verify the flexibility of FedIGW with different FL protocols, including FedAvg (McMahan
et al., 2017), SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020) and FedProx (Li et al., 2020a). As observed
in Section 5, using the further optimized SCAFFOLD and FedProx provides better performances
compared with using the basic FedAvg, which credits to that FedIGW can seamlessly leverage al-
gorithmic advances in FL protocols. Moreover, it can be observed that the performance obtained by
using SCAFFOLD as the FL choice in FedIGW is also particularly stable, which demonstrates its
superiority in the application of sequential decision-making.

G.3   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS : VARYING N UMBERS OF AGENTS

Fig. 6 further reports the averaged rewards of FedIGW with M = 10, 20, 30, 50 involved agents
and their associated error bars in the Bibtex dataset, while Fig. 7 reports the same set of results in
the Delicious dataset. Moreover, Fig. 8 compares the averaged rewards of FedIGW with varying
numbers of agents. In these results, the FL protocol in FedIGW is selected to be FedAvg.
From Figs. 6 and 7, we can observe that FedIGW is capable of collecting more rewards than the
two single-agent baselines, which demonstrates its efficiency. Moreover, Fig. 8 elucidates that the
final performance of FedIGW is positively correlated with an increasing number of clients, which
verifies the benefits of learning in a larger federation. Furthermore, the variance (i.e., error bar) in


                                                  37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figs. 6 and 7 begins at a relatively small value and subsequently expands due to the initially intense
explorations. Eventually, when the algorithm gradually approaches convergence, the variance begins
to reduce, reflecting the stabilization of the learning process.


Figure 6: Averaged rewards and error bars on Bibtex from FedIGW (using FedAvg) with varying numbers of
involved agents, i.e., M = 10, 20, 30, 50. The continuous curves represent the empirical average values, and
                              the shadowed areas are the standard deviations.
G.4   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS : C OMPARISON WITH F EDERATED N EURAL BANDITS

To further verify the performance of FedIGW, additional comparisons are conducted with a state-of-
the-art FCB baseline, specifically, the federated neural-upper confidence bound (FN-UCB) design
proposed in Dai et al. (2023). FN-UCB is capable of leveraging neural networks to approximate
rewards and Dai et al. (2023) has reported superior performance compared to many other designs,
which makes it a strong FCB baseline. When conducting the experiments, we first notice that
FN-UCB necessitates multiple matrix inversions over the entire set of neural network parameters
and such operations lead to substantial memory consumption when handling the high-dimensional
context and numerous arms in both Bibtex and Delicious (which evidence the difficulty of these two
employed datasets). To accommodate our already powerful computing resources (dual Nvidia-RTX
3090 and 20 GB RAM), we had to use a small-size MLP in both FALCON and FN-UCB for smooth
testing and fair comparison. Especially, the width of the MLP hidden layer is down-scaled from the
originally adopted 256 (in Fig. 1) to only 5, as our 20 GB RAM cannot support FN-UCB using an
MLP with its hidden layer wider than 10. Also, due to the inefficiency of FN-UCB in our testing
scenario, the error bars are omitted in Fig. 9. We believe this experimental observation demonstrates
the computational efficiency of FedIGW over FN-UCB.
Moreover, the statistical performance of FedIGW and FN-UCB is presented in Fig. 9. As evident
from the reported results, the substantial reduction in the neural network size has affected the per-
formance of FedIGW compared with Figs. 6 and 7. In particular, FedIGW achieves only about 30%
of the previously reported performance on Bibtex and 50% on Delicious. Nevertheless, despite this
diminished performance, our proposed FedIGW still outperforms FN-UCB significantly, surpassing
it by nearly 70% on both tasks as shown in Fig. 9. These comparisons further validate the advantages
of FedIGW, demonstrating its relatively easy implementation and superior performance compared
to existing FCB designs.


                                                    38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Averaged rewards and error bars on Delicious from FedIGW (using FedAvg) with varying numbers
 of involved agents, i.e., M = 10, 20, 30, 50. The continuous curves represent the empirical average values,
                             and the shadowed areas are the standard deviations.


Figure 8: Averaged rewards and error bars on Bibtex (left) and Delicious (right) at time step 2.3 Г— 104 from
   two single-agent baselines and FedIGW (using FedAvg) with varying numbers of involved agents, i.e.,
                                           M = 10, 20, 30, 50.


Figure 9: Comparisons between FedIGW and FN-UCB on Bibtex (left) and Delicious (right) with 10 involved
                                             agents.


                                                    39
