Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E NHANCING H UMAN E XPERIENCE IN H UMAN -AGENT
C OLLABORATION : A H UMAN -C ENTERED M ODELING
A PPROACH BASED ON P OSITIVE H UMAN G AIN
  Yiming Gao1∗ Feiyu Liu1∗ Liang Wang1 Dehua Zheng1 Zhenjie Lian1
 Weixuan Wang1 Wenjin Yang1 Siqin Li1 Xianliang Wang1 Wenhui Chen1
 Jing Dai1 Qiang Fu1 Wei Yang1 Lanxiao Huang2 Wei Liu1
 1
   Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China 2 Tencent TiMi L1 Studio, Chengdu, China
 yatminggao@tencent.com;wl2223@columbia.edu


                                                A BSTRACT
          Existing game AI research mainly focuses on enhancing agents’ abilities to win
          games, but this does not inherently make humans have a better experience when
          collaborating with these agents. For example, agents may dominate the collabora-
          tion and exhibit unintended or detrimental behaviors, leading to poor experiences
          for their human partners. In other words, most game AI agents are modeled in a
          "self-centered" manner. In this paper, we propose a "human-centered" modeling
          scheme for collaborative agents that aims to enhance the experience of humans.
          Specifically, we model the experience of humans as the goals they expect to achieve
          during the task. We expect that agents should learn to enhance the extent to which
          humans achieve these goals while maintaining agents’ original abilities (e.g., win-
          ning games). To achieve this, we propose the Reinforcement Learning from Human
          Gain (RLHG) approach. The RLHG approach introduces a "baseline", which
          corresponds to the extent to which humans primitively achieve their goals, and
          encourages agents to learn behaviors that can effectively enhance humans in achiev-
          ing their goals better. We evaluate the RLHG agent in the popular Multi-player
          Online Battle Arena (MOBA) game, Honor of Kings, by conducting real-world
          human-agent tests. Both objective performance and subjective preference results
          show that the RLHG agent provides participants better gaming experience.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Recently, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been widely used in developing Artificial Intelligence
(AI) systems for games, developing various agents that perform at a human-level performance, such
as AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016; 2017) in Go, AlphaStar (Vinyals et al., 2019) in StarCraftII, OpenAI
Five (OpenAI et al., 2019) in Dota2, and Wukong AI (Ye et al., 2020a) in Honor of Kings. To
further expand the applications of these agents, researchers are exploring ways to improve their
generalization to human partners (Carroll et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2020; Strouse et al., 2021; Lupu et al.,
2021; Knott et al., 2021; McKee et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022), as well as enabling effective explicit
communication between agents and humans (FAIR et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022) in collaborative tasks.
However, these agents primarily focus on maximizing their own rewards to complete the task, less
considering the role of their human partners. This potentially leads to behaviors that are inconsistent
with human values and preferences, resulting in a poor experience for human partners (Fisac et al.,
2020; Alizadeh Alamdari et al., 2022). Thus, we say that the optimization objective of these agents is
self-centered. In a qualitative study (Cerny, 2015) on companion behavior, it was found that humans
reported greater enjoyment of the game when the AI assisted them more like a sidekick.
Consider the scenario depicted in Figure 1(⇐), the self-centered agent may push the obstacle to the
human side and pass through to get the coin itself, which can complete the task, but its human partner
has no experience. However, as illustrated in Figure 1(⇒), the human may prefer the agent to play a
more assisting role by pulling the obstacle to its side, thereby facilitating the human to get the coin.
Consequently, not only is the task completed, but the experience of the human, hereafter referred to
as human experience, is also enhanced. In many real-world collaborative scenarios, such as robotic
    * These authors contributed equally to this work.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


assistants and autonomous driving, humans not only want to complete the task but also pursue a
better experience (Wilson & Daugherty, 2018a;b; Crandall et al., 2018). Therefore, it is important for
a collaborative agent to learn a human-centered objective, that is, to enhance the human experience.

   Agent gets the coin                                                                           Human gets the coin


       : Task Reward +1, Human Experience +0   :                      : Task Reward +1, Human Experience +1    :



Figure 1: Toy scenario, where an agent and its human partner are on either side of an obstacle. Only the agent is
capable of pushing or pulling the obstacle. Their task goal is to obtain the coin. ⇐: The agent gets the coin by
itself. The task is completed, but the human has no experience. ⇒: The agent assists the human to get the coin.
Both the task is completed and the experience of the human is enhanced.

In this paper, we conceptualize the human experience as the human goals they expect to achieve
during the task. Note that the human experience is task-dependent, and the corresponding goals
may be explicit, such as obtaining coins, improving safety, and enhancing empowerment (Du et al.,
2020). Additionally, these goals may be implicit and require inference through goal reward models
learned with human feedback (Ng et al., 2000; Ziebart et al., 2008; Ho & Ermon, 2016; Christiano
et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022). These human goals can then be quantified as human goal rewards,
hereafter referred to as human rewards, which measure the extent to which humans achieve these
goals. Our work does not aim to define or infer human goals accurately, but rather focuses on training
agents to enhance the extent to which humans achieve these goals. One intuitive way is to directly
combine agents’ original (task-related) rewards with human rewards. However, we find that this
approach may encounter the human-agent credit assignment challenge, where the human rewards
are assigned to the agent without any assistive behavior, potentially leading to the agent learning
incorrect behavior and even losing its autonomy, i.e., the original abilities to complete the task, as
shown in Section 4.2. A potential solution to solve this is to carefully reshape the human reward
function. However, this approach heavily relies on domain knowledge and expertise.
We propose a novel approach that enables agents to learn to enhance the extent to which humans
achieve their goals while maintaining agents’ autonomy as much as possible. Our key insight is that
the contribution made by humans themselves needs to be separated from the human rewards, and the
remaining benefits can be considered as the real contribution of the agents to enhancing the humans,
which we refer to as human gains. To realize this insight, we propose the Reinforcement Learning
from Human Gain (RLHG) approach, which involves two stages. Firstly, we evaluate the primitive
human performance in achieving human goals and consider this as a "baseline". We train a value
network to estimate the primitive expected human return in achieving human goals with episodes
collected by directly teaming the human and the self-centered agent to execute. Secondly, we train
the agent to learn effective human enhancement behaviors. We train a gain network to estimate
the expected positive gain of human return when subjected to effective enhancement, compared
to the "baseline". The agent is fine-tuned using the combination of its original advantage and the
human-centered advantage calculated by the positive human gains.
We conducted experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of the RLHG approach in Honor of Kings (Wei
et al., 2022), a typical Multi-player Online Battle Arena (MOBA) game (Silva & Chaimowicz, 2017),
which has received much attention from researchers lately (Ye et al., 2020a;b;c; Gao et al., 2021;
2022). We first evaluated the RLHG approach in simulated environments, i.e., human model-agent
tests. Our experimental results demonstrate that the RLHG agent outperforms baseline agents in
enhancing the performance of the human model in achieving human goals. We further conducted
real-world human-agent tests, with the RLHG agent teaming up with participants of varying skill
levels. Our experimental results show that the RLHG agent effectively enhanced the performance
of general-level participants in achieving their goals, bringing them closer to the performance of
high-level participants. And we find that this enhancement is generalizable across different participant
skill levels. Additionally, subjective preference results reveal that most participants were satisfied
with the RLHG agent, believing it provided a better gaming experience. In general, our contributions
are as follows:

• We proposed a human-centered modeling scheme for guiding human-level agents to enhance the
  experience of their human partners in collaborative tasks.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• We gained insights into the challenge of human-agent credit assignment and addressed this challenge
  by presenting the RLHG algorithm, along with a detailed implementation framework.
• We conducted human-agent tests in Honor of Kings, and both objective performance and subjective
  preference results show that the RLHG agent provides participants better gaming experience.


2     BACKGROUND
2.1   G AME I NTRODUCTION
Honor of Kings is a typical MOBA game, characterized by multi-agent cooperation and competition
mechanisms, often used as a testbed for game AI research (Wu, 2019; Ye et al., 2020a;b;c; Gao et al.,
2021; 2022). The game is played by two opposing teams on a symmetrical map, each comprising five
players. The game environment, depicted in Figure 2(a), consists of the main hero with peculiar skill
mechanisms and attributes, controlled by each player. Players can maneuver the hero’s movement
using the wheel (C.1) and release the hero’s skills through the buttons (C.2, C.3). They can view the
local environment on the screen, the global environment on the mini-map (A), and access game states
on the dashboard (B). The agent and the human player share the same game information and the
action mechanism. Agents team up with human players to compete against the enemy camp through
collaboration. The gaming experience is crucial for a player’s engagement and satisfaction. Along
with the task goal, players also pursue multiple individual goals (Figure 2(b)), such as achieving a
higher MVP score, experiencing more highlight moments, and obtaining more in-game resources.
The pursuit of these goals can contribute to a more enjoyable and rewarding gaming experience.
Agents can enhance the gaming experience of their human partners through interactive behaviors,
such as timely support, sharing resources, and active protection.

                                                              Task Goal                         Human Goals



                                                                                                                                 …
                                                              Game Victory   MVP Score     In-game Resource   Highlight Moment

                                                Bittersweet      Win           Low              Few                Few

                                                Enjoyable        Win          High             More               More

                  (a)                                                                (b)


Figure 2: (a) The UI of Honor of Kings. (b) In-game goals, based on our participant survey (see Figure 4(c)).
Human players pursue multiple goals for more enjoyable gaming experience.


2.2   H UMAN -AGENT C OLLABORATION
We formalize a human-agent collaboration task as an extension of the Decentralized Partially Observ-
able Markov Decision Processes (Dec-POMDP) (Bernstein et al., 2002), which can be represented as
a tuple < N, S, A, O, P, R, γ, πH , G H , RH >, where N denotes the number of agents. S denotes the
space of global states. A = {Ai , AH }i=1,...,N denotes the space of actions of N agents and a human
to be enhanced, respectively. O = {Oi , OH }i=1,...,N denotes the space of observations of N agents
and the human, respectively. P : S × A → S and R : S × A → R denote the shared state transition
probability function and the task reward function of N agents, respectively. γ ∈ [0, 1) denotes
the discount factor. We define an agent policy, π i , to be a mapping from histories of observations
oi = {oi1 , ..., oit } ∈ Oi to actions ai ∈ Ai . A joint policy, πθ =< π 1 , ..., π N >, parameterized by θ,
is defined to be a tuple of N agent policies. We define a human policy πH , to be a mapping from
observations oH ∈ OH to actions aH ∈ AH , which remains fixed during the agent’s optimization
process and cannot be accessible to the agent. G H = {gi }i=1,...,M denotes the human goals, where
gi is a designated goal and M is the total number of human goals. RH : S × A × G H → R denotes
the human reward function.
Most previous research work focuses on learning self-centered agents. In agent-only team settings,
the agent is optimized to complete the task, with the optimization  objective beingP
                                                                                   to maximize the
                                                                                     ∞
value function for a given state s, i.e., V πθ (s) = Eπθ Gt |st = s , where Gt = k=0 γ k Rt+k+1
represents the discounted cumulative task rewards. In human-agent team settings, the agent is


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


optimized to adapt to its human partners
                                             to complete
                                                          the task, and the corresponding optimization
objective is V πθ ,πH (s) = Eπθ ,πH Gt |st = s . This optimization objective paradigm is referred to
as the self-centered objective. While optimizing the self-centered objective may enhance the agents’
abilities to complete tasks (i.e., task rewards R) in collaboration with humans, it does not necessarily
enhance the human experience (i.e., human rewards RH ).

3     M ETHODS
In this section, we introduce the human-centered modeling scheme. We start with formalizing the
human-centered objective (Section 3.1). Then we propose a novel insight that enables agents learn
to enhance the extent to which humans achieve their goals while maintaining the agents’ autonomy
(Section 3.2). Finally, we implement our insights by providing the RLHG algorithm and a practical
implementation (Section 3.3).

3.1   H UMAN -C ENTERED O BJECTIVE
We define the human-centered objective as VHπθ ,πH (s) = Eπθ ,πH GH
                                                                                            H
P∞ k H                                                                  t |st = s , where Gt =
   k=0 γ Rt+k+1 is the discounted cumulative human rewards. Intuitively, the self-centered ob-
jective optimizes the agents’ abilities to complete the task, while the human-centered objective
optimizes the agents’ abilities to enhance human performance in achieving human goals G H . Thus,
the overall optimization objective can be formulated as:
                                                                     h                   i
                                                π ,πH
                 J(θ) = V πθ ,πH (s) + α · VH θ         (s) = Eπθ ,πH Gt + α · GH
                                                                                t |st = s ,           (1)

 where α is a balancing parameter. The approximation to the policy gradient is defined as follows:
                                                                                    
                                      ∞
                                      X
                ∇J(θ) = Eπθ ,πH            ∇θ log πθ (at |ot )       Gt + α · GH
                                                                                t
                                                                                     ,               (2)
                                      t=0
                                                                                               
                                      ∞
                                      X
                        ∝ Eπθ ,πH          ∇θ log πθ (at |ot ) A(st , at ) + α · AH (st , at )  ,   (3)
                                      t=0


 where A(s, a) = Eπθ ,πH [Gt |st = s, at = a] − V πθ ,πH (s) is the self-centered advantage and
                                            πθ ,πH
AH (s, a) = Eπθ ,πH [GH
                      t |st = s, at = a] − VH      (s) is the human-centered advantage.
However, incorporating human rewards directly into the optimization objective may lead to negative
consequences, such as human-agent credit assignment issues. Intrinsically, humans possess the
primitive abilities to achieve certain goals independently. Therefore, it is unnecessary to reward the
agents for assisting when the human can easily achieve human goals or to reward the agents who
do not provide any assistance, as it potentially leads to the agents learning incorrect behavior and
even losing their autonomy. To this end, we propose a novel insight below to achieve effective human
enhancement without compromising the agents’ original abilities to complete the task.

3.2   E FFECTIVE H UMAN E NHANCEMENT

Our key insight is that the human contribution, termed human primitive value, should be distinguished
from human rewards. The residual benefits, representing the agent’s actual contribution in enhancing
human to achieve goals, are referred to as human gains.
We define the human primitive value as VHπ0 ,πH (s), which represents the expected human return for a
given state s under the setting of collaboration between the human πH and the pre-trained agent π0 .
                                                                            π0 ,πH
We define the human gain as ∆(s, a) = Eπθ ,πH [GH   t |st = s, at = a] − VH        (s), which represents
the benefits brought by taking a specific action a for a given state s compared to the human primitive
value. In the process of learning to enhance the human, the agents explore two types of behaviors
in state s: effective enhancement behaviors, i.e., A+ (s) = {a|a ∼ πθ , ∆(s, a) > 0}, and invalid
enhancement behaviors, i.e., A− (s) = A(s) \ A+ (s) = {a|a ∼ πθ , ∆(s, a) ≤ 0}. Intuitively, A+
can help the human achieve human goals better than the primitive and A− provides no benefits or
even hinders the human from achieving human goals. Therefore, the agent is only encouraged to
learn effective enhancement behaviors, and the Eq. 3 can be reformulated as:


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     
                              X∞
             ∇J(θ) = Eπθ ,πH    ∇θ log πθ (at |ot ) A(st , at ) + α · A
                                                                       bH (st , at )  ,            (4)
                                  t=0


where A bH (s, a) = ∆(s, a) − ∆(s)
                               b   is the advantage of the human gain over the expected positive
human gain ∆(s) = Ea∼A+ (s) [∆(s, a)]. We use ∆ω (s) to denote an estimate of ∆(s),
             b                                                                b     which can be
trained by minimizing the following loss function:
                                                                              (
                                                                               1,     x>0
          L(ω) = Es∈S,a∈A I(∆(s, a)) · ∥∆(s, a) − ∆ω (s)∥2 ,           I(x) =                       (5)
                                                                               0,     x≤0

where I in Eq. 5 is an indicator function to filter invalid enhancement samples.

3.3   T HE A LGORITHM & P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION


Algorithm 1 Reinforcement Learning from Human Gain (RLHG)
 1: while not converged do
 2:   Freeze π0 and collect human-agent team < π0 , πH > trajectories;
 3:   Compute human return GH , and update human primitive value Vϕ ← GH ;
 4: end while                            // Stage I: Human Primitive Value Estimation
 5: while not converged do
 6:   Freeze Vϕ and collect human-agent team < πθ , πH > trajectories;
 7:   Compute original return G, self-centered advantage A;
 8:   Compute human return GH , human gain ∆, and human-centered advantage AbH ;
 9:   Update agent policy network πθ using Eq. 4, and value network Vψ ← G;
10:   Update human gain network ∆ω using Eq. 5;
11: end while                                    // Stage II: Human Enhancement Training

We introduce the RLHG algorithm 1 to actualize our insights, comprising two stages: the Human
Primitive Value Estimation (Stage I) and the Human Enhancement Training (Stage II). In Stage I, the
RLHG algorithm freezes the pre-trained agent policy π0 and collects trajectory samples to compute
the human return GH . Subsequently, the RLHG algorithm updates the human primitive value network
Vϕ by minimizing the Temporal Difference (TD) errors (Sutton & Barto, 2018). In Stage II, the
RLHG algorithm freezes Vϕ and collects trajectory samples to compute the original return G and
human return GH . Both G and GH contribute to determining the self-centered advantage A and
human-centered advantage A  bH , respectively. The agent’s policy network πθ is fine-tuned according
to Eq. 4 and the value network Vψ is fine-tuned by minimizing the TD errors. ∆ω is trained by
minimizing the loss function in Eq. 5.
Figures 3(a) and (b) show the training framework of Stage I and Stage II, respectively. The human
policy πH can be trained via Behavior Cloning (BC) (Bain & Sammut, 1995) or any Supervised
Learning (SL) techniques (Ye et al., 2020b), but this is not the focus of our concern. Since in many
practical scenarios, agents cannot access the human policy, we instead learn a human policy embed-
ding, enabling agents to adapt and infer human intentions. Similar to the Theory-of-Mind (Rabinowitz
et al., 2018), we input the observed human historical information ht = (sH              H
                                                                              t , ..., s1 ) into an LSTM
module (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) to extract the human policy embedding. The human
policy embedding is subsequently fed into two extra value networks, i.e., the human primitive value
network Vϕ and the gain network ∆ω , and fused into the agent’s original network πθ . We use surgery
techniques (Chen et al., 2015; OpenAI et al., 2019) to fuse the human policy embedding into the
agent’s original network, i.e. adding more randomly initialized units to an internal fully-connected
layer. We apply the absolute activation function to ensure that the predicted gains are non-negative.
In practical training, we find that only conducting human enhancement training has a certain nega-
tive impact on the agent’s original abilities to complete the task. Therefore, we introduce 1 − β%
agent-only team settings to maintain the agent’s original abilities and reserve β% human-agent team
settings to learn effective enhancement behaviors. These two environments can be easily controlled
through the task gate, i.e., the task gate is set to 1 in the human-agent team settings and 0 otherwise.

                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Observation 𝑜!                                                                                           Human-Agent
           (a)                                                                                                              𝑠!
                                                                                                        𝜋(𝑜! )                                   Architecture

                                                      Encoder
                                                                                                                            𝑎!
                                                                                                                                                 Environment
                                                                                                                                       +
                                                                                                                             𝐺!"
                                                       LSTM
                                                                                                                                                    Frozen
                       Human History Info
                                    "
                       ℎ! = (𝑠!" , 𝑠!#$ , …, 𝑠$" )                                                     𝑉% (ℎ! )
                                                                                                                                   Human-Agent   Agent-Only
                          Observation 𝑜!
           (b)                                                                                          𝜋' (𝑜! ,ℎ! )        𝑠!
                                                                                                                            𝑎!
                                                      Encoder

                                                                                                                           𝐺!
                                                                         x Task Gate            𝑉( (𝑠! ,ℎ! )
                                                                                                                                       +             +
                                                                                                         𝑉% (ℎ! )
                                                       LSTM
                                                                                                                             𝐺!"
                        Human History Info
                                    "
                       ℎ! = (𝑠!" , 𝑠!#$ , …, 𝑠$" )
                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                          abs     Δ& (ℎ! )         minus               𝛽%         1 − 𝛽%


Figure 3: The RLHG training framework. (a) Human Primitive Value Estimation stage. The human primitive
value network Vϕ is trained in the human-agent team settings with the agent’s policy π frozen. (b) Human
Enhancement Training stage. Vϕ is frozen and added to a downstream network ∆ω to learn to estimate the
expected positive human gain. β% human-agent team settings are used to learn human enhancement behaviors,
and 1 − β% agent-only team settings are used to maintain the agent’s original ability.


4       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the proposed RLHG approach by conducting both simulated human
model-agent tests and real-world human-agent tests in Honor of Kings (HoK). All experiments1 were
conducted in the 5v5 mode with a full hero pool (over 100 heroes, see Appendix A.2). Our demo
videos and code are present at https://sites.google.com/view/rlhg-demo.

4.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Environment Setup: To evaluate the performance of the RLHG agent, we conducted experiments in
both the simulated environment, i.e., human model-agent game tests, and the real-world environment,
i.e., human-agent game tests, as shown in Figure 4(a) and 4(b), respectively. All game tests were
played in a 5v5 mode, that is, 4 agents plus 1 human or human model team up against a fixed
opponent team. To conduct our experiments, we communicated with the game provider and obtained
testing authorization. The game provider assisted in recruiting 30 experienced participants with
anonymized personal information, which comprised 15 high-level (top 1%) and 15 general-level (top
30%) participants. We first did an IRB-approved participant survey on what top 5 goals participants
want to achieve in-game, and the result is shown in Figure 4(c). We can see that the top 5 goals voted
the most by the 30 participants including the task goal, i.e., game victory, and 4 human goals, i.e.,
high MVP score, high participation, more highlights, and more resources. We find that participants
consistently rated the high MVP score goal most, even more than the task goal.
                  Human Model                                    Human                      Goals                                  Votes

                 +                                        +                            High MVP Score
                                                                                        Game Victory *
                 VS                                       VS                       High Participation


                 +                                        +
                                                                                       More Highlights
                                                                                       More Resources
            Fixed Opponent                           Fixed Opponent                                            0           10               20           30
                 (a)                                       (b)                                                             (c)

Figure 4: Environment Setup. (a) Simulated environment: the human model-agent game tests. (b) Real-world
environment: the human-agent game tests. (c) Top 5 goals based on the stats of our participant survey. * denotes
the task goal. The participant survey contains 8 initial goals, each participant can vote up to 5 non-repeating
goals, and can also add additional goals. 30 participants voluntarily participated in the voting.
    1
        All experiments are conducted subject to oversight by an Institutional Review Board (IRB).


                                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Training Setup: We were authorized by Ye et al. to use the Wukong agent (Ye et al., 2020a) as the
pre-trained agent and use the JueWu-SL agent (Ye et al., 2020b) as the fixed human model. Note that
both the Wukong agent and the JueWu-SL agent were developed at the same level as the high-level
(top 1%) players. We adopted the top 4 human goals as G H for the pre-trained agent to enhance the
human model. The corresponding goal reward function can be found in Appendix B.3. We trained
the human primitive value network and fine-tune the agent until they converge for 12 and 40 hours,
respectively, using a physical computer cluster with 49600 CPU cores and 288 NVIDIA V100 GPU
cards. The batch size of each GPU is set to 256. The hyper-parameters α and β are set to 2 and 50,
respectively. The step size and unit size of the LSTM module are set to 16 and 4096, respectively.
Baseline Setup: We compared the RLHG agent with two baseline agents: the Wukong agent (Ye
et al., 2020a) and the Human Reward Enhancement (HRE) agent.

• Wukong: A state-of-the-art agent in HoK, trained using the PPO algorithm to optimize the Game
  Victory goal in an agent-only team setting.
• HRE: An agent that is fine-tuned from the pre-trained Wukong agent by directly incorporating the
  human-centered objective into the optimization objective (see Eq. 3).
• RLHG: An agent that is fine-tuned from the pre-trained Wukong agent by incorporating the
  human-centered objective based on positive human gains into the optimization objective.

The human model-agent team (4 Wukong agents plus 1 human model) was adopted as the fixed
opponent for all tests. For fair comparisons, both the HRE and RLHG agents were trained using the
same human reward function, and all common parameters, network structures, and training resources
were kept consistent. Results were reported over five random seeds.
4.2   H UMAN M ODEL -AGENT T EST
Directly evaluating agents with humans is expensive, which is not conducive to model selection and
iteration. Instead, we build a simulated environment, i.e., human model-agent game tests, to evaluate
agents, in which the human model, i.e., the JueWu-SL agent, teams up with different agents. The
results of the human model on different goal after teaming up with different agents are shown in
Figure 5, including the top 4 human goals and the task goal.


Figure 5: The performance of the human model in achieving human goals after teaming up with different agents.
(a) The task goal. (b) The top 4 human goals (b.1, b.2, b.3, and b.4). (c) The follow rate metric: the frequency
with which an agent follows a human in the entire game. Each agent played 10,000 games. Error bars represent
95% confidence intervals, calculated over games.
From Figure 5 (b), we can observe that both the RLHG agent and the HRE agent significantly enhance
the performance of the human model in achieving the top 4 human goals, and the RLHG agent has
achieved the best enhancement effect on most of the human goals. These results validate that the
human-centered objective can encourage agents to learn behaviors that better enhance humans in
achieving their goals.
However, as shown in Figure 5 (a), the HRE agent drops significantly on the task goal. We observed
the actual performance of the HRE agent and found that the HRE agent did many unreasonable
behaviors. For example, to assist the human model in achieving the Participation Rate and Highlight
Times goals, the HRE agent had been following the human model throughout the entire game. Such
excessive following behaviors greatly affected its original abilities to complete the task and led to
a decreased Win Rate. This can also be reflected in Figure 5(c), in which the HRE agent has the
highest Follow Rate metric. Although the Follow Rate of the RLHG agent has also increased, we
observed that most of the following behaviors of the RLHG agent can effectively assist the human
model. We also observed that the Win Rate of the RLHG agent slightly decreased, which is consistent


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with expectations, as enhancing the abilities to achieve human goals inevitably sacrifices the abilities
to achieve the task goal. We implement an adaptive adjustment mechanism to balance the two
optimization objectives. We simply utilize the agent’s original value network to measure the degree
of completing the task goal and set the task gate to 1 (enhancing the human) when the original value
is above the specified threshold ξ, and to 0 (completing the task) otherwise. The threshold ξ depends
on the human preference, i.e. the relative importance of the task goal and the human goals. We verify
the effectiveness of the adaptive adjustment mechanism in Appendix C.3.

4.3    H UMAN -AGENT T EST
In this section, we conduct online experiments to examine whether the RLHG agent can effectively
enhance the experience of human participants. Note that, We did not compare the HRE agent,
since the Win Rate of the HRE agent is extremely low. We used a within-participant design for the
experiment: each participant teams up with four agents. This design allowed us to evaluate both
objective performance as well as subjective preference. All participants read detailed guidelines and
provided informed consent before the testing. Each participant tested 20 matches. After each test,
participants reported their preference over their agent teammates. For fair comparisons, participants
were not told the type of their agent teammates.

Table 1: The results of high-level participants achieving goals after teaming up with different agents. Results for
the task goal are expressed as percentages, and results for human goals are expressed as mean (std.).

                             Task Goal                               Top 4 human Goals
           Agent \ Goals
                             Win Rate      MVP Score      Highlight Times   Participation Rate   Resource Quantity

              Wukong           52%         8.86 (0.79)      0.53 (0.21)        0.46 (0.11)           5.3 (2.87)
              RLHG            46.7%        10.28 (0.75)     0.87 (0.29)        0.58 (0.09)          6.28 (2.71)

Table 2: The results of general-level participants achieving goals after teaming up with different agents. Results
for the task goal are expressed as percentages, and results for human goals are expressed as mean (std.).

                             Task Goal                               Top 4 Human Goals
            Agent \ Goals
                              Win Rate     MVP Score      Highlight Times   Participation Rate   Resource Quantity

              Wukong            34%         7.44 (0.71)     0.37 (0.349)       0.41 (0.11)          4.98 (2.73)
               RLHG             30%         9.1 (0.61)      0.75 (0.253)       0.59 (0.05)           5.8 (2.78)


We first compare the objective performance of the participants on different human goal metrics after
teaming up with different agents. Table 1 and Table 2 demonstrate the results of high-level and
general-level participants, respectively. We see that both high-level and general-level participants had
significantly improved their performance on all top 4 human goals after teaming up with the RLHG
agent. Notably, the RLHG agent effectively improved the performance of general-level participants
in achieving human goals even better than the primitive performance of high-level participants. We
also notice that the Win Rate of the participants decreased when they teamed up with the RLHG
agent, which is consistent with the results in the simulated environment. However, we find in the
subsequent subjective preference statistics that the improvement of Gaming Experience brought by
the enhancement outweighs the negative impact of the decrease in Win Rate.


Figure 6: Participants’ preference over their agent teammates. (a) Behavioral Rationality: the reasonableness
of the agent’s behavior. (b) Enhancement Degree: the degree to which the agent enhances your abilities to
achieve goals. (c) Gaming Experience: your overall gaming experience. (d) Overall Preference: your overall
preference for your agent teammates. Participants scored (1: Terrible, 2: Poor, 3: Normal, 4: Good, 5: Perfect)
in these metrics after each game test. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals, calculated over games.


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We then compare the subjective preference metrics, i.e., the Behavioral Rationality, the Enhancement
Degree, the Gaming Experience, and the Overall Preference, reported by participants over their agent
teammates, as shown in Figure 6. We find that most participants showed great interest in the RLHG
agent, and they believed that the RLHG agent’s enhancement behaviors were more reasonable than
that of the Wukong agent, and the RLHG agent’s enhancement behaviors brought them a better
gaming experience. A high-level participant commented on the RLHG agent "The agent frequently
helps me do what I want to do, and this feeling is amazing." In general, participants were satisfied
with the RLHG agent and gave higher scores in the Overall Preference metric (Figure 6(d)).

4.4    C ASE S TUDY
To better understand how the RLHG agent effectively enhances the experience of participants, we
visualize the values predicted by the gain network in two test scenarios where participants benefitted
from the RLHG agent’s assistance, as illustrated in Figure 7. In the first scenario (Figure 7(a)), the
RLHG agent successfully assisted the participant in achieving the highlight goal, whereas the Wukong
agent disregarded the participant, leading to a failure in achieving the highlight goal. Figure 7(b)
illustrates that the gain of the RLHG agent, when accompanying the participant, is positive, reaching
the maximum when the participant achieved the highlight goal. In the second scenario (Figure 7(c)),
the RLHG agent actively relinquishes the acquisition of the monster resource, enabling the participant
to successfully achieve the resource goal. Conversely, the Wukong agent competes with the participant
for the monster resource, resulting in the participant’s failure to achieve the resource goal. Figure 7(d)
also reveals that the gain of the RLHG agent’s behavior - actively forgoing the monster resource,
is positive, with the gain peaking when the participant achieved the resource goal. These results
indicate that the RLHG agent learns effective enhancement behaviors through the guidance of the
gain network.

                                                  (T2) Agent ignores Human.           Human does nothing.

      (T1) Human goes to Top Lane.   Wukong                                                                                                  Gain


                                          (T2) Agent follows and assists Human.      Human achieves Highlight.
                                                                                                    First Defeat


                                                                                                                      T1
                                                                                                                       a                           T2
                                                                                                                                                    &
                                                                                                                   Primitive Value         Enhanced Value
                  (a)                RLHG
                                                                                                                                     (b)
                                       (T2) Agent competes with Human for Monster.     Agent gets Monster.
       (T1) Human wants Monster.

                                     Wukong
                                                                                                                                      Gain

                                             (T2) Agent leaves Monster to Human.       Human gets Monster.


                                                                                                                   T1
                                                                                                                   T1                           T2
                                                                                                                                                 T2

                                                                                                                   Primitive Value         Enhanced Value
                                      RLHG
                 (c)                                                                                                                 (d)
Figure 7: The RLHG agent enhances the experience of participants in two scenarios. (a) The Wukong agent
ignores the participant; The RLHG agent accompanies the participant and assists the participant in achieving
the highlight goal. (b) The gain value in scenario (a). (c) The Wukong agent competes with the participant for
the monster resource; The RLHG agent actively forgoes the monster resource, and the participant successfully
achieves the resource goal. (d) The gain value in scenario (c).

5     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed a "human-centered" modeling scheme for collaborative agents, designed to
enhance the human experience. We represent the human experience as the goals they expect to achieve
during the task. To enhance the extent to which humans achieve these goals while maintaining agent’s
original abilities, we introduced the RLHG approach. The RLHG approach initially trains a value
network to estimate the primitive expected human return in achieving human goals, utilizing episodes
collected by directly partnering the human and the self-centered agent for execution. Subsequently,
the RLHG approach trains a gain network to estimate the expected positive gain of human return
when subjected to effective enhancement, compared to the "baseline." The agent is fine-tuned using a
combination of its original advantage and the human-centered advantage calculated by the positive
human gains. We conducted real-world human-agent tests in Honor of Kings, and the results in both
objective performance and subjective preference demonstrate that the RLHG agent offers a superior
gaming experience for humans.


                                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Parand Alizadeh Alamdari, Toryn Q Klassen, Rodrigo Toro Icarte, and Sheila A McIlraith. Be
  considerate: Avoiding negative side effects in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 21st
  International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 18–26, 2022.

Michael Bain and Claude Sammut. A framework for behavioural cloning. In Machine Intelligence
 15, pp. 103–129, 1995.

Daniel S Bernstein, Robert Givan, Neil Immerman, and Shlomo Zilberstein. The complexity of
  decentralized control of markov decision processes. Mathematics of operations research, 27(4):
  819–840, 2002.

Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Tom Griffiths, Sanjit Seshia, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca
 Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Martin Cerny. Sarah and sally: Creating a likeable and competent ai sidekick for a videogame. In Pro-
 ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment,
 volume 11, pp. 2–8, 2015.

Tianqi Chen, Ian Goodfellow, and Jonathon Shlens. Net2net: Accelerating learning via knowledge
  transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05641, 2015.

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.

Jacob W Crandall, Mayada Oudah, Fatimah Ishowo-Oloko, Sherief Abdallah, Jean-François Bonne-
  fon, Manuel Cebrian, Azim Shariff, Michael A Goodrich, and Iyad Rahwan. Cooperating with
  machines. Nature Communications, 9(1):233, 2018.

Yuqing Du, Stas Tiomkin, Emre Kiciman, Daniel Polani, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. Ave:
  Assistance via empowerment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:4560–4571,
  2020.

FAIR, Anton Bakhtin, Noam Brown, Emily Dinan, Gabriele Farina, Colin Flaherty, Daniel Fried,
  Andrew Goff, Jonathan Gray, Hengyuan Hu, et al. Human-level play in the game of diplomacy by
  combining language models with strategic reasoning. Science, 378(6624):1067–1074, 2022.

Jaime F Fisac, Monica A Gates, Jessica B Hamrick, Chang Liu, Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Malayandi
   Palaniappan, Dhruv Malik, S Shankar Sastry, Thomas L Griffiths, and Anca D Dragan. Pragmatic-
   pedagogic value alignment. In Robotics Research: The 18th International Symposium ISRR, pp.
  49–57. Springer, 2020.

Yiming Gao, Bei Shi, Xueying Du, Liang Wang, Guangwei Chen, Zhenjie Lian, Fuhao Qiu, Guoan
  Han, Weixuan Wang, Deheng Ye, et al. Learning diverse policies in moba games via macro-goals.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:16171–16182, 2021.

Yiming Gao, Feiyu Liu, Liang Wang, Zhenjie Lian, Weixuan Wang, Siqin Li, Xianliang Wang,
  Xianhan Zeng, Rundong Wang, QIANG FU, et al. Towards effective and interpretable human-
  agent collaboration in moba games: A communication perspective. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.

Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Alex Peysakhovich, and Jakob Foerster. “other-play” for zero-shot
  coordination. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4399–4410. PMLR, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in atari. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Paul Knott, Micah Carroll, Sam Devlin, Kamil Ciosek, Katja Hofmann, and Rohin Shah. Evaluating
  the robustness of collaborative agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05507, 2021.

Andrei Lupu, Brandon Cui, Hengyuan Hu, and Jakob Foerster. Trajectory diversity for zero-shot
  coordination. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 7204–7213. PMLR, 2021.

Kevin R McKee, Joel Z Leibo, Charlie Beattie, and Richard Everett. Quantifying the effects of
  environment and population diversity in multi-agent reinforcement learning. Autonomous Agents
  and Multi-Agent Systems, 36(1):21, 2022.

Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.

Andrew Y Ng, Stuart Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, volume 1, pp. 2, 2000.

OpenAI, Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław D˛ebiak,
  Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz,
  Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto,
 Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever,
 Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.

Neil Rabinowitz, Frank Perbet, Francis Song, Chiyuan Zhang, SM Ali Eslami, and Matthew Botvinick.
  Machine theory of mind. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4218–4227. PMLR,
  2018.

John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438,
  2015.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Victor do Nascimento Silva and Luiz Chaimowicz. Moba: A new arena for game ai. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1705.10443, 2017.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.

David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go without
  human knowledge. nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.

DJ Strouse, Kevin McKee, Matt Botvinick, Edward Hughes, and Richard Everett. Collaborating with
  humans without human data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.

Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods
  for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in
  starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Hua Wei, Jingxiao Chen, Xiyang Ji, Hongyang Qin, Minwen Deng, Siqin Li, Liang Wang, Weinan
  Zhang, Yong Yu, Liu Linc, et al. Honor of kings arena: An environment for generalization in
  competitive reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
 11881–11892, 2022.
H James Wilson and Paul R Daugherty. Human+ machine: Reimagining work in the age of AI.
  Harvard Business Press, 2018a.
H James Wilson and Paul R Daugherty. Collaborative intelligence: Humans and ai are joining forces.
  Harvard Business Review, 96(4):114–123, 2018b.
Bin Wu. Hierarchical macro strategy model for moba game ai. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference
  on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 1206–1213, 2019.
Deheng Ye, Guibin Chen, Wen Zhang, Sheng Chen, Bo Yuan, Bo Liu, Jia Chen, Zhao Liu, Fuhao
  Qiu, Hongsheng Yu, et al. Towards playing full moba games with deep reinforcement learning.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:621–632, 2020a.
Deheng Ye, Guibin Chen, Peilin Zhao, Fuhao Qiu, Bo Yuan, Wen Zhang, Sheng Chen, Mingfei
  Sun, Xiaoqian Li, Siqin Li, et al. Supervised learning achieves human-level performance in moba
  games: A case study of honor of kings. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
  Systems, 2020b.
Deheng Ye, Zhao Liu, Mingfei Sun, Bei Shi, Peilin Zhao, Hao Wu, Hongsheng Yu, Shaojie Yang,
  Xipeng Wu, Qingwei Guo, et al. Mastering complex control in moba games with deep reinforce-
  ment learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp.
  6672–6679, 2020c.
Chao Yu, Jiaxuan Gao, Weilin Liu, Botian Xu, Hao Tang, Jiaqi Yang, Yu Wang, and Yi Wu. Learning
  zero-shot cooperation with humans, assuming humans are biased. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, volume 8,
  pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS
A.1    G AME I NTRODUCTION

MOBA (Multiplayer Online Battle Arena) games (Silva & Chaimowicz, 2017), characterized by
multi-agent cooperation and competition mechanisms, long time horizons, enormous state-action
spaces (1020000 , (Wu, 2019)), and imperfect information (OpenAI et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020a), have
attracted much attention from researchers. The general layout of the MOBA games is depicted in the
Figure 8(a). The red and blue on the map indicate two teams, and the map can be divided into 3 lanes
(i.e., yellow areas separated into the top, middle, and bottom lane), 4 jungle areas (i.e. green areas),
and 2 base areas. Circles symbolize turrets.

      Top Lane                    Base Area



                      Jungle
                       Area



                               Jungle
                    Mid Lane
                                Area


        Base Area                Bottom Lane
                        (a)                                                   (b)


           Figure 8: (a) A generic map of MOBA games. (b) The UI interface of Honor of Kings.

Honor of Kings (Wei et al., 2022) is a typical MOBA game often used as a testbed for game AI
research (Wu, 2019; Ye et al., 2020a;b;c; Gao et al., 2021; 2022). The game is played by two
opposing teams on a symmetrical map, each comprising five players. The game environment depicted
in Figure 8(b) comprises the main hero with peculiar skill mechanisms and attributes, controlled
by each player. The player can maneuver the hero’s movement using the bottom-left wheel (C.1)
and release the hero’s skills through the bottom-right buttons (C.2, C.3). The player can view the
local environment on the screen, the global environment on the top-left mini-map (A), and access
game stats on the top-right dashboard (B). Players of each camp compete for resources through team
confrontation and collaboration, etc., with the task goal of winning the game by destroying the crystal
in the opposing team’s base area.

                                                                       Bittersweet    Enjoyable


             +                   Task Goal                   Game
                                                             Victory
                                                                            Win           Win

                                                             MVP
                                                             Score
                                                                             Low          High

                                Human Goals              In-game
                                                         Resource
                                                                             Few          More

                                                         Highlight
                                                         Moment              Few          More

                                                         …
Figure 9: In-game goals, based on our participant survey (see Figure 24 (c)). Human players pursue multiple
goals for more enjoyable gaming experience.

The gaming experience is crucial for a player’s engagement and satisfaction. Along with the task
goal, players also pursue multiple individual goals (Figure 9, such as achieving a higher MVP score,
experiencing more highlight moments, and obtaining more in-game resources. The pursuit of these


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


goals can contribute to a more enjoyable and rewarding gaming experience. Agents can enhance
the gaming experience of their human partners through interactive behaviors such as timely support,
sharing resources, and active protection.
For fair comparisons, all experiments in this paper were carried out using a fixed released game
engine version (Version 8.2 series) of Honor of Kings.

A.2         H ERO P OOL

Table 3 shows the full hero pool used in Experiments. Each match involves two camps playing against
each other, and each camp consists of five randomly picked heroes.

                                            Table 3: Hero pool used in Experiments.

                      Lian Po, Xiao Qiao, Zhao Yun, Mo Zi, Da Ji, Ying Zheng, Sun Shangxiang, Luban Qihao, Zhuang Zhou, Liu Chan
                      Gao Jianli, A Ke, Zhong Wuyan, Sun Bin, Bian Que, Bai Qi, Mi Yue, Lv Bu, Zhou Yu, Yuan Ge, Chengji Sihan
                      Xia Houdun, Zhen Ji, Cao Cao, Dian Wei, Gongben Wucang, Li Bai, Make Boluo, Di Renjie, Da Mo, Xiang Yu
                      Wu Zetian, Si Mayi, Lao Fuzi, Guan Yu, Diao Chan, An Qila, Cheng Yaojin, Lu Na, Jiang Ziya, Liu Bang, Chang E
                      Han Xin, Wang Zhaojun, Lan Lingwang, Hua Mulan, Ai Lin, Zhang Liang, Buzhi Huowu, Nake Lulu, Ju Youjing
  Full Hero pool      Ya Se, Sun Wukong, Niu Mo, Hou Yi, Liu Bei, Zhang Fei, Li Yuanfang, Yu Ji, Zhong Kui, Yang Yuhuan, Zhu Bajie
                      Yang Jian, Nv Wa, Ne Zha, Ganjiang Moye, Ya Dianna, Cai Wenji, Taiyi Zhenren, Donghuang Taiyi, Gui Guzi
                      Zhu Geliang, Da Qiao, Huang Zhong, Kai, Su Lie, Baili Xuance, Baili Shouyue, Yi Xing, Meng Qi, Gong Sunli
                      Shen Mengxi, Ming Shiyin, Pei Qinhu, Kuang Tie, Mi Laidi, Yao, Yun Zhongjun, Li Xin, Jia Luo, Dun Shan, Sun Ce
                      Shangguan Waner, Ma Chao, Dong Fangyao, Xi Shi, Meng Ya, Luban Dashi, Pan Gu, Meng Tian, Jing, A Guduo
                      Xia Luote, Lan, Sikong Zhen, Erin, Yun ying, Jin Chan, Fei, Sang Qi, Ge Ya, Hai Yue, Zhao Huaizhen, Lai Xiao


B     F RAMEWORK D ETAILS
B.1     I NFRASTRUCTURE D ESIGN

                                                        Inference Server
                                                                                              parameter sync
                                                           Network forward prediction

                                                              Sample management
 AI Server with Game Env                                                                                     RL Learner
               self-play                                                                                         Policy network
 5 agents       Env #1      5 agents
                                                                                                                 Value network
                 …


                                                               Memory Pool
 5 agents      Env #n       5 agents                            Memory
                                                                 MemoryPool
                                                                        Pool                                  GPUs with All-Reduce


                                       Figure 10: The infrastructure of the training system.

Figure 10 shows the infrastructure of the training system (Ye et al., 2020a), which consists of four key
components: AI Server, Inference Server, RL Learner, and Memory Pool. The AI Server (the actor)
covers the interaction logic between the agents and the environment. The Inference Server is used for
the centralized batch inference on the GPU side. The RL Learner (the learner) is a distributed training
environment for RL models. And the Memory Pool is used for storing the experience, implemented
as a memory-efficient circular queue.


                                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2   TASK R EWARD D ESIGN

Table 4 demonstrates the details of the designed task reward from environment.

                                      Table 4: The details of the environment reward.

      Head                   Reward Item                    Weight          Type         Description
                             Gold                           0.005           Dense        The gold gained.
                             Experience                     0.001           Dense        The experience gained.
      Farming Related        Mana                           0.05            Dense        The rate of mana (to the fourth power).
                             No-op                          -0.00001        Dense        Stop and do nothing.
                             Attack monster                 0.1             Sparse       Attack monster.
                             Kill                           1               Sparse       Kill a enemy hero.
                             Death                          -1              Sparse       Being killed.
                             Assist                         1               Sparse       Assists.
      KDA Related            Tyrant buff                    1               Sparse       Get buff of killing tyrant, dark tyrant, storm tyrant.
                             Overlord buff                  1.5             Sparse       Get buff of killing the overlord.
                             Expose invisible enemy         0.3             Sparse       Get visions of enemy heroes.
                             Last hit                       0.2             Sparse       Last hitting an enemy minion.
                             Health point                   3               Dense        The health point of the hero (to the fourth power).
      Damage Related
                             Hurt to hero                   0.3             Sparse       Attack enemy heroes.
                             Attack turrets                 1               Sparse       Attack turrets.
      Pushing Related
                             Attack crystal                 1               Sparse       Attack enemy home base.
      Win/Lose Related       Destroy home base              4               Sparse       Destroy enemy home base.


B.3   H UMAN R EWARD D ESIGN

Table 5 demonstrates the details of the designed human reward.

                                            Table 5: The details of the human reward.

         Head                       Reward Item       Weight         Type          Description
                                    Kill              1              Sparse        Kill a enemy hero.
                                    Death             -1             Sparse        Being killed.
         MVP Score Related          Assist            1              Sparse        Assists.
                                    Hurt to hero      0.3            Sparse        Attack enemy heroes.
                                    Health point      3              Dense         The health point of the hero (to the fourth power).
         Participation Related      Participation     1              Dense         Percentage of players participating in the team fight.
         Highlight Related          Highlight         2              Sparse        Double kill, triple kill, quadra kill, penta kill.
                                    Buff              1              Sparse        Get a red buff, blue buff.
         Resource Related
                                    Health cake       1              Sparse        Get a health cake.


                                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.4        F EATURE D ESIGN

Table 6 shows the designed features of the Wukong agent (Ye et al., 2020a), some of which (observ-
able) are used as human features.

                       Table 6: The observation space of agents. ∗ are used as human features.

 Feature Class                       Field                Description                                                       Dimension   Type
 1. Unit feature                     Scalar               Includes heroes, minions, monsters, and turrets                   8599
                                                          Current HP, mana, speed, level, gold, KDA, buff,
                                     Status                                                                                 1842        (one-hot, normalized float)
                                                          bad states, orientation, visibility, etc.
                                     Position             Current 2D coordinates                                            20          (normalized float)
                                                          Is main hero or not, hero ID, camp (team), job, physical attack
 Heroes*                             Attribute                                                                              1330        (one-hot, normalized float)
                                                          and defense, magical attack and defense, etc.
                                                          Skill 1 to Skill N’s cool down time, usability, level,
                                     Skills                                                                                 2095        (one-hot, normalized float)
                                                          range, buff effects, bad effects, etc.
                                     Item                 Current item lists                                                60          (one-hot)
                                     Status               Current HP, speed, visibility, killing income, etc.               1160        (one-hot, normalized float)
                                     Position             Current 2D coordinates                                            80          (normalized float)
 Minions                             Attribute            Camp (team)                                                       80          (one-hot)
                                                          Type of minions (melee creep, ranged creep,
                                     Type                                                                                   200         (one-hot)
                                                          siege creep, super creep, etc.)
                                     Status               Current HP, speed, visibility, killing income, etc.               868         (one-hot, normalized float)
 Monsters*                           Position             Current 2D coordinates                                            56          (normalized float)
                                     Type                 Type of monsters (normal, blue, red, tyrant, overlord, etc.)      168         (one-hot)
                                     Status               Current HP, locked targets, attack speed, etc.                    520         (one-hot, normalized float)
 Turrets                             Position             Current 2D coordinates                                            40          (normalized float)
                                     Type                 Type of turrets (tower, high tower, crystal, etc.)                80          (one-hot)
 2. In-game stats feature            Scalar               Real-time statistics of the game                                  68
                                     Time                 Current game time                                                 5           (one-hot)
                                     Gold                 Golds of two camps                                                12          (normalized float)
 Static statistics*                  Alive heroes         Number of alive heroes of two camps                               10          (one-hot)
                                     Kill                 Kill number of each camp (Segment representation)                 6           (one-hot)
                                     Alive turrets        Number of alive turrets of two camps                              8           (one-hot)
                                     Gold diff            Gold difference between two camps (Segment representation)        5           (one-hot)
                                     Alive heroes diff    Alive heroes difference between two camps                         11          (one-hot)
 Comparative statistics*
                                     Kill diff            Kill difference between two camps                                 5           (one-hot)
                                     Alive turrets diff   Alive turrets difference between two camps                        6           (one-hot)
 3. Invisible opponent information   Scalar               Invisible information used for the value net                      560
 Opponent heroes                     Position             Current 2D coordinates, distances, etc.                           120         (normalized float)
                                                          Current 2D coordinates of all non-player characters,
 NPC                                 Position                                                                               440         (normalized float)
                                                          including minions, monsters, and turrets
 4. Spatial feature                  Spatial              2D image-like, extracted in channels for convolution              7x17x17
                                     Region               Potential damage regions of ally and enemy skills                 2x17x17
 Skills*
                                     Bullet*              Bullets of ally and enemy skills                                  2x17x17
 Obstacles*                          Region               Forbidden region for heroes to move                               1x17x17
 Bushes*                             Region               Bush region for heroes to hide                                    1x17x17
 Health cake*                        Region               Cake for heroes to recover blood                                  1x17x17


                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5        ACTION D ESIGN

Table 7 shows the action space of agents.

                                                                    Table 7: The action space of agents.

                              Action   Detail                             Description
                                       Illegal action                     Placeholder.
                                       None action                        Executing nothing or stopping continuous action.
                                       Move                               Moving to a certain direction determined by move x and move y.
                                       Normal Attack                      Executing normal attack to an enemy unit.
                                       Skill1                             Executing the first skill.
                                       Skill2                             Executing the second skill.
                              What     Skill3                             Executing the third skill.
                                       Skill4                             Executing the fourth skill (only a few heroes have Skill4).
                                       Summoner ability                   An additional skill choosing before the game begins (10 to choose).
                                       Return home(Recall)                Returning to spring, should be continuously executed.
                                       Item skill                         Some items can enable an additional skill to player’s hero.
                                       Restore                            Blood recovering continuously in 10s, can be disturbed.
                                       Collaborative skill                Skill given by special ally heroes.
                                       Move X                             The x-axis offset of moving direction.
                                       Move Y                             The y-axis offset of moving direction.
                              How
                                       Skill X                            The x-axis offset of a skill.
                                       Skill Y                            The y-axis offset of a skill.
                              Who      Target unit                        The game unit(s) chosen to attack.


B.6        N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

Figure 11 shows the detailed network architecture of the RLHG agent, which consists of two parts:
the pre-trained Wukong model (Ye et al., 2020a), and the human enhancement module.

                                                 Game Stats Feature     MLP
                        Agent4                                                                                              Attention Key
                                                     Unit Feature                                                                                                            Monster Hero    Turret
                       Agent3                                                                                                                                                               …
                                                                                                                                                                       who
                      Agent2                       Monsters      ……
                     Agent1                                                                                          LSTM
                                                                 ……                                                                   Actions                          how Offset_x Offset_y
                                          Unit       Turrets            MLP
             Game Stat Info
                                                                 ……
                                                                                                                                                                              Move Attack       Skill
   Spatial Feature                                  Minions
                                                                                     MLP                                                                               what                 …
  Unit                                                                                            Max Pooling
                                                      Heros      ……                                                  MLP
                         Unit                                                                                                        Action Mask
                                                                                                      Embed4
                                                   Spatial Feature                                   Embed3
                                                                                                    Embed2                                                Farming Related
             Game Stat Info                                                                        Embed1                                                 KDA Related                  Team Value
                                                                        CNN                                                              Multi-Head
                                                                                                                                        Multi-Head
                                                                                                                                       Multi-Head         Damage Related
                                                                                                                                      Multi-Head
                                                                                                                                            Value1
                                                                                                                                          Value1
                                                                                           Invisible Opponent Info                       Value1           Pushing Related
                                                                                                                                         Value
                                                                                                                                                          Win/Lose Related               Mixer
                                                                                    Wukong Model


                     Human
                                                                                                       Task Gate
               Game Stat Info                                                                                                                                               Multi-Head
                                                                                                                                            MLP
    Spatial Feature                                                                                                                                                     Human Primitive Value
   Unit
                                                 Human Feature                MLP          LSTM                      MLP
                             Unit
                                                                                                                                                                              Multi-Head
                                                                                                                                            MLP       |abs|
                                                                                                                                                                              Human Gain
              Game Stat Info

                                                                                                                                                              MVP Score Related    Participation Related

                                                                         Human Enhancement Module                                                             Highlight Related    Resource Related


                                                                      Figure 11: The network structure.

Human Enhancement Module. Human features are sequentially fed into the Fully-Connected (FC)
layers with LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) to extract human policy embedding. The policy
embedding is used to predict human primitive values and gains. We apply the absolute activation
function to ensure that the gains are non-negative. To manage the uncertain value of state-action
in the game, we introduce the multi-head value estimation (Ye et al., 2020a) into the network by
grouping the human reward in Table 5.
Human Conditioned Policy Modeling. We use surgery techniques (Chen et al., 2015; OpenAI
et al., 2019) to fuse the human policy embedding into the agent’s original network, i.e. adding more
randomly initialized units to an internal FC layer. The task gate is used to control the agent’s policy


                                                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


style, i.e., for the non-enhancement mode, the task gate is set to 0, and for the enhancement mode,
the task gate is set to 1. The agent’s policy network predicts a sequence of actions for each agent
based on its observation and human policy embedding.
Network Parameter Details. All hyper-parameters of the Wukong model are consistent with the
original (Ye et al., 2020a). The unit size and step size of the LSTM module in the human enhancement
module are set to 4096 and 16, respectively. The parameters of each FC layer are shown in our code.
We use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) with an initial learning rate of 0.0001 for fine-turning.

B.7   A LGORITHM D ETAILS

The more detailed pseudocode of RLHG is shown in Algorithm 2. The RLHG approach aims to
fine-tune a pre-trained agent π0 to enhance a given human model πH . The RLHG algorithm consists
of two stages: the Human Primitive Value Estimation stage and the Human Enhancement Training
stage.
Human Primitive Value Estimation: The RLHG algorithm starts with initializing a human primitive
value network Vϕ . Trajectories are collected by pairing the pre-trained agent π0 and the human πH to
perform in a collaborative environment. Next, these trajectories are utilized to compute the human
return GH for achieving human goals G H . Lastly, the human primitive value network Vϕ is updated
using the human return by minimizing the Temporal Difference (TD) error. After Vϕ converges, it is
frozen and used as the baseline for calculating human gains in the next stage.
Human Enhancement Training: The RLHG algorithm initializes the agent’s policy network πθ
and value network Vψ conditioned on the human policy πH , and a gain network ∆ω . Trajectories are
then collected by pairing the agent πθ and the human πH to perform in a collaborative environment.
Subsequently, these trajectories are employed to compute the original return G and human return GH .
The RLHG algorithm calculates the human gain from the human return based on the predicted human
primitive value Vϕ (s). This human gain is used for human-centered advantage calculations. The
agent’s policy network πθ is fine-tuned using the Policy Gradient algorithm (Sutton et al., 1999; Mnih
et al., 2016), like PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), which combines the original advantage A and the
human-centered advantage A   bH . The agent’s value network Vψ is fine-tuned using the agent’s original
return. Finally, the gain network is updated when the human gain is positive, as per Equation 5.

Algorithm 2 Reinforcement Learning from Human Gain (RLHG)
Require: Human policy network πH , human goals G H , agent policy network π0 , agent value network V ,
hyper-parameter α
Process:
 1: Initialize human primitive value network Vϕ ;
    // Stage I: Human Primitive Value Estimation
 2: while not converged do
 3:    Freeze π0 and collect human-agent team < π0 , πH > trajectories;
 4:    Compute human return GH for achieving goals G H ;
 5:    Update human primitive value network Vϕ ← GH
 6: end while
 7: Initialize agent policy network πθ ← π0 , agent value network Vψ ← V , human gain network ∆ω ;
    // Stage II: Human Enhancement Training
 8: while not converged do
 9:    Freeze Vϕ and collect human-agent team < πθ , πH > trajectories;
10:    Compute agent original return G and human return GH ;
11:    Compute agent self-centered advantage A = G − Vψ ;
12:    Compute human gain ∆ = GH − Vϕ
13:    Compute human-centered advantage A    bH = ∆ − ∆ω ;
14:    Update agent policy network πθ ← A + α · A   bH ;
15:    Update agent value network Vψ ← G;
16:    if ∆ > 0 then
17:        Update human gain network ∆ω ← ∆;
18:    end if
19: end while



                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C         S UPPLEMENTARY E XPERIMENT
C.1       BASELINE D ETAILS

We describe the training process of two baseline agents here, including the Wukong agent and the
Human Reward Enhancement (HRE) agent.
Wukong (Ye et al., 2020a): A state-of-the-art agent in Honor of Kings, which can easily beat the
high-level human players. As shown in Figure 12, the agent is trained in agent-only team settings,
with the optimization objective being to maximize Game Victories.

                                                                                            Agent-Only

                                                                      𝜋"# (𝑜! ,ℎ! )    𝑠!
                 Observation 𝑜!
                                                                                       𝑎!

                                  Encoder
                                                                                       𝐺!       +

                                                                      𝑉$# (𝑠! ,ℎ! )



Figure 12: The Wukong training process. The policy network πθ̂ and value network Vψ̂ are trained in the
agent-only team settings.

To avoid instability in training within large-scale distributed environments, Wukong uses the Dual-
clip PPO algorithm to train the policy network πθ̂ , which is a practical improvement of the PPO
algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017). When πθ̂ (a|s) ≫ πθ̂old (a|s) and A < 0, the radio r(θ̂) =
 πθ̂ (a|s)
πθ̂   (a|s) is huge, which causes the large and unbounded variance since r(θ̂) · A ≪ 0. Dual-clip
    old
PPO introduces another clipping parameter c that indicates the lower bound when A < 0. The policy
loss is the following:
                                  h                                               i
                Lπ (θ̂) = Es∈S,a∈A max(cA, min(clip(r(θ̂), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)A, r(θ̂)A) ,
where ϵ is the original clip parameter in PPO. In the experiments, we use the same parameters as
Wukong, with the two clipping hyperparameters ϵ and c set to 0.2 and 3, respectively. The discount
factor γ is set as 0.998. Besides, Wukong uses Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) (Schulman
et al., 2015) for return calculation, with λ = 0.95 to reduce the variance caused by delayed effects.
To decrease the variance of value estimation, Wukong uses full information about the game state,
including observations hidden from the policy, as input to the value network Vψ̂ in training. To
estimate the value of the ever-changing game state more accurately, Wukong introduces multi-head
value by decomposing the reward. The multi-head value loss is:
                                                                 
                                               X
                               LV (θ̂) = Es∈S     (Gk − Vθ̂k (s)) ,
                                                   k

where Gk and Vθ̂k are the discounted return and value estimation of the k-th head, respectively. Then,
the total value estimation is the weighted sum of the head value estimates Vtotal (s) = k wk · Vθ̂k (s),
                                                                                       P

where wk is the weight of the k-th head.
HRE (Human Reward Enhancement): An agent that is fine-tuned from the pre-trained Wukong
agent by directly incorporating the human-centered objective into the optimization objective. The
optimization objective can be formulated as:
                                                              h                   i
              J(θ) = V πθ ,πH (s) + α · VHπθ ,πH (s) = Eπθ ,πH Gt + α · GH
                                                                         t |st = s ,

where α is a balancing parameter. The approximation to the policy gradient is defined as follows:
                                                                                        
                                X∞

             ∇J(θ) = Eπθ ,πH       ∇θ log πθ (at |ot ) A(st , at ) + α · AH (st , at )  ,
                                  t=0



                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where A(s, a) = Eπθ ,πH [Gt |st = s, at = a] − V πθ ,πH (s) is the self-centered advantage and
                                            πθ ,πH
AH (s, a) = Eπθ ,πH [GH
                      t |st = s, at = a] − VH      (s) is the human-centered advantage.

                                                                                        Human-Agent   Agent-Only
                 Observation 𝑜!
                                                                   𝜋% (𝑜! ,ℎ! )   𝑠!
                                                                                  𝑎!
                                           Encoder

                                                                                  𝐺!
                                                     x Task Gate
                                                                   𝑉& (𝑠! ,ℎ! )
                                                                                            +             +
                                                                                  𝐺!"
                                           LSTM
              Human History Info
                          "                                          𝑉' (ℎ! )
             ℎ! = (𝑠!" , 𝑠!#$ , …, 𝑠$" )
                                                                                            𝛽%         1 − 𝛽%


Figure 13: The HRE training process. The policy network πθ and value network Vψ conditioned on the human
policy πH are trained in 1 − β% agent-only team settings and β% human-agent team settings. The human value
network Vϕ is trained to estimate the expected human return in human-agent team settings.

In comparison to Wukong (see Figure 13), HRE introduces a value network Vϕ (s) to estimate the
human value VHπθ ,πH (s) when teaming up with agent policy πθ , which is utilized to calculate the
human-centered advantage. The difference between HRE and RLHG is that HRE lacks modeling of
human gains. Apart from these differences, other settings remain consistent with RLHG. Firstly, the
policy network πθ and value network Vψ are also conditioned on the human policy πH . Secondly,
the agent is trained in both β% human-agent team settings and 1 − β% agent-only team settings. The
human value network Vϕ is only trained in human-agent team settings by minimizing the following
loss function:                                  h                 i
                               L(ϕ) = Es∈S,a∈A ∥GH − Vϕ (s)∥2 .



C.2   A BLATION S TUDY

We examine the influence of the balance parameter α, i.e., the relative importance of human goals
relative to the task goal. The results of RLHG agents trained with different values of α are shown
in Figure 14. We can see that with the increase of α, the human model’s performance in achieving
human goals is significantly improved, but the negative effect is that the agent sacrifices its original
ability to achieve the task goal (The Win Rate metric is reduced). We also notice that when α is too
large, the Win Rate is significantly reduced, which will also have a negative impact on the MVP score
goal. We find that when α is set to 2, it not only greatly improves the human model’s performance in
achieving human goals, but also has little impact on the Win Rate. Therefore, in our experiments, α
is set to 2.


   Figure 14: Influence of the balance parameter α. Note that α = 0 means training without enhancement.


C.3   A DAPTIVE A DJUSTMENT M ECHANISM

We implement an adaptive adjustment mechanism by simply utilizing the agent’s original value
network to measure the degree of completing the task goal. We first normalize the output of the
original value network and then set the task gate to 1 (enhancing the human) when the normalized


                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


value is above the specified threshold ξ, and to 0 (completing the task) otherwise. The threshold ξ is
used to control the timing of enhancement. The results of RLHG agents with different values of ξ are
shown in Figure 15. We can see that as the threshold ξ increases, the Win Rate increases, and the
human model’s performance on human goals decreases. In practical applications, the threshold ξ can
be set according to human preference.


Figure 15: Influence of the threshold ξ. Note that ξ = 1 means never enhancement, and ξ = 0 means always
enhancement.



D     D ETAILS OF H UMAN -AGENT C OLLABORATION T EST

D.1     E THICAL R EVIEW

The ethics committee of a third-party organization conducted an ethical review of our project. They
reviewed our experimental procedures and risk avoidance methods (see Appendix D.1.3). They
believed that our project complies with the "New Generation of AI Ethics Code" 2 of the country
to which the participants belonged (China), so they approved our study. In addition, all participants
consented to the experiment and provided informed consent (see Appendix D.1.1) for the study.

D.1.1    I NFORMED C ONSENT
All participants were told the following experiment guidelines before testing:

• This experiment is to study human-agent collaboration technology in MOBA games.
• Your identity information will not be disclosed to anyone.
• All game statistics are only used for academic research.
• You will be invited into matches where your opponents and teammates are agents.
• Your goal is to win the game as much as possible by collaborating with agent teammates.
• Your agent teammates will assist you in achieving your individual goals in the game.
• After each test, you can report your gaming experience and express your preferences regarding the
  agent teammates.
• After each test, you may also voluntarily fill out a debriefing questionnaire to tell us your open-ended
  feedback about the agent teammates.
• Each game lasts 10-20 minutes.
• You may voluntarily choose whether to take the test. You can terminate the test at any time if you
  feel unwell during the test.
• At any time, if you want to delete your data, you can contact the game provider directly to delete it.

If participants volunteer to take the test, they will first provide written informed consent, then we
will provide them with the equipment and game account, and explain the experimental details on the
screen.
  2
    China: MOST issues New Generation of AI Ethics Code, https://www.dataguidance.com/n
ews/china-most-issues-new-generation-ai-ethics-code


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.1.2    S CREENSHOTS
Screenshots of detailed experimental instructions are shown below.

      1. Read tutorial and instruction on the study and gameplay. (Figure 16)
      2. Read the detailed test content and precautions. (Figure 17)
      3. Play the game with agents until the game is complete. (Figure 18)
      4. Answer questions about perceptions and preferences.(Figure 19, 20, 21, and 22)
      5. Volunteer to complete a debriefing questionnaire regarding open-ended feedback from your
         agent teammates. (Figure 23)
      6. Repeat steps 3, 4, and 5 for a total of 20 times.

After the participant has read it carefully and confirmed complete understanding, the test will begin.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (a) Welcome participants to the experiment.                    (b) Introduce test equipment.


             (c) Introduces test mode.                     (d) Introduce participant’s controllable hero.


       (e) Introduce the control mechanism.                    (f) Explain the task goal of the game.


                                (g) Explain the enhanced individual goals.

                        Figure 16: Screenshots of tutorial and instruction screens.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   (a) Introduce agent teammates and opponents.            (b) Describe testing requirements and compensation.

                                Figure 17: Screenshot of experiment content.


      (a) Repeat the following process to test.                   (b) Confirm completion of each test.

                                      Figure 18: Screenshots of each test.


         (a) Elicit participant’s preference.                     (b) Confirm participant’s preference.

                 Figure 19: Screenshots of Behavioral Rationality elicitation over each test.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a) Elicit participant’s preference.                   (b) Confirm participant’s preference.

                Figure 20: Screenshots of Enhancement Degree elicitation over each test.


        (a) Elicit participant’s preference.                   (b) Confirm participant’s preference.

                 Figure 21: Screenshots of Gaming Experience elicitation over each test.


        (a) Elicit participant’s preference.                   (b) Confirm participant’s preference.

                  Figure 22: Screenshots of Overall Preference elicitation over each test.


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Figure 23: Screenshot of open-ended feedback about the agent teammates from debrief questionnaire.


D.1.3    P OTENTIAL PARTICIPANT R ISKS
First, we analyze the risks of this experiment to the participants. The potential participant risks of the
experiment mainly include the leakage of identity information and the time cost. And we have taken
a series of measures to minimize these risks.
Identity Information. A series of measures have been taken to avoid this risk:

• All participants will be recruited with the help of a third party (the game provider of Honor of
  Kings), and we do not have access to participants’ identities.
• We make a risk statement for participants and sign an identity information confidentiality agreement
  under the supervision of a third party.
• We only use unidentifiable game statistics in our research, which are obtained from third parties.
• Special equipment and game accounts are provided to the participants to prevent equipment and
  account information leakage.
• The identity information of all participants is not disclosed to the public.

Time Cost. We will pay participants to compensate for their time costs. Participants receive $5
at the end of each game test, and the winner will receive an additional $2. Each game test takes
approximately 10 to 20 minutes, and participants can get about an average of $20 an hour.

D.2     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

D.2.1    PARTICIPANT D ETAILS
To conduct our experiments, we communicated with the game provider and obtained testing authoriza-
tion. The game provider assisted in recruiting 30 experienced participants with anonymized personal
information, which comprised 15 high-level (top 1%) and 15 general-level (top30%) participants. All
participants have more than three years of experience in Honor of Kings and promise to be familiar
with all mechanics in the game.
And special equipment and game accounts are provided to each participant to prevent equipment and
account information leakage. The game statistics we collect are only for experimental purposes and
are not disclosed to the public.

D.2.2    E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN
We used a within-participant design for the experiment: each participant teams up with four agents.
This design allowed us to evaluate both objective performance as well as subjective preference.
All participants read detailed guidelines and provided informed consent before the testing. Each
participant tested 20 matches. Each participant is asked to randomly team up with two different


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


types of agents: the Wukong agent and the RLHG agent. After each test, participants reported their
preference over their agent teammates. For fair comparisons, participants were not told the type of
their agent teammates. The human model-agent team (4 Wukong agents plus 1 human model) was
adopted as the fixed opponent for all tests.
In addition, as mentioned in Ye et al. (2020a); Gao et al. (2021), the response time of agents is usually
set to 193ms, including observation delay (133ms) and response delay (60ms). The average APM of
agents and top e-sport players are usually comparable (80.5 and 80.3, respectively). To make our
test results more accurate, we adjusted the agents’ capability to match the performance of high-level
humans by increasing the observation delay (from 133ms to 200ms) and response delay (from 60ms
to 120 ms).

D.2.3    PARTICIPANT S URVEY D ESCRIPTION
We designed an IRB-approved participant survey on what top 5 goals participants want to achieve
in-game. The participant survey contains 8 initial goals, including Game Victory, High MVP Score,
More Highlights, More Kill Counts, Few Death Counts, High Participation, More Resources, and
More Visible Information. Each participant can vote up to 5 non-repeating goals, and can also add
additional goals. 30 participants voluntarily participated in the voting, and the result is shown in
Figure 24.

                          Human Goals                           Votes

                       High MVP Score
                        Game Victory *
                     High Participation
                       More Highlights
                       More Resources
                       More Kill Counts
                     Few Death Counts
               More Visible Information
                                           0               10              20              30


 Figure 24: Voting results on human goals in Honor of Kings, based on statistics from our participant survey.


D.2.4    P REFERENCE D ESCRIPTION
After each test, participants gave scores on several subjective preference metrics to evaluate their
agent teammates, including the Behavioral Rationality: the reasonableness of the agent’s behavior,
the Enhancement Degree: the degree to which the agent enhances your abilities to achieve your
goals, the Gaming Experience: your overall gaming experience, and the Overall Preference: your
overall preference for your agent teammates.
For each metric, we provide a detailed problem description and a description of the reference scale
for the score. Participants rated their agent teammates based on how well their subjective feelings
matched the descriptions in the test. The different metrics are described as follows:

• For the Behavioral Rationality, "Do you think your agent teammate’s behavior is reasonable?
  Please evaluate Behavioral Rationality according to the following scales."
    1) Terrible: totally unreasonable.
    2) Poor: more unreasonable behavior.
    3) Normal: some behavior is unreasonable.
    4) Good: less unreasonable behavior.
    5) Perfect: no unreasonable behavior.
• For the Enhancement Degree, "To what extent do you think the agent enhances your abilities to
  achieve your individual goals? Please evaluate the Enhancement Degree according to the following
  scales."


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    1) Terrible: no enhancements, great reductions.
    2) Poor: no enhancements, slight reductions.
    3) Normal: no enhancements, no reductions.
    4) Good: slight enhancements
    5) Perfect: great enhancements.
• For the Gaming Experience, "How is your gaming experience? Please rate the following words
  according to your subjective feelings."
    1) Terrible.
    2) Poor.
    3) Normal: close to teaming up with human teammates.
    4) Good.
    5) Perfect.
• For the Overall Preference, "What is your overall preference for your agent teammates? Please rate
  the following words according to your subjective feelings.".
    1) Terrible.
    2) Poor.
    3) Normal: close to teaming up with human teammates.
    4) Good.
    5) Perfect.

Table 8: The subjective preference results (95% confidence intervals) of all participants in the Human-Agent
Game Tests.

          Participant Preference Metrics                                Type of Agent
                                              Participant Level
          (from terrible to perfect, 1∼5)                            Wukong       RLHG
                                                General-level       2.03 ± 0.31     3.60 ± 0.30
              Behavioral Rationality
                                                 High-level         2.81 ± 0.21     4.06 ± 0.30
                                                General-level       2.10± 0.40      3.50 ± 0.24
              Enhancement Degree
                                                 High-level         2.94 ± 0.21     4.14 ± 0.25
                                                General-level       2.40 ± 0.41     4.01 ± 0.30
               Gaming Experience
                                                 High-level         3.06 ± 0.27     4.22 ± 0.30
                                                General-level       2.65 ± 0.35     3.95 ± 0.28
                Overall Preference
                                                 High-level         3.06 ± 0.21     4.19 ± 0.29


D.2.5    A DDITIONAL S UBJECTIVE P REFERENCE R ESULTS
Detailed subjective preference statistics are presented in Table 8. We can see that both high-level and
general-level participants preferred the RLHG agent over the Wukong agent.
Behavioral Rationality. We can see that the Behavioral Rationality of the Wukong agent was lower
than normal, indicating that participants believed that most of the behaviors of the Wukong agent
lacked rationality. The participants generally believed that the behavior of the RLHG agent was more
reasonable, therefore they scored the RLHG agent more than normal.
Enhancement Degree. Participants believed that the Wukong agent did not bring them any effective
enhancement, while they believed that the RLHG agent effectively enhanced their abilities to achieve
their individual goals.
Gaming Experience. Participants agreed that effective enhancement gave them a good gaming
experience, while the irrational behavior of the Wukong agent degraded their gaming experience.


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Overall Preference. In general, participants were satisfied with the RLHG agent and gave higher
scores in the Overall Preference metric. The results of these subjective preference metrics are also
consistent with the results of objective performance metrics, further verifying the effectiveness of the
RLHG approach.

D.2.6    PARTICIPANT C OMMENTS
After each game test, participants provided voluntary feedback on their agent teammates. Some
participants commented on the RLHG agent "Teaming up with the agent (RLHG) as teammates
makes me feel good, they helped me achieve a higher MVP score" and "The agent teammates (RLHG)
proactively considered my in-game needs, assisted me in building advantages, and provided the
resources I required". Other participants provided feedback on the Wukong agent, stating that "The
agent (Wukong) brought me a less enjoyable experience, as they rarely paid attention to my gameplay
behavior" and "My agent teammates (Wukong) frequently left me feeling isolated and undervalued".
Such voluntary feedback from participants can offer insights into the effectiveness of the RLHG
approach.

E    B ROADER I MPACTS
The main goal of our research is to develop better technologies that enable artificial agents to assist
humans more effectively in complex environments. This technology has the potential to benefit the
research community and various real-world applications, such as friendly assistive robots.
To the research community. Games, as the microcosm of real-world problems, have been widely
used as testbeds to evaluate the performance of Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques for decades.
And MOBA poses a great challenge to the AI community, especially in the field of Human-Agent
Collaboration (HAC). Even though the existing MOBA-game AI systems have achieved or even
exceeded human-level performance, they mainly focus on how to compete rather than how to assist
humans, leaving HAC in complex environments still to be investigated. To this end, this paper
introduces a learning methodology to train agents to assist humans and enhance humans’ ability to
achieve goals in complex human-agent teaming environments. We herewith expect that this work can
provide inspiration for the human enhancement and human assistance in various AI research.
To the real-world applications. Firstly, our AI has found real-world applications in games and
is changing the way MOBA game designers work. For example, for PVE (player vs environment)
teaching mode, introducing AI with human enhancement into the game is a low-cost method to
increase the interest of novice players. Secondly, our method can be directly applied to any pre-
trained agent, and only needs to be fine-tuned with human gain to change it from apathetic to
human-enhanced. It could be directly applied to assistive robotics, such as enhancing the safety of
humans in collaboration with industrial robotic arms.
However, we should take into consideration the possibility of human goals being harmful. Therefore,
if agents are optimized for harmful goals, this can have negative social impacts, as with all advanced
AI techniques, such as AlphaStar (Vinyals et al., 2019), OpenAI Five (OpenAI et al., 2019) and
Cicero (FAIR et al., 2022). To avoid these problems, we increase regulation and scrutiny during
technological research and development to ensure that human goals do not negatively impact society.
In addition, we recommend that when releasing the pre-trained agent model, some restrictions need
to be added for fine-tuning, such as enhancing the safety of humans.

F    F UTURE W ORK
In some application scenarios, human experience may be difficult to quantify directly but can be
implicitly modeled through human feedback, such as in Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018; Ouyang et al., 2022). Therefore,
combining RLHF with RLHG for more general collaborative tasks is a promising research direction.
Besides, our approach and experiments only consider the scenario where multiple agents enhance
one human. Another worthy research direction is how to simultaneously enhance the experience of
multiple humans with diverse behaviors.



                                                  29
