Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W IDE N EURAL N ETWORK T RAINING DYNAMICS FOR
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         While deep reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated remarkable empirical
         success, understanding certain aspects of the training of deep RL agents remains
         elusive, leading to many RL algorithms requiring additional heuristic ingredients
         to be practically useful. In contrast to supervised learning, RL algorithms typically
         do not have access to ground-truth labels, leading to a more challenging train-
         ing setup. In this work, we analyze the training dynamics of overparametrized,
         infinitely-wide value function networks, trained through temporal difference up-
         dates by extending previous results from neural tangent kernel approaches in su-
         pervised learning. We derive closed-form expressions for the training dynamics of
         common temporal difference policy evaluation methods as well as an analysis on
         the effects of uncertainty quantification of ensembling, a common heuristic mea-
         sure of uncertainty in RL, in the infinite-width limit. We validate our analytically
         derived dynamic predictions on a toy environment, where we find good agreement
         with real neural networks. We also evaluate our methods on the classic control cart
         pole environment, and discover that the predictions and uncertainty quantification
         of our analytical solutions outperform those made by true ensembles trained via
         gradient descent.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) presents great promise as a tool for sequential decision-making
in complex environments, although it comes with a number of unique challenges compared to other
machine learning tasks. For example, common features of deep RL algorithms are function approx-
imation, bootstrapping, and off-policy learning – sometimes referred to as the deadly triad (Sutton
& Barto, 2018) – which can lead to instability in training. This manifests in practice in the form of
algorithms that require significant fine-tuning of numerous hyperparameters and additional ingredi-
ents required to make training stable.
The theoretical tractability of the training mechanics of deep RL is also arguably more challenging
than that of deep supervised learning. Well-established branches of theory exist in supervised learn-
ing that model the training dynamics of neural networks (NNs) trained with supervised data, such
as the neural tangent kernel (NTK) approach (Jacot et al., 2018; Huang & Yau, 2020; Zhang et al.,
2017; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019). This approach has led to insight into the generalization capabilities
of training neural networks (Jacot et al., 2018; Roberts et al., 2022) as well as the development
of principled methods of commonly used heuristic approaches, such as ensembling for uncertainty
quantification (Lee et al., 2019).
In contrast, the usual training setups in RL do not admit ground-truth labeled data and are therefore
not immediately tractable with the tools developed for supervised learning. For example, a common
way to train value networks in RL is to employ bootstrapping: the regression is a moving target,
so that by the end of training, the network converges to the correct value function. We aim to
bring the tools and formalism developed in the NTK approach to RL. In particular, we extend the
work presented by Lee et al. (2019) to address networks trained through temporal difference (TD)
updates in the infinite width limit and the effect that ensembling, a ubiquitous method used in RL
for uncertainty quantification, has on the uncertainty predictions.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Contributions. We derive the infinite-width limit neural network training dynamics solutions for
TD learning (sec. 4) considering the cases where gradients are propagated to all terms in the loss,
corresponding to using a single value network (sec. 4.1), as well as the more common setup in prac-
tice that uses a primary and a target Q-network (sec. 4.2). We validate our predictions on a simple,
interpretable toy environment as well as the classical control cart pole environment and compare the
predictions to the empirical training of an ensemble of networks (sec. 5). We find that the analytic
infinite-width limit solution of the dynamics equations captures epistemic uncertainty better than its
empirical counterpart, suggesting that ensembles may behave unexpectedly or suboptimally in TD
learning.


2     R ELATED WORK

2.1   T EMPORAL D IFFERENCE L EARNING

Many model-free deep RL approaches rely on iteratively evaluating and improving a particular pol-
icy. Approximate dynamic programming methods rely on bootstrapping the current estimate of the
value function to improve the evaluation of the learned policy’s value, and this approach is crucial to
many off-policy methods (Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja
et al., 2018). Given a current parametric estimate Qθ (s, a) for the expected return of policy π after
taking action a in state s, the TD loss corresponding to a batch of transitions (si , ai , ri , s′i ) corre-
sponds to
                                                                               2
                                  X
                          L(θ) =     (Qθ (si , ai ) − ri − γQθ (s′i , π(s′i ))) ,                        (1)
                                     i

where in practice the term involving Qθ (s′i , π(s′i )) is often replaced with a target network derived
from Q that does not propagate gradients to stabilize training. Bootstrapping is particularly nec-
essary for offline RL methods, where no further interaction with the environment is possible and
improving the policy via importance sampling gradients would result in excessively high variance
(Precup, 2000).
Existing work in the analysis of convergence and training dynamics of value functions under TD
updates with function approximators mostly limits itself to the tabular or linear function approxi-
mation settings (Bhandari et al., 2018; Gordon, 2000) due to the low degree of tractability of deep
neural networks. Nonetheless, even in the linear function approximation case it can be shown that
TD updates can lead to divergent training (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997), highlighting the fact that
we do not yet have a good characterization of nonlinear function approximators in RL. Recent work
has paid particular attention to how the learning dynamics of RL affect the neural network’s learned
representations (Lyle et al., 2019). We complement the investigation into the training dynamics of
deep value function approximators by adapting existing techniques for the infinite-width analysis in
supervised learning to TD updates for policy evaluation.

2.2   W IDE N EURAL N ETWORKS

One of the objectives in the theory of deep learning is to explain training and generalization, which
is made challenging due to the complexity of neural networks. Surprisingly, in the limit where the
width of the hidden layers tends to infinity, analytical approaches become tractable (Jacot et al.,
2018; Lee et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2017; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019).
Of particular importance to our analysis is the work by Lee et al. (2019), which attempts to character-
ize training and generalization for infinitely wide neural networks in the supervised learning setting,
and show correspondence between ensembles of wide neural networks and Gaussian processes.
The derived theoretical results are exact only in the case of neural networks with infinitely wide
layers and continuous time gradient descent, although the authors find good correspondence between
the infinite width case and finite-sized networks and provide critical learning rates under which
discrete gradient descent steps approximate the dynamics of their continuous counterpart. In this
work we have taken the main results from the work by Lee et al. (2019) and attempted to adapt these
findings in the RL setting.


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.3   E NSEMBLES IN R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

A common practical method to estimate uncertainty in value function estimates in RL is to employ
an ensemble of neural networks trained in parallel through TD updates with different random ini-
tializations. Ensembling provides state-of-the-art uncertainty quantification in supervised learning
(Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), and has proven to be an empirically
successful approach in a wide range of RL contexts, from encouraging efficient exploration in on-
line learning (Osband et al., 2018; 2016) to ensuring that learned policies are supported with a high
degree of confidence in offline RL (An et al., 2021; Eriksson et al., 2022). As a consequence, the
quality of uncertainty estimation has been identified as one of the current potential bottlenecks in
improving RL algorithms (Levine et al., 2020). While successful in practice, the theoretical backing
for using ensembles as a principled method for uncertainty quantification is weak. For example, it
can be shown that naı̈vely trained ensemble members of deep neural networks need to be trained
with additional terms in the loss in order to be interpreted as samples from a Bayesian posterior
(D'Angelo & Fortuin, 2021), which is not widespread practice in RL. With our work, we inves-
tigate the effect of using ensembles in the infinite width limit for uncertainty quantification, and
characterize the behavior of an ensemble of independently trained value functions.

3     P RELIMINARIES

We consider the standard discounted reward RL setting (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Levine et al., 2020),
formalized as a Markov decision process (MDP), given by a tuple (S, A, r, P, γ), where S is the set
of states, A the set of actions, r = r(s, a) is the reward obtained after taking action a from state
s, P (s′ |s, a) is the probability of transitioning to state s′ from state s with action a (also called the
environment transition probability, or dynamics of the system) and γ ∈ [0, 1] the discount factor.
We will consider the off-policy policy evaluation task: for any given policy we wish to evaluate the
value of that policy from a static dataset.
The expected return following policy π satisfies the Bellman equation for the state-action value
function Q:
                    Qπ (s, a) = r + γEs′ ∼P (s′ |s,a), a′ ∼π(a′ |s′ ) [Qπ (s′ , a′ )] ,      (2)
which leads to the TD update rule presented in eq. 6.
Next, we extend the notation by Lee et al. (2019) to apply to the TD setting. For the purpose
of notation in this section, we will assume the action is part of the input to the Q-network (as is
customary for continuous action spaces). Let x be a concatenation of s and a, so xi = (si , ai ) and
D = {(si , ai , ri , s′i )}i denotes the dataset of previously collected experience that is available for
training. We will use |D| to denote the number of transitions in the dataset, |θ| to denote the number
of parameters in the neural network, |s| and |a| to denote the dimensions of the state and action
spaces respectively. We will consider the case where Qπ is approximated using a neural network
Qθ , with parameters θ = {W (i) , b(i) }i for every layer i, and a nonlinearity ϕ (such as a sigmoid or
a ReLU function), for example:

           Qθ (x) = ϕ ϕ . . . ϕ(xW (1) + b(1) ) . . . W (L−1) + b(L−1) W (L) + b(L) .                 (3)

Following Lee et al. (2019) we will use the NTK parametrization:
                                       ( (l)            (l)
                                         W i,j = √σnwl ωi,j
                                          (l)       (l)     ,
                                         bj = σb βj
         (l)      (l)                                                                           (l)   (l)
where ωi,j and βj are the trainable parameters, drawn i.i.d. from a standard Gaussian, ωi,j , βj ∼
N (0, 1), and nl is the layer width for layer l.
As is standard in the NTK literature, the theoretical analysis will be approached under the lens of
full-batch continuous-time gradient descent. Following the work by Lee et al. (2019), from which
we directly borrow notation, the base equations of motion for the vector of parameters θt at time t
with learning rate η is
                                           θ̇t = −η∇θ L .                                       (4)


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The exact form of the loss L and how gradients are propagated through it will depend on the TD
update rule modeled, and will be discussed in the next section and will depend on whether a target
network is used, which is a common and often necessary ingredient to make RL algorithms stable
(Mnih et al., 2015). Thus, we will differentiate between when only a single Q-network is used and
where instead a target network is also employed along with the primary network (sometimes referred
to as primary, online, behavior, or policy network).
We will find it useful to refer to X as a matrix of all the state-action pairs in the dataset, i.e.:
                                          x1
                                            
                                        x2                |D|×(|s|+|a|)
                                  X =  ...  , X ∈ R
                                             

                                              x|D|
and X ′ for a matrix of all next-state-action pairs, where the next action a′ is computed from s′ by
the policy we wish to evaluate. Similarly, r is the stack of rewards r from the dataset. Additionally,
we will use θ̄ to indicate the parameters of the target network (θ for primary). For the Q-values, we
will use the following notation:

                                                     Qlin   ′
                                                      θ t (x ) ,
                       The approximation of Q-values by linearization at state-action x′
                    using parameters θt at timestep t (we will use θ̄t for target NN parameters).
                                                                                                def
where the linearization is a first-order Taylor expansion around θ = θ0 . Letting ωt = θt − θ0 :
                                            def
                                   Qlin
                                    θt (x) = Qθ0 (x) + ∇θ Qθ0 (x)|θ=θ0 ωt .                            (5)
We will also be employing the following compact notation:
             def            |D|×1
       • Qt = Qlin
                θt (X ) ∈ R        is the approximation of Q-values by linearization at state-actions
         X (from the dataset), using parameters θ at time t (∇θ Qt ∈ R|D|×|θ| );
             def
       • Q′t = Qlin   ′
                 θt (X ) ∈ R
                             |D|×1
                                   – at X ′ (each element x′ = (s′ , π(s′ )) coming from a combination
         of dataset and policy), using θ in the single network case; and using θ̄ in the primary &
         target network case;
              def                     ∗
       • Q∗t = Qlin    ∗
                  θt (X ) ∈ R
                              |X |×1
                                     – at new state-action pairs X ∗ , using θ (|X ∗ | is the number of
         new state-action pairs we wish to evaluate).

4     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
Here we present the results for the dynamics of neural network parameters during training under
TD updates for a fixed policy and a static dataset of transitions. We consider two cases: first a TD
update where gradients are propagated through all terms in the equation (no target network), and
then the case with a target network through which no gradients are propagated, which is instead
updated through soft updates of the parameters to converge to the primary value network (analo-
gous to Haarnoja et al. (2018)). We will consider losses that minimize the dataset-averaged TD
error throughout, which in the tabular setting guarantees convergence to the true value function in
deterministic environments (although the same guarantee does not always hold for stochastic envi-
ronments) (Sutton & Barto, 2018).

4.1   S INGLE Q-N ETWORK

First, we consider the setup with no target network, where all gradients are passed through all terms
in the TD update. While in practice this is rarely used due to instabilities in training, in principle the
value function could be learned this way. This corresponds to the following loss in eq. 4:
                                           1                           2
                                     L=      ∥Qθ (X ) − r − γQθ (X ′ )∥2 .                             (6)
                                           2

                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We note that the proofs by Lee et al. (2019) can be adapted to show that even in this setup the
kernel is stable under gradient descent and the linearized approximation will also become arbitrarily
exact with this update rule during training for wide enough networks. This follows immediately by
replacing the original network f in the relevant proofs with Q − γQ′ , resulting in the same proof
with a different kernel for gradient descent. Hence, by substituting the linearization into the equation
of motion and taking derivatives, we obtain
                                           T
            ω̇t = −η (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) ((Q0 − r − γQ′0 ) + (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) ωt ) .                (7)
Much like Lee et al. (2019), this is a linear differential equation in ωt and can be solved analytically.
We present the derivation in Appendix A, and report here the solution:

                                            T
              ωt = − (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) Θ̄−1     0    I |D| − e−ηΘ̄0 t (Q0 − r − γQ′0 ) ,            (8)
where we introduce
                               def                                        T
                           Θ̄0 = (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) .                             (9)
Similarly to Lee et al. (2019), the distribution of an ensemble of networks after training can also be
                                                                                                ∗
computed in closed form, with a derivation also presented in Appendix A. The output Qlin   θ0 (X ) has
a distribution
               ∗ ∗             ∗           ′ ∗
                                                           ∗        ′ ∗
                                                                         T
   N Zr, KX X − Z(KX X − γKX X ) − Z(KX X − γKX X )
                           ′             ′         ′ ′

        − Z(KX X − γKX X − γKX X + γ 2 KX X )Z T ;
          ∗              ∗ ′
                                                                         ′             ′         ′ ′
  Z = ΘX X − γΘX X Θ̄−1 I |D| − e−ηΘ̄t ; Θ̄ = ΘX X − γΘX X − γΘX X + γ 2 ΘX X
                                                                                                    (10)
where K and Θ are the architecture-dependent NNGP kernels and NTK at initialization respectively
(Lee et al., 2017; Jacot et al., 2018) which can be computed analytically for a family of architectures
and activation functions.
Again, by analogy with the results by Lee et al. (2019), we note that the critical learning rate for
approximating the continuous-time gradient descent dynamics is given by
                                                         2
                                        ηcritical =                                             (11)
                                                    λmax + λmin
where λmax and λmin in this context are the maximum and minimum eigenvalues of Θ. Finally,
we remark that at every stage, setting γ = 0 reduces the equations to be identical to those by Lee
et al. (2019), which is expected because in this regime learning the value function is essentially a
supervised learning task of learning the immediate rewards, and all terms with policy dependence
(those involving X ′ ) drop out as would be expected in a supervised learning task. We will consider
cases with different values of γ.

4.2   W ITH TARGET N ETWORK

Here we consider a target network θ̄ which is updated through soft target network updates (Haarnoja
et al., 2018). For discrete updates to the target network, the following equation is used:
                                     θ̄t+1 = (1 − τ )θ̄t + τ θt+1 ,                                 (12)
where τ is the smoothing coefficient. The continuous-time equations of motion of the primary
network parameters θ and the target network parameters θ̄ are then given by
                                 (
                                   ω̇t = −η∇θ QT0 ∇Qlin   θt (X )
                                                                  L
                                                                                        (13)
                                   ˙ω̄t = τ (ωt − ω̄t ) ,

where ω̄t = θ̄t − θ0 (we assume the target network is initialized with the same parameters θ̄0 = θ0 ).
In this case the loss is given by
                                   1     lin                lin      2
                                L=     Q θt (X ) − r − γQ θ̄t (X ′ ) .
                                   2                                 2                          (14)
                         primary network                         target network


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We note that the loss and udpate rules of the DQN are no longer purely involving gradient updates.
Hence, the reasoning in sec. 4.1, justifying why reasoning analogous to Lee et al. (2019) guarantees
the linearization approximation holds during training in the TD case, no longer directly applies.
Nonetheless, we proceed with the analysis under the assumption it does. The loss presented here
is much more common in practical RL algorithms, and we present our step-by-step analysis in
Appendix B, and report here the solution:
           ωt = ∇θ QT0 Θ̄′−1  E 11 − I |D| + τ −1 ηγ∇θ Q′0 ∇θ QT0 E 21 (Q0 − r − γQ′0 ) ,

                         0                                                                      (15)
where we introduce
                                                     def
                                               Θ̄′0 = (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) ∇θ QT0 ,                                                          (16)
E 11 and E 21 are the block matrices from the result of the exponent:

                   E 11 E 12              −η∇θ Q0 ∇θ QT0 ηγ∇θ Q′0 ∇θ QT0
                               = exp                                       t .                                                             (17)
                   E 21 E 22                   τ I |D|           −τ I |D|

5       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present our experiments that show the described training dynamics. We consider
a fully connected NN architecture, trained with full-batch gradient descent, using a sufficiently small
learning rate (smaller than ηcritical ) so the approximation of continuous-time gradient descent holds
well. We design a toy environment to better illustrate our theoretical results, and consider the cart
pole environment as well. All experiments were developed in JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018), Haiku
(Hennigan et al., 2020) and the Neural Tangents (Novak et al., 2020) libraries. We provide the code
necessary to investigate RL training dynamics presented in this work.

5.1         T OY E XAMPLE

We consider a simple, interpretable toy environment to validate the analytic solutions we derived. In
this environment, the state is represented by a single nonnegative number s. There is only one action
available to the agent, which has the effect of increasing s by 0.25. When the action results in a new
state that exceeds s = 1 a reward of 1 is given, otherwise the reward is zero. An action from a state
above s = 1 terminates the episode. This environment displays the two following key properties.
First, it has a simple and interpretable ground truth value function: the value will be 1 (taking
γ = 1) for all s < 1 and 0 otherwise. Moreover, inferring such a value will require the function
approximator to correctly propagate cumulative rewards across multiple timesteps. These properties
allow us to verify that the analytic solutions behave as expected and examine any discrepancies with
the modeled ensemble of NNs.

                                                             p                                         p
             Normalized ||ωt ||2                                   ⟨(θNN − θlin )2 ⟩                    ⟨(QNN          lin
                                                                                                           θ (s, a) − Qθ (s, a)) ⟩
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                10 0
               Linearization                                                                                                                Θ̂
                                                     1
10 −5          NNs                              10
                                                                                                                                            Θ


10 −6
                                                10 0



                                                                                               10 −1
10 −7
                                                    −1
                                               10


    10 −1    10 0     10 1       10 2   10 3        10 −1   10 0      10 1       10 2   10 3      10 −1    10 0   10 1       10 2   10 3
                             t                                               t                                           t


Figure 1: Training dynamics in the toy environment. The left pane shows how the parameters of
the networks evolve from their starting point over time. The middle pane shows the RMSE between
parameters obtained by training a NN and parameters from the analytic solution. The right pane
shows how the output values of the Q-networks differ, comparing the Q-values of the linearization
with the original neural network.


                                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   t=0                           t = 16                         t = 256                    t = 2048                       t = 65536
     1.0


Q    0.5


     0.0
                                                                                                                                          Lin.
                                                                                                                                          NNs
    −0.5
        0.0       0.5           1.0    0.0       0.5           1.0    0.0       0.5           1.0    0.0       0.5           1.0    0.0       0.5           1.0
                        s                              s                              s                              s                              s


Figure 2: Q-network dynamics during training. The curves and shading correspond to mean and
standard deviations of the output distributions at various stages during training. For individual run
samples of the NN ensemble, see fig. 6 in the appendix. The dataset for this experiment is populated
with transitions observed at the states with s ∈ [0, 1.25] corresponding to the dashed vertical lines.


We apply our parameter dynamics solutions to this environment and compare them against empiri-
cally trained networks, with an architecture of 2 hidden layers that are wide but still computationally
tractable (1024 neurons per layer). For the neural networks, we train each network for a specified
amount of full-batch gradient steps, whereas in the analytic solutions we simply evaluate these at
the desired t. Unless otherwise specified, the analytic quantities examined in this section are those
derived from eq. 8. Further experiment details are presented in Appendix D.1.
First, we present a comparison of the evolution through time of an individual NN with a single
initialization. In fig. 1, the left pane shows that the average distance traveled by the parameters
during training is small, ensuring that we remain in the approximately linear regime. The middle
and right panes show how the error between analytic prediction and trained NN evolves in parameter
and function space. Interestingly, while error in parameter space tends to accumulate throughout
training, as may be expected, in function space the error tends to alternate, eventually decreasing as
both models tend to converge to the same function.
A more qualitatively intuitive visualization of the similarity between the analytic prediction (distri-
bution given in eq. 10) and an ensemble of neural networks (50 different initializations) is presented
in fig. 2. Qualitatively, we observe that the output from the analytic solution approximately matches
the NNs’ learning progression, suggesting that the approximation successfully models some of the
core aspects of the learning.
During and after training, uncertainty quantification remains mostly consistent between the ana-
lytic solution and empirical NNs within the in-distribution region. However, in fig. 3 we see that
the empirical NNs estimate smaller undertinaties in certain regions of the out-of-distribution state-
space. Moreover, within the training distribution, in fig. 4 we see that the exact analytic solution has
smaller epistemic uncertainty at the exact points where data is available whereas the NN ensemble
has a roughly constant, albeit small, uncertainty estimate throughout the in-distribution state-space.
Hence, the uncertainty quantification provided by the NN ensemble in this case is suboptimal and
inferior to the one provided by the linearized approximation.
We also compare experimentally the dynamics of NNs with target networks, using the linearized
target network solution (eq. 15) and compare different values of τ . These results can be seen in

                   t=0                           t = 16                         t = 256                    t = 2048                       t = 65536
     1.0


     0.5
Q


     0.0
                                                                                                                                          Lin.
                                                                                                                                          NNs
    −0.5
        −1    0             1         2 −1   0             1         2 −1   0             1         2 −1   0             1         2 −1   0             1         2
                        s                              s                              s                              s                              s


Figure 3: Q-network dynamics during training, with states outside the training distribution. Green
area denotes states which were present in the training dataset.


                                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       1.02
                    1.00
                                                       1.01
                    0.75

                    0.50                               1.00



                Q
                              NNs
                    0.25      Lin. (MC)                0.99
                              Lin.
                    0.00                               0.98

                       0.0        0.5        1.0          0.40    0.45   0.50   0.55   0.60
                                        s                                  s

Figure 4: Comparison of our theoretical results to the empirical ensemble in the setup where a single
Q-network estimates both Q-values. Lin. (blue) – eq. (10) applied to the toy environment (t → ∞).
Lin. (MC) (orange) – eq. (8, 5) evaluated with 500 different intitializations. NNs (red) – an ensemble
of 50 independently trained Q-networks for 216 full batch gradient descent steps. Vertical dashed
green lines indicate the states s from transitions present in the dataset D. Vertical dashed black line
at s = 1 indicates the threshold of the reward region. The networks have 2 hidden layers of width
                                      2
1024, ReLU activation functions, σw      = 1, σb2 = 0.1, and η = 0.01. The shaded regions denote
1 standard deviation from the mean. We observe that Lin. (MC) has much higher uncertainty than
Lin., and note that this may be due to the closed-form prediction using infinite width.


fig. 7 in the Appendix D.1. We find empirically that the analytic solutions for the linearized target
network do not match the true dynamics as closely as the single-network solutions do, suggesting
that the linearized model does not provide good approximations to the dynamics in this regime.

5.2   C ART P OLE

In this section we consider the cart pole environment (Barto et al., 1983). Experiments in this
subsection were implemented using the Gymnasium (Towers et al., 2023) package.
We train an ensemble of 50 fully-connected Q-networks each with two layers of width 256, with
γ = 1. For the neural networks, we train each network for 216 epochs. For the linearization, we
consider eq. (8) (at t = 216 ). We evaluate 50 different initializations.
We then compare the Q-values obtained from the neural networks and the derived formulas against
the true returns obtained by rolling out the evaluated policy in the environment to evaluate our
method. Train and test refer to whether the policy is rolled out from states that are present in the
dataset or not. Test and train states are sampled from the same initial state distribution. Further
experiment details can be found in Appendix D.2. The results can be seen in table 1.

                                Method                             RMSE              NLL
                                 NNs                             231.2 ± 0.3    331625 ± 201000
        Train
                             TD-NTK (ours)                       60.4 ± 2.5       55.8 ± 82.1
                                 NNs                             196.8 ± 0.3    259429 ± 134000
         Test
                             TD-NTK (ours)                       17.2 ± 2.7       7.8 ± 15.4

Table 1: Results from the cart pole environment (lower is better). NNs – an ensemble of indepen-
dently trained Q-networks for 216 full batch gradient descent steps. TD-NTK – analytic predictions
from eq. (8) and (5) applied to the dataset. We evaluate the NN and linearization Q-values and
compare them against the true returns, obtained from rolling out the policy from a given state. To
compute the negative log-likelihood (NLL), we fit the Q-values from the ensemble to the Gaussian
function, and use its probability density function.

These results again suggest that the linearization is able to better estimate the Q-values from the
data. In particular, the error in predicted Q-values is significantly lower, as can be seen from the
RMSE scores, and the uncertainty estimation is much better using the prediction from the linearized
model, as can be seen from the NLL scores. We find these results surprising – we expected to see the


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


training dynamics of the linearization accurately describing the neural network training dynamics,
but we instead observe that they better capture the epistemic uncertainty from the data.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this work we have derived analytic closed-form solutions for the training dynamics of infinitely
wide neural network ensembles trained under temporal difference updates with continuous-time
gradient descent. We achieved this by using an extension of the NTK formalism to linearize the
output of wide neural networks and solve the resulting first-order differential equations of motion
for the parameters. Having established that the evolution through time of a single initialized network
is an affine transformation of its output at initialization, we were able to derive analytical expressions
for the evolution of an ensemble of randomly initialized, independently trained networks in terms of
their NNGP kernels. This allows us to approximate the dynamics of real ensembles trained through
gradient descent for policy evaluation in a reinforcement learning context, and predict the changes
in uncertainty.
We have validated our solutions in a simple toy environment and have compared the result of car-
rying out our derived analytical policy evaluation against a real ensemble of neural networks on the
classic control cart pole environment. Interestingly, we find that our analytic solution better predicts
the returns and uncertainty of the policy being evaluated, with better predictive RMSE and better un-
certainty demonstrated through improved NLL scores. This suggests that uncertainty quantification
of real ensembles may suffer from unexpected behavior that degrades the quality of their predictive
uncertainty in the TD setting.
We hope this work serves as a basis for analyzing TD training in deep RL, opening up the ability
to study convergence and stability of TD algorithms with deep NNs. In addition, return uncertainty
quantification for deep RL is a key open question in RL, and the methods provided here form a
starting place for possible quantitative insight into the behavior of ensembles, a widespread heuris-
tic method for uncertainty quantification (Smit et al., 2021; An et al., 2021; Osband et al., 2018).
Our experimental results suggest that these can behave unexpectedly and suboptimally, and further
research into this phenomenon may prove beneficial for a wide range of RL contexts.

Limitations and future work. In our derivations and experiments, we consider TD policy eval-
uation for a fixed policy. Another key part of RL algorithms is policy improvement, and a natural
next step for extending this work is to investigate the modeling of a non-stationary, improving policy.
Additionally, we did not provide a rigorous proof that the asymptotic behavior of wide NNs as linear
systems holds during training with update rules other than gradient descent, such as with target net-
work updates. In a similar vein, many of the other assumptions made here necessary for tractability
(continuous-time gradient descent, full-batch training, infinite width, fixed policy and dataset) are
often broken in practical RL algorithms. While we believe that our work still retains some of the
crucial ingredients that make TD learning with deep NNs interesting, extending this work while re-
laxing some of these assumptions could lead to further valuable insight into other aspects of training
practical RL agents.

R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Yingyu Liang. Learning and generalization in overparame-
  terized neural networks, going beyond two layers. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.
Gaon An, Seungyong Moon, Jang-Hyun Kim, and Hyun Oh Song. Uncertainty-based offline re-
  inforcement learning with diversified q-ensemble. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:7436–7447, 2021.
Andrew G. Barto, Richard S. Sutton, and Charles W. Anderson. Neuronlike adaptive elements
  that can solve difficult learning control problems. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
  Cybernetics, SMC-13(5):834–846, 1983. doi: 10.1109/TSMC.1983.6313077.
Dennis S Bernstein. Matrix Mathematics: Theory, Facts, and Formulas. Princeton University Press,
  2009.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jalaj Bhandari, Daniel Russo, and Raghav Singal. A finite time analysis of temporal difference
   learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 1691–1692.
   PMLR, 2018.

James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.

Francesco D'Angelo and Vincent Fortuin. Repulsive deep ensembles are bayesian. In M. Ran-
  zato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 3451–3465. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/
  file/1c63926ebcabda26b5cdb31b5cc91efb-Paper.pdf.

Hannes Eriksson, Debabrota Basu, Mina Alibeigi, and Christos Dimitrakakis. Sentinel: taming
  uncertainty with ensemble based distributional reinforcement learning. In Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 631–640. PMLR, 2022.

Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.

Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1050–1059.
  PMLR, 2016.

Geoffrey J Gordon. Reinforcement learning with function approximation converges to a region.
  In T. Leen, T. Dietterich, and V. Tresp (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 13. MIT Press, 2000. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2000/file/04df4d434d481c5bb723be1b6df1ee65-Paper.pdf.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Tom Hennigan, Trevor Cai, Tamara Norman, Lena Martens, and Igor Babuschkin. Haiku: Sonnet
  for JAX, 2020. URL http://github.com/deepmind/dm-haiku.

Jiaoyang Huang and Horng-Tzer Yau. Dynamics of deep neural networks and neural tangent hierar-
   chy. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
   Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4542–4551.
   PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/huang20l.
   html.

Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predic-
  tive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.

Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00165,
  2017.

Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-
  Dickstein, and Jeffrey Pennington. Wide neural networks of any depth evolve as linear models
  under gradient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tuto-
  rial, review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Clare Lyle, Marc G Bellemare, and Pablo Samuel Castro. A comparative analysis of expected
  and distributional reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 4504–4511, 2019.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Quynh Nguyen, Marco Mondelli, and Guido F. Montúfar. Tight bounds on the smallest eigenvalue
  of the neural tangent kernel for deep relu networks. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July
  2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8119–8129.
  PMLR, 2021. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/nguyen21g.html.
Roman Novak, Lechao Xiao, Jiri Hron, Jaehoon Lee, Alexander A. Alemi, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein,
  and Samuel S. Schoenholz. Neural tangents: Fast and easy infinite neural networks in python. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://github.com/
  google/neural-tangents.
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
  bootstrapped dqn. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Ian Osband, John Aslanides, and Albin Cassirer. Randomized prior functions for deep reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Doina Precup. Eligibility traces for off-policy policy evaluation. Computer Science Department
  Faculty Publication Series, pp. 80, 2000.
Daniel A. Roberts, Sho Yaida, and Boris Hanin. The Principles of Deep Learning Theory. Cam-
  bridge University Press, 2022. https://deeplearningtheory.com.
Jordi Smit, Canmanie T Ponnambalam, Matthijs TJ Spaan, and Frans A Oliehoek. Pebl: Pessimistic
  ensembles for offline deep reinforcement learning. In Robust and Reliable Autonomy in the Wild
  Workshop at the 30th International Joint Conference of Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Mark Towers, Jordan K. Terry, Ariel Kwiatkowski, John U. Balis, Gianluca de Cola, Tristan Deleu,
 Manuel Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Arjun KG, Markus Krimmel, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, An-
 drea Pierré, Sander Schulhoff, Jun Jet Tai, Andrew Tan Jin Shen, and Omar G. Younis. Gymna-
 sium, March 2023. URL https://zenodo.org/record/8127025.
J.N. Tsitsiklis and B. Van Roy. An analysis of temporal-difference learning with function approxi-
   mation. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 42(5):674–690, 1997. doi: 10.1109/9.580874.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy8gdB9xx.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    S INGLE Q- NETWORK D ERIVATION
The dynamics governing gradient descent (GD) are well known and given as follows:
                                     θt+1 = θt − η∇θ L .                                         (18)
Using continuous time GD, the dynamics can be written as
                                         θ̇t = −η∇θ L .                                          (19)
Similar to Q-learning, we aim to minimize the Bellman error
                                                                     2
                                L = ∥Qθ (X ) − r − γQθ (X ′ )∥2 ,                              (20)
and we note that in this equation, the two instances of Qθ are using the exact same Q-network –
this corresponds to the setup where we do not use a target network. We consider a linearized neural
network in the same way as Lee et al. (2019), where we replace the Q-function with a linearized
version, based on eq. (3):
                               Qlin         lin            lin
                                 θt (X ) = Qθ0 (X ) + ∇θ Qθ0 (X ) ωt ,                         (21)
          def                                                                    def     def
                                                                                         ′          ′
where ωt = θt −θ0 , and ω̇t = θ̇t . For brevity we shorten the notation: Q0 = Qlin            lin
                                                                               θ0 (X ), Q0 = Qθ0 (X ).
We present our derivations (with reference to Lee et al. (2019)) for the loss defined in eq. (20).
Expanding eq. (19) yields
           ω̇t = −η∇θ QT0 ∇Qlin  θ0 (X )
                                         L − η∇θ Q′T
                                                   0 ∇Qlin    ′ L
                                                         θ0 (X )
                                                                                                  (22)
                                            T
               = −η (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) ((Q0 − r − γQ′0 ) + (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) ωt ) .
Therefore, we obtain

                                           T
                  ωt = − (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) Θ̄−1
                                              0    I |D| − e−ηΘ̄0 t (Q0 − r − γQ′0 ) ,           (23)
            def                                           T
where Θ̄0 = (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) . Eq. (21) now becomes:

          ∗     ∗       ∗                 ′ T    −1
   Qlin
     θt (X ) = Q0 − ∇θ Q0 (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q0 ) Θ̄0       I |D| − e−ηΘ̄0 t (Q0 − r − γQ′0 ) ,        (24)
            def
where Q∗0 = Qlin  ∗
             θ0 (X ). We can separate the equation into two terms:
                                              ∗       ∗       ∗
                                        Qlin
                                         θt (X ) = µ(X ) + ς(X ) ,                               (25)
where
                                             T
          µ(X ∗ ) = ∇θ Q∗0 (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) Θ̄−1
                                                0     I |D| −  e −η Θ̄0 t
                                                                            r,                   (26)

                                                   T
          ς(X ∗ ) = Q∗0 − ∇θ Q∗0 (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) Θ̄−10     I |D| − e−ηΘ̄0 t (Q0 − γQ′0 )      (27)

Taking the expectation of these terms yields

         ∗          X ∗X        ∗ ′
E[Qlin
    θt (X )] = (Θ        − γΘX X )Θ̄−1 I |D| − e−ηΘ̄t r ,                        (28)
                     ∗ ∗       ∗           ∗ ′
                                                                      ∗   ′ ∗
         ∗         X X
V[Qlin
    θt (X )] = K         − (KX X − γKX X ) I |D| − e−ηΘ̄t Θ̄−1 (ΘX X − γΘX X )
                      ∗        ∗ ′
                                                            ∗       ′ ∗
             − (ΘX X − γΘX X )Θ̄−1 I |D| − e−ηΘ̄t (KX X − γKX X )
                      ∗        ∗ ′
                                                                  ′        ′    ′ ′
             − (ΘX X − γΘX X )Θ̄−1 I |D| − e−ηΘ̄t (KX X − γKX X − γKX X + γ 2 KX X )
                                         ∗       ′ ∗
               I |D| − e−ηΘ̄t Θ̄−1 (ΘX X − γΘX X )
                                                                                                 (29)
          X ′X
where K           = E[Q′0 QT0 ], and similarly for other combinations,
                                   def  XX         X ′X     XX′          ′   ′
                               Θ̄ = Θ      − γΘ       − γΘ      + γ ΘX X ,
                                                                     2
                                                                                                 (30)
           ′
where ΘX X = E[∇θ Q′0 ∇θ QT0 ], and similarly for other combinations.
We use these expressions in the environments, see sec. 5.
At the point where the network converges, i.e., at t → ∞, eq. (24) becomes:
                         ∗     ∗       ∗               ′     −1  T         ′
                   Qlin
                    θ∞ (X ) = Q0 − ∇θ Q0 (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q0 ) Θ̄0 (Q0 − r − γQ0 ) .                 (31)


                                                     12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Case γ = 0. To check consistency with the supervised learning case, we verify what happens to
the system when γ = 0:
                       ∗     ∗        ∗     T              T −1
                 Qlin

                  θ∞ (X ) = Q0 − ∇θ Q0 ∇θ Q0 ∇θ Q0 ∇θ Q0         (Q0 − r) ,              (32)
and evaluated at the same training points, i.e., when X ∗ = X the equation reduces to:
                                           Qlin
                                            θ∞ (X ) = r .                                        (33)
As expected, the neural network converges to the reward after training. This corresponds to the
supervised learning case, where we can replace the predictions Q(X ) with f (X ) and the target
values r with y.

B    W ITH TARGET Q- NETWORK D ERIVATION
Here we consider having a target network that uses its own parameters θ̄, but otherwise acts like the
primary Q-network. The target network parameters are set using a smooth moving average:
                                    θ̄t+1 = (1 − τ )θ̄t + τ θt+1 ,                               (34)
where τ is the smoothing coefficient.
We consider the Bellman error with two Q-networks – a primary network and a target network:
                                    1  lin              lin        2
                              L=      Q θt (X ) − r − γQ θ̄t (X ′ ) .
                                    2                              2
                                                                                                 (35)
                        primary network                         target network

Here we present our derivation for this setting as well. The dynamics of the main Q-network are
governed by the same equation (19) as in the previous section, except additionally the target network
is updated as a smooth moving average of the main network:
                                 (
                                   ω̇t = −η∇θ QT0 ∇Qlin    θt (X )
                                                                   L
                                                                                                  (36)
                                   ω̄˙ t = τ (ωt − ω̄t ) ,
and expanding this yields
        (
                                     T
          ω̇t = −η (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) ((Q0 − r − γQ′0 ) + ∇θ Q0 ωt − γ∇θ Q′0 ω̄t ) ,
                                                                                                 (37)
          ω̄˙ t = τ (ωt − ω̄t ) ,
           def
where ω̄t = θ̄t − θ0 (we also assume θ̄0 = θ0 , implying the two networks are initialized with
the same parameters); we use the same shorthand notation for Q-values as in the previous section,
                                                                                 def
except computing the second Q-value in the equation using the target network Q′0 = Qlin (X ′ ).
                                                                                         θ̄0

We can rewrite the system (37) in matrix form:

                        ω̇t     −ηU T U ηγU T V ωt            −ηU T r̂
                              =                             +            ,                       (38)
                        ω̄˙ t     τ I |θ|    −τ I |θ|   ω̄t     0
          def          def          def
where U = ∇θ Q0 , V = ∇θ Q′0 , r̂ = Q0 − r − γQ′0 .
Therefore, the solution is
                                   −1
  ωt       −ηU T U ηγU T V                    −ηU T U       ηγU T V                 −ηU T r̂
      =                                exp                             t − I 2|θ|              . (39)
  ω̄t        τ I |θ|     −τ I |θ|              τ I |θ|       −τ I |θ|                 0
and at t → ∞ it becomes
                               ωt = −∇θ QT0 Θ̄′−1
                                              0   (Q0 − r − γQ′0 ) ,                             (40)
where Θ̄′0 = (∇θ Q0 − γ∇θ Q′0 ) ∇θ QT0 . For a new state-action pair X ∗ the Q-function is:


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            ∗     ∗       ∗     T ′−1
                      Qlin
                       θ∞ (X ) = Q0 − ∇θ Q0 ∇θ Q0 Θ̄0 (Q0 − r − γQ′0 ) .                       (41)
Rewriting eq. (39) (details in sec. C.3), we obtain:
                      T                                      −1
                 ωt     U        0    −ηU U T ηγV U T             −η E 11 − I |D| r̂
                     =                                                                  ,      (42)
                 ω̄t     0     UT       τ I |D|    −τ I |D|             −ηE 21 r̂
or, for ωt , simply
                                              −1
                ωt = U T U U T − γV U T            E 11 − I |D| + τ −1 ηγV U T E 21 r̂ ,       (43)
where E 11 and E 21 are the block matrices from the result of the exponent:

                         E 11 E 12              −ηU U T ηγV U T
                                      = exp                            t .                     (44)
                         E 21 E 22               τ I |D|     −τ I |D|

We use this form to study what happens to the dynamics during training (see fig. 2). We now analyze
certain cases of γ and τ .

Case γ = 0. Again, to check consistency with the supervised learning case, we verify what hap-
pens to the system when γ = 0:
                                  −η (U U T )−1
                 T                 −1
             ωt     U        0                           0       −η E 11 − I |D| r̂
                 =                                                                   .        (45)
             ω̄t     0     U T −η −1 (U U T )−1 −τ −1 I |D|            −ηE 21 r̂
At t → ∞ terms E 11 and E 21 tend to 0, and the dynamics simplify considerably
                             ωt = −∇θ QT0 (∇θ Q0 ∇θ QT0 )−1 (Q0 − r) ,                        (46)
giving the same result as in eq. (32), and the same analysis can be made as in eq. (33), i.e., the
prediction converges to the reward, Qlin
                                     θ∞ (X ) = r.

Case τ is negative. To verify the robustness of the equations, we check the case when τ is negative
and hope to expect divergence. The diagonal in the exponent (44) is no longer negative semidefinite.
This may cause divergence at cases when t → ∞. Here we do not study the convergence properties
of this setting, although there has been some work looking into convergence bounds via eigenvalues
of the neural tangent kernel (Nguyen et al., 2021).

Case τ = 0. In this case we can simulate the setting, where a hard update to the target network
parameters occurs (Mnih et al., 2015); τ = 0 would describe the dynamics between these updates.
Our weight dynamics simplify to:
                                 (
                                   ω̇t = −η∇θ QT0 ∇Qlin
                                                     θt (X )
                                                             L
                                                                                            (47)
                                   ˙ω̄t = 0
reducing the system to the case where the target network is fixed. The solution is the same as (43),
except the term with τ −1 does not exist.

Mean & covariance. We can separate the equation into two terms:
                                        ∗          ∗         ∗
                                Qlin
                                  θt (X ) = µ(X ) + ς(X ) ,                                (48)
where
                                       −1
µ(X ∗ ) = ∇θ Q∗0 U T U U T − γV U T         I |D| − E 11 − τ −1 ηγV U T E 21 r ,           (49)
                                             −1
ς(X ∗ ) = Q∗0 − ∇θ Q∗0 U T U U T − γV U T          I |D| − E 11 − τ −1 ηγV U T E 21 (Q0 − γQ′0 ) ,
                                                                                               (50)
The expectation of these terms is
                     ∗         ∗
          E[Qlin
               θt (X )] = µ(X ) ,                                                              (51)
                   ∗       X ∗X ∗          ∗     ′ ∗            ∗     ′ ∗
           V[Qlin
              θt (X )] = K        − (Z(KX X − γKX X ))T − Z(KX X − γKX X )
                                              ′        ′            ′   ′                      (52)
                  + Z(KX X − γKX X − γKX X + γ 2 KX X )Z T ,
            ∗
                          ′
                             −1                           ′

where Z = ΘX X ΘX X − γΘX X       I |D| − E 11 − τ −1 ηγΘX X E 21 .


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C      OTHER P ROOFS & D ERIVATIONS
C.1     S INGLE Q- NETWORK D IFFERENTIAL E QUATION

      For a differential equation of the form
                                        f˙t = −αD T (b + Df t ) ,                           (53)
      the solution is given by
                                                               T

                                 f t = −D T (DD T )−1 b − e−αDD t c ,                       (54)

      where c is a free variable. Additionally, if f 0 = 0, then c = b.

We will present a straightforward proof by verification. When f 0 = 0, we can check the point t = 0
to obtain the value for c:
                                 f 0 = −D T (DD T )−1 b − e0 c

                                                                                                (55)
                                      0 = −D T (DD T )−1 (b − c) ,                              (56)
the only general solution for c is c = b.
The derivative of eq. (54) is given by
                                                       T

                    f˙t = −D T (DD T )−1 − −αDD T e−αDD t c
                                                            T
                        = −αD T (DD T )−1 DD T e−αDD t c
                                          T
                        = −αD T e−αDD t c
                                          T

                        = −αD T b + e−αDD t c − b                                               (57)
                                                        T

                        = −αD T b + DD T (DD T )−1 e−αDD t c − b
                                                                 T

                        = −αD T b + D −D T (DD T )−1 b − e−αDD t c
                        = −αD T (b + Df t ) ,
which is equal to the original differential eq. (53).
                                                                                                    □

C.2     W ITH TARGET Q- NETWORK D IFFERENTIAL E QUATION

      For a differential equation of the form

                                      f˙t = A      B      ft
                                                             +
                                                               e
                                                                 ,                          (58)
                                       ġ t   C    D      gt   h
      when f 0 = 0 and g 0 = 0 the solution is given by:
                                      −1
                     ft       A B                   A B       I           0       e
                          =                 exp           t −                        .      (59)
                     gt       C D                   C D        0          I       h
      The expression for the inverse can be obtained using the known block inverse formula (Bern-
      stein, 2009):
               −1 "                        −1                                 −1               #
                          A − BD −1 C                       − A − BD −1 C         BD −1

      A B
                =                               −1                                    −1
     C D            −D −1 C A − BD −1 C              D −1 + D −1 C A − BD −1 C           BD −1
      We present a proof in sec. C.2.



                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In essence, this is the same differential equation as (53), although in a matrix form. We present a
proof by verification. The derivative of (59) is
                            −1
          f˙t = A B              A B
                                           exp
                                                  A B
                                                          t
                                                                e
          ġ t      C D          C D              C D           h
                                      −1
                     A B A B                        A B            I 0        I 0       e
                =                            exp            t −           +
                    C D C D                         C D            0 I        0 I       h
                                         −1                                     !              (60)
                     A B        A B                   A B            I 0       e        e
                =                              exp             t −                   +
                    C D         C D                   C D            0 I       h        h

                     A B ft            e
                =                  +       ,
                    C D gt             h
which is equal to the original differential eq. (58).
                                                                                                     □

C.3   M ATRIX P USH -T HROUGH D ERIVATION W ITH TARGET N ETWORK

We begin with eq. (39):
                                  −1
  ωt      −ηU T U ηγU T V                    −ηU T U          ηγU T V                 −ηU T r̂
      =                               exp                                t − I 2|θ|              . (61)
  ω̄t       τ I |θ|     −τ I |θ|              τ I |θ|          −τ I |θ|                 0
Rewriting the terms:
                                  −1
         −ηU T U ηγU T V                      −ηU T U ηγU T V                     −ηU T r̂
                                       exp                           t − I 2|θ|
            τ I |θ|     −τ I |θ|               τ I |θ|    −τ I |θ|                  0
                                     −1
                                          −ηU T E 11 − I |D| r̂

             −ηU T U ηγU T V

        =                                                                                         (62)
                τ I |θ|   −τ I |θ|            −ηU T E 21 r̂
                                     −1
                                          UT

             −ηU T U ηγU T V                    0      −η E 11 − I |D| r̂
        =
                τ I |θ|   −τ I |θ|         0   UT           −ηE 21 r̂
where E 11 and E 21 are the corresponding block matrices from the result of the exponent:

                         E 11 E 12 def          −ηU U T ηγV U T
                                     = exp                            t .                         (63)
                         E 21 E 22               τ I |D|    −τ I |D|
Rewriting the first two matrices further yield:
                          −1   T
 −ηU T U ηγU T V              U       0
   τ I |θ|     −τ I |θ|        0     UT
                               −1                                          −1                  
         −1     T          T          T            −1       T          T          T      T
    −η        U   U  −  γU   V      U           −τ    γ  U    U  −  γU   V      U   V U
=
                                                                                               
                                −1                                               −1             
         −1     T          T          T       −1 T       −1       T         T          T      T
    −η        U U − γU V            U     −τ U + τ γ U U − γU V                       U VU
                                    −1                                         −1              
         −1 T          T          T               −1     T        T         T           T
  −η U           U U − γV U                    −τ γU        U U − γV U            VU
=
                                                                                                
                                     −1                                               −1        
         −1 T          T          T          −1 T       −1     T       T          T          T
    −η U          U U − γV U              −τ U + τ γU               U U − γV U           VU
                                             −1                                      −1            
                       −1       T          T                 −1         T          T          T
                   −η       U U    − γV U                −τ     γ   U U   − γV  U         V U
    T
    U        0 
=                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                    
                                              −1                                            −1
            UT

      0
                  
                       −1       T          T           −1           −1        T          T        T
                   −η       U U − γV U             −τ I + τ γ U U − γV U
                                                          |D|                                  VU
                                                                                                  (64)

Thus, obtaining eq. (42):
                   T                                           −1
              ωt       U        0     −ηU U T      ηγV U T         −η E 11 − I |D| r̂
                   =                                                                  ,           (65)
              ω̄t        0     UT      τ I |D|     −τ I |D|           −ηE 21 r̂

                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     E NVIRONMENT E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
D.1       T OY E NVIRONMENT

                                                                        r=0                                r=1


                                               0                                                      1                s
                                                                         step
                                                                        +0.25



Figure 5: Illustration of the toy environment. S = R≥0 , the only action is increase the current state
by 0.25. A reward of 1 is given when the state exceeds s = 1. An action taken from s ≥ 1 terminates
the episode.

An illustration of the environment can be seen in fig. 5. Details for the toy environment:

          • State space S = R≥0 , dataset generated by getting 21 linearly spaced numbers in [0, 1.25];
          • Single action: s′ = s + 0.25;

                              1 if s ∈ [1, 1.25)
          • Reward r(s) =
                              0 otherwise ;
          • Episode terminates, when s′ ≥ 1.25.

The toy environment experiments were ran with the following parameters (unless specified other-
wise): using the single fully connected NN case; ReLU activation function; γ = 1, η = 0.01,
τ = 0.1, 2 layers of width 1024; 216 epochs; weights initialized with std. σw
                                                                            2
                                                                              = 1, σb2 = 0.1;
ensemble of 20 networks. The figures were evaluated by taking 100 linearly spaced values in the
range [0, 1.25].
                     t=0                                t = 16                               t = 256                  t = 2048                    t = 65536
           1.0


           0.5
      Q


           0.0

                                                                                                                                                  NNs
          −0.5
              0.0   0.5           1.0   0.0             0.5             1.0         0.0       0.5         1.0   0.0   0.5           1.0     0.0    0.5        1.0
                          s                                   s                                       s                     s                            s


                                        Figure 6: Individual runs of the NN from fig. 2.

                                         τ = 0 .0 0 0 1                                   τ = 0 .0 0 1                τ = 0 .0 1


                                  1
                              Q


                                  0
                                                                                                                       Lin. (MC)
                                                                                                                       NN Ensemble

                                  0.0         0.5                 1.0         0.0           0.5           1.0   0.0    0.5            1.0
                                                    s                                             s                             s


Figure 7: Comparison of different values of τ during training, at t = 2048. We observe that
increasing the smoothing coefficient leads to faster convergence for the linearization, although the
convergence of NNs seems to be unaffected. In this setting there are no theoretical guarantees that
the linearized model (considering the case with a target network) is a good approximation in the
infinite width. We conclude, that even though the linearized model converges to the correct Q-
values, it does not accurately reflect the training dynamics of the empirical ensemble.


                                                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      NNs
                            update


            rollout                             Linearization                  rollout


               Pretraining                       Evaluation                True Return

Figure 8: Schematic of the data collection and training procedures for the cartpole experiment.
Figure adapted from Levine et al. (2020).


D.2   C ART P OLE

In the cart pole environment (Barto et al., 1983), we train an agent to obtain a policy πα we wish
to evaluate. We then use another policy πβ to generate an offline dataset of interactions with the
environment (the behavior policy). In the examples in this work, πα = πβ . Our collected dataset
consists of 2048 transitions.
We train a fully-connected Q-network with 2 layers of width 256, with γ = 1. The neural networks
are trained in the setup with a primary Q-network only; η = 0.1, trained for 216 epochs.
The experiment details presented in table 1 can be summarized in fig. 8. To obtain the true returns we
take each element from the dataset and roll out the greedy policy based on the predicted Q-values.
To obtain the negative log-likelihood, we fit the ensemble of different Q-values to a Gaussian, and
use its PDF to compute the likelihoods. The presented values are the mean and std over the 2048
transitions in the dataset.


                                                 18
