Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V IDEO C LUSTER N ET: S ELF -S UPERVISED AND A DAP -
TIVE FACE C LUSTERING FOR V IDEOS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                    A BSTRACT

             With the rise of digital media content production, the need for analyzing movies
             and TV series episodes to locate the main cast of characters precisely is gain-
             ing importance. Specifically, Video Face Clustering aims at grouping together
             detected video face tracks with common facial identities. This problem is very
             challenging due to the large range of pose, expression, appearance, and lighting
             variations of a given face across video frames. Generic pre-trained Face Iden-
             tification (ID) models fail to adapt well to the video production domain, given
             its high dynamic range content and also unique cinematic style. Furthermore,
             traditional clustering algorithms depend on hyperparameters requiring individual
             tuning across datasets. In this paper, we present a novel video face clustering ap-
             proach that learns to adapt a generic face ID model to new video face tracks in a
             fully self-supervised fashion. We also propose a parameter-free clustering algo-
             rithm that is capable of automatically adapting to the finetuned model’s embedding
             space for any input video. Due to the lack of comprehensive movie face cluster-
             ing benchmarks, we also present a first-of-kind movie dataset: MovieFaceCluster.
             Our dataset is handpicked by film industry professionals and contains extremely
             challenging face ID scenarios. Experiments demonstrate our method’s effective-
             ness in handling difficult mainstream movie scenes on our benchmark dataset and
             state-of-the-art performance on traditional TV series datasets.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Video Face Clustering can be defined as the task of grouping together human faces in a video among
common identities. It contributes significantly to several other research domains, such as video scene
captioning Rohrbach et al. (2017), video question answering Tapaswi et al. (2016), and video under-
standing Vicol et al. (2018). Having an understanding of the spatial location, face size, and identity
of the characters that appear in specific scenes is essential for all the aforementioned tasks. Cluster-
ing faces in a video is a challenging unsupervised problem that has garnered a lot of interest over
the past few decades Satoh et al. (1999); Pham et al. (2009); Zhou et al. (2015); Wu et al. (2013b).
Given the rise in the creation of video production content and the subsequent need for its analysis,
face clustering in the movie/TV series domain has garnered significant interest in the last couple of
years Sharma et al. (2019); Tapaswi et al. (2019). It serves as an effective editing tool for movie
post-production personnel, helping them select scenes with a specific group of characters, among
other benefits. We thus primarily focus on the video production content domain for evaluating our
proposed method, given its closeness to real-world scenarios and use cases.
The video production content domain often provides an unique set of challenges for face clustering,
in terms of large variations in facial pose, lighting, expression and appearance w.r.t. a given character
across its entire duration (Fig. 1). In specific domains with high-quality standards, such as movies
that possess an unique cinematic style1 , performance of face identification (ID) models trained on
generic large-scale datasets is often limited for such domains (Tab. 5). Furthermore, hand labeling
a large cast of characters, often present in movies/TV series, can be very time-consuming and error-
prone. As a result, the inherent challenges in video face clustering and difficulties in hand labeling
often limit video-specific model training. In this paper, we propose an algorithm that successfully
    1
        Particular movie features are high resolution, high dynamic range, and large facial attribute variations.


                                                           1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tackles these limitations. Specifically, our proposed method adapts a generic face ID model to a
specific set of faces and their observed variations in a given video in a fully self-supervised fashion.
                                                                                                          Trivial Face
Also, traditional deep face clustering algorithms Zhou           Trivial Face

et al. (2022c) present certain limitations, which can be
categorized into two main types. The first group Defays
(1977); Ester et al. (1996) adopts a bottom-up approach to
clustering and incorporates a pre-defined distance func-
tion to compare face embeddings, thus requiring an user-
defined threshold to specify a positive match. The sec-           Trivial Face
                                                                                                         Trivial Face

ond group Lloyd (1982); Comaniciu & Meer (2002) fol-
lows a top-down approach and requires the number of
known clusters or minimum cluster sample count as in-
put for its initialization. Both of these groups thus have
shortcomings, in terms of requiring non-intuitive user de-
fined parameters. As an essential component of our idea,
                                                               Varying Parameter
we present a novel clustering algorithm that improves on         Pose Lighting     (Partial) Occlusion   Expression      Appearance Change

these limitations. It is fully automated without the need
                                                              Figure 1: Select hard case clusters predicted using our al-
for any user input and uses a distance metric that is opti-   gorithm from within MovieFaceCluster dataset. Trivial
mized for the given model-learned embedding space.            face represents an easy ID sample for each cluster.

Overall, our proposed method VideoClusterNet can be divided into two main stages. The first stage
involves a fully self-supervised learning (SSL) based finetuning of a generic face ID model on a
given set of video faces. Finetuning is formulated as an iterative optimization task facilitated through
alternating stages of model finetuning and coarse face track matching. The SSL finetuning boot-
straps itself by soft grouping together high-confidence matching tracks at regular training intervals.
The second stage involves a track clustering algorithm that adopts the loss function used for model
SSL finetuning as a distance metric. Our clustering algorithm computes a custom matching thresh-
old for each track and combines tracks with high-confidence matches in an iterative bottom-up style.
Given that the video content production domain provides unique in-the-wild challenges regarding
video face clustering, the academic research community lacks a standardized video dataset bench-
mark for real-world performance evaluation (Appendix E). Thus, we also present a novel video face
clustering dataset, which incorporates challenging movies hand-selected by experienced film post-
production specialists. We conduct extensive experiments of our proposed method on this dataset
to validate its effectiveness for character clustering in mainstream movies. In addition, we provide
results on selects benchmark datasets, showing that our method attains state-of-the-art performance.
In summary, we propose the following contributions: 1) A fully self-supervised video face clus-
tering algorithm, which progressively learns robust identity embeddings for all faces within a given
face video dataset, facilitated via iterative soft matching of faces across pose, illumination, and ex-
pression variations observed in the dataset. 2) A self-supervised model finetuning approach that
unlike prior works relies only on positive match pairs, removing any dependence on manual ground
truth labels or use of temporal track constraints to obtain negative match pairs. 3) A deep learning-
based similarity metric for face clustering, which automatically adapts to a given model’s learned
embedding space. 4) A novel parameter-free video face clustering method that requires neither user-
defined thresholds nor an initial number of clusters. 5) A new comprehensive movie face clustering
benchmark dataset to better evaluate video face clustering algorithms on real-world challenges.

2   R ELATED W ORK

We review prior work in video-based face clustering and list out some deep learning metric and
self-supervised learning based methods since they form an important component in our approach.
Auxiliary labels assisted Video Face Clustering: Single frame-based face clustering has drawn a
lot of attention in the past few decades. For a detailed survey, please refer to Zhou et al. (2022c).
For the video domain, early work focused on using additional information available from TV series
episodes/movies. Specifically, methods such as Satoh et al. (1999); Berg et al. (2004); Cour et al.
(2010); Everingham et al. (2009); Tang et al. (2015); Ozkan & Duygulu (2006); Pham et al. (2009);
Everingham et al. (2006) utilize aligned captions, transcripts, dialogues, or a combination of the
above with detected faces to perform identity clustering.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                     Trained Student Branch
                                                                                                                                                                                        Track crop
                                                                                                                                                                                        embeddings
                                                                                                                                                                        Pair 1
       Frames with detected faces                                                                                                                                      similarity
                                                                                     Large scale pre-trained
                                            Video                                         face ID model                                              Similarity                           Custom track
    Frame T                Frame T+1                                                     Student Branch         Similarity                             loss                         Mean match threshold
                                            Track                                                                 loss
                                                                                                                                                                        Pair N
                 Track 1                                 Sample crop                                                                                                   similarity
                                           Dataset                                        Replica of Above                   Generate all possible
                                                        pair from within                                                      pair combinations
                 Track 2
                                                        same/matched                      Teacher Branch                                                 Pair similarity computation
                                                               track          Self supervised model ﬁnetuning                  Custom match threshold computation for each dataset track
      Create tracks by linking faces
                                         Update track                               Repeat for
                                          matches                                   N iterations                                                                                           Cluster
                                                                                                                                                                Bottom-up                    A        Cluster
                                                               Coarse Track                                                    Track 1   Track 2              clustering with                           B
                                                                 Matching                                                                                custom track thresholds            Cluster
                                                                                                                                                                                              C
          Sample track crops                                                                                                        Track N
                                                                                                                               Track Embedding
                                                                                                                                    Dataset
  Add sampled track to overall dataset
  Stage 1: Track Pre-Processing              Stage 2: Self-Supervised Model Finetuning on Video Tracks                              Stage 3: Fully Automated Track Clustering



Figure 2: Overview of VideoClusterNet: Given the temporal continuity in the video domain, faces detected in consecutive frames are
first locally grouped into tracks using a motion tracking algorithm. A large-scale pre-trained face ID model is finetuned on these tracks
using temporal self-supervision (w/ only positive pairing), via learning through natural face variations available within each track. Then, the
finetuning is bootstrapped by soft-matching tracks across common identities. Performing these two steps alternatively helps the model better
understand the given set of faces. A final clustering algorithm based on a model-learned similarity metric groups common identity tracks.


Contextual Information based Video Face Clustering: Following work using supplementary la-
bels, methods such as Zhang et al. (2013); El Khoury et al. (2010) leverage contextual information,
e.g., clothing and surrounding scene contents, while Paul et al. (2014) use aligned audio to help
localize faces. Alternatively, Zhou et al. (2015) incorporate gender information along with tempo-
ral constraints through face motion tracking. Unlike previous approaches, our method requires no
explicit contextual information.
Video Face Clustering using temporal feature aggregation, 3D convolutions: Another line of
work, such as in Liu et al. (2019); Gong et al. (2019), incorporates mechanisms to aggregate deep
learning-based features of a given face track to provide a single track level embedding, which is
in turn used to perform non-temporal face clustering. Recent approaches, such as Huo & van Zyl
(2020), adopt 3D convolutions inside the feature extractor to model temporal identity information
better. Our method utilizes temporal information in a more flexible way, thus allowing the use of
any feature encoder architecture.
Temporal Track Constraints based Video Face Clustering: A large body of methods focuses on
generating identity labels through the creation of positive image pairs. They track a given face across
consecutive frames and negative pairs through co-occurring tracks. Approaches such as Cherniavsky
et al. (2010); Kapoor et al. (2009); Yan et al. (2006) apply such temporal constraints in semi/fully
supervised settings, whereas methods like Wu et al. (2013a;b); Tapaswi et al. (2014); Xiao et al.
(2014); Dahake et al. (2021); Tapaswi et al. (2019); Somandepalli & Narayanan (2019); Aggarwal
et al. (2022); Datta et al. (2018) use temporal constraints in an unsupervised manner, with the major-
ity of them adopting some contrastive pair loss formulation. We significantly improve on this major
trend by skipping negative pairs selection and thus any complex mining strategy for obtaining them.
Deep Metric Learning: Deep face clustering inherently relies on having embeddings of the same
identity closer to each other and of different identities farther away in the representation space.
Approaches such as Song et al. (2017); Cinbis et al. (2011); Zhang et al. (2016a); Yang et al. (2016);
Law et al. (2017); Mensink et al. (2012) focus on optimizing such a space and require defining a
face similarity metric to improve video face clustering performance. Most approaches incorporate a
contrastive-based similarity metric, such as triplet loss, to help obtain an embedding space optimized
for a given set of faces in a video. We adopt the metric defined in Eq. (2) that does not rely on
any negative pairing, thereby avoiding any sub-optimality induced through incorrect negative pair
selection. In this paper, we also utilize this metric for final video track clustering, which provides
enhanced performance since the embeddings are optimized w.r.t. the metric itself.
Joint Representation and Clustering:Sharma et al. (2019) propose two methods, TSiam and
SSiam, to generate positive and negative pairs for model finetuning on a set of given video faces.
TSiam adopts track-level constraints, i.e., sampling faces within the same and co-occurring tracks
for positive and negative pairing, respectively. SSiam mines hard contrastive pairs using a pseudo-
relevance feedback (pseudo-RF) inspired mechanism Yan et al. (2006). Both methods employ com-


                                                                                              3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


plex modules that depend on finetuned parameters to mine negative pairs. In contrast, our proposed
method does not depend on negative pairs at all, making it much simpler and generalized. Also,
while Sharma et al. (2019) incorporates a baseline final clustering algorithm, which depends on the
number of clusters as initialization, we propose a novel final clustering algorithm that is directly
linked to the model finetuning approach and requires no initial guidance. Zhang et al. (2016b) in-
corporate a Markov Random Field (MRF) model to assign coarse track cluster labels, used as weak
supervision for iteratively training a feature encoder. Negative pairs are mined through specific tem-
poral constraints to boot start optimization of MRF. We introduce a much simpler weak matching
mechanism that removes any dependency on negative pairs, thus requiring no complex training as
in MRF. Besides, our clustering algorithm requires no input number of known characters for deter-
mining final cluster labels.

3     M ETHOD
3.1   OVERVIEW

A high-level overview of our proposed method is shown in Fig. 2. The following subsections de-
scribe in detail the prominent components of our approach.
3.2   FACE T RACK P RE -P ROCESSING

In a standard frame rate video, frame content within the same scene gradually varies w.r.t. its tempo-
ral neighboring frames. To exploit this temporal stability for face clustering, we first locally cluster
detected faces in a video by motion tracking, akin to all major prior works Cinbis et al. (2011);
Sharma et al. (2019); Wu et al. (2013b). This pre-processing stage consists of four components.
First, scene cuts are detected in the given video, which divides it into contiguous separate sections,
here coined as shots. Each scene cut represents a major change in scene composition, either in-
volving a camera angle or scene setting change. We employ a threshold-based scene cut detection
algorithm implemented in PySceneDetect library API (2022). Second, we utilize a face detection
algorithm to find all visible faces in each frame of the processed shots. We adopt RetinaFace Deng
et al. (2020) as our face detector due to its current state-of-the-art benchmark performance.
Third, the detected face crops are evaluated for their face ID quality by thresholding facial attributes
based on blurriness and crop size. Crops failing the quality test are directly labeled as Unknown.
Fourth, detected faces within a given shot are locally linked into a face track using a motion tracking
algorithm. We adopt the state-of-the-art method, BoT-SORT Aharon et al. (2022), to generate tracks.
For each face track t, a face crop I is sampled every 12-th frame, i.e., t = [It1 , It2 , ...., Itn ], where
tn = 12 ∗ n + f1 and f1 denotes the original frame index for the first frame in the track’s sampled
set t. This particular frame interval assumes a video frame rate of 24 fps and ensures, in most cases,
that there is a significant change in either facial pose and/or expressions through the track duration.
3.3   TASK O BJECTIVE F ORMULATION

Following Gong et al. (2019); Wu et al. (2013a), we consider a set of all detected tracks within a
given video, which can be denoted by T = {tj |j = 1, 2, ...., N } for a set of N tracks. The face
clustering objective can be defined as assigning an unique cluster id d for each track tj , where all
tracks with the same id belong to an unique facial identity in the set T . Note that the ground truth
number of clusters is undefined. More formally,

                                tdj = {−1, 1, 2, ...}, ∀j = {1, 2, ..., N },                            (1)

where d = −1 indicates the Unknown face cluster. This cluster represents tracks with the majority
of their faces flagged as failures in any of the previously mentioned face attributes tests or if the face
ID model was uncertain about it. The latter case is detailed in Section 3.6.
3.4   S ELF S UPERVISED M ODEL F INETUNING

To adapt a large-scale pre-trained face ID model to a specific set of faces, we incorporate the notion
of finetuning the model for that face track set. Traditional supervised finetuning would require
human supervision, i.e. ground truth labels, which can be tedious depending on the number of
tracks involved. To alleviate this problem, several approaches in the domain of self-supervised


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


feature learning (SSL) have recently been proposed van den Oord et al. (2018); Tian et al. (2020);
He et al. (2020); Chen et al. (2020). Especially interesting are methods that only use positive pairs for
contrastive-based learning Grill et al. (2020); Zhou et al. (2022b). Inspired by Zhou et al. (2022a), we
adopt a self-distillation-based SSL method that uses a teacher-student mechanism and positive pairs.
First, we modify the technique                                           MLP head ﬁnetuned with base
                                                                     model weights frozen for initial few epochs
to perform finetuning rather than
                                                                                            Student Branch
training from scratch. As shown in                                                                                    Class token
                                                                                                                                               Gradient
                                                                                                                                               backprop
                                                                                                                      MLP head
Fig. 3, given the pre-trained face-                                           Large scale pre-trained
                                                                                                                                               Class token
                                                                                   face ID model
ID model, which has no specific ar-                                                                                   Patch token   *          similarity loss

                                                                                                                      MLP head
chitecture limitations, we attach a                                                        Teacher branch weights
                                                                                          updated as moving average
randomly initialized multilayer per-                                                      of student branch weights
                                                                                                                      Class token

ceptron (MLP) as a model head.                                                                                        MLP head                  Patch token
                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                similarity loss
                                                                                   Replica of Above
For a Transformer model architec-         Aligned face crop pair                                                      Patch token   *
                                                                                                                       MLP head
ture Dosovitskiy et al. (2021), sepa-      sampled from within
                                          same/matched track(s)                             Teacher Branch
rate heads are attached for the class      (modiﬁed with randomnly
                                            sampled augmentations)
                                                                                                                           *Only for transformer archs
and patch token embeddings, re-
spectively. The base model with         Figure 3: Self-Supervised Model Finetuning: Face crop pair sampled from within
the attached head(s) is duplicated      same/matched track(s) is passed through a student and teacher branch, respectively. Gra-
                                        dients w.r.t. similarity loss are backpropagated only through the student branch, while
to create a teacher branch, with the    the teacher weights are updated as moving average of student weights. Random augmen-
original one designated as the stu-     tations set includes horizontal flipping, rotation and color temperature variations.
dent branch.
Second, image pairs are curated from each track’s sampled crop set. Images in a given pair are
first passed through a set of augmentations, then an embedding pair is obtained as the output of the
two constructed branches. We adopt a similarity loss to compare these embeddings, presented as
follows:

                                          embedt − c
                 Lssl = −1 ∗ sof tmax                   ∗ log(sof tmax(embeds )),                (2)
                                              temp
where embedt and embeds are the embeddings from teacher and student branches, respectively.
Here, c denotes a rolling average teacher embedding computed across training batches, and temp
is a fixed softening temperature. Respective loss gradients are backpropagated through the student
branch weights only, while the teacher branch weights are updated via a moving average of the stu-
dent weights at regular training intervals. Please refer Appendix A.3 for additional implementation
details.
As the branch heads are randomly initialized, each of the branch’s base model is frozen for an
initial training phase. First, the heads are updated separately, akin to the description above. Then,
both the base model and the heads are updated. Such a structured training regime encourages the
model branch heads to produce robust and consistent embeddings for a given facial identity across
the observed range of poses, expressions, lighting and appearance changes, thus improving overall
clustering performance for that specific video.
3.5     C OARSE T RACK M ATCHING

Since a given face track is limited to being within a shot, there is no significant variation in lighting
and/or face appearance across the track, which theoretically puts an upper bound on the model
learning capacity. However, for real-world scenarios such as those likely to be observed in movies
and TV series, such parameters can vary greatly throughout the video. To account for such variations
and facilitate further model learning, we perform fully automated coarse matching of tracks across
the entire dataset. Image pairs generated from such coarse-matched tracks enable the model to
better adapt to specific lighting and appearance variations encountered in a given face across the
entire dataset. This notion is supported by our experimental findings in Section 4 and Appendix H.
For coarse track matching, we leverage multiple sampled crops of the same identity in a given face
track. To model this track crop distribution, we found empirically that fitting a multivariate normal
distribution on all track crop embeddings works the best. Mathematically, we adopt

                                                                                −1           ⊤ −1
      Ntj (µtj , Σtj ) = (2π)−d/2 ∗ det(Σtj )−1/2 ∗ exp                          2 (x − µtj ) Σtj (x − µtj )                                  ,          (3)


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where µtj ∈ Rd and Σtj ∈ Rd×d are the mean and covariance matrix for the j th face track, com-
puted using all its sampled face crop embeddings. Here, d denotes the number of dimensions of the
fitted distribution, which equals the dimension of track crop embeddings.
To automatically set a custom threshold value
for matching a given face track to other neigh-
boring tracks in the model learned embedding
space, we resort to the probability density func-
tion (pdf) values of a given track’s crop em-
beddings. Specifically, the pdf values of all          Visualized model embedding space                    Multivariate gaussian ﬁtted
                                                                                                         for each track crop distribution
crop embeddings are computed w.r.t. their par-                                                                                      non-matched
                                                                                                                                  neighbouring track
ent track’s fitted distribution using Eq. (3). We
then consider the lowest 25% of these val-                                                                                            matched
                                                                                                                                  neighbouring track
ues and compute their mean. This provides a Step 1: Compute pdf Step 2: Select outlier Custom track matching Step 3: Match other
                                                      for each track crop  crops w.r.t. pdf values threshold visualized    tracks by computing
customized matching threshold, which is illus-            w.r.t. its ﬁtted                              as a ring             mean pdf w.r.t.
                                                           Gaussian                                                             given track
trated as a ring around the track’s distribution in
Fig. 4. To get coarse matches for a given track, Figure 4: Coarse Face Track Matching: A Multivariate Gaussian is
we compute a mean embedding for every other fitted to every track crop distribution. Then, a custom track match-
dataset track and its corresponding pdf value ing        threshold is computed using outlier crops pdf values. Neighboring
                                                    tracks having a mean pdf value higher than custom threshold are soft-
w.r.t. the given track’s fitted distribution. If matched with the given track.
a neighboring track’s pdf value is equal to or
higher than that given track’s custom match threshold, then the track pair’s distributions have signif-
icant overlap, hinting at a strong face identity match.
Further, given coarse matches for every dataset face track, we curate face crop pairs across these
track matches for the next iteration of model finetuning. In particular, for each face crop in a given
track, we randomly sample a track from a set of its coarsely matched tracks. The image pair is
created by randomly sampling a crop from within the sampled track. We empirically found that
this image pairing mechanism works better than other more complex strategies such as thresholding
inter track euclidean/cosine distances. If a track has no coarse matches, then we create pairs from
within the same track.

3.6     T RACK FACE Q UALITY E STIMATION

In complex face identification scenarios, excluding bad quality crops/tracks becomes essential
for coarse track matching and final clustering. Bad face quality of a given track often relates to
model uncertainty, which can result in false track matches during the coarse matching phase or
wrong clustering in the final stage. To automatically estimate the face quality of track crops, we
adopt SER-FIQ Terhörst et al. (2020), which utilizes a dropout layer to determine consistency in
embeddings predicted by the model for multiple iterations of the same face crop input. For bad
quality crops, the learned model that is uncertain about them would predict embeddings with high
variance, thus resulting in a low-quality score.
To compute the face quality score for a given track (tqs), we adapt SER-FIQ to work on a track level
by obtaining scores for each track crop and averaging them. To detect bad quality tracks, we adopt
the median absolute deviation (MAD) Leys et al. (2013) to detect roughly the lower 5% outlier tracks
based on dataset track score distribution and compute a threshold value. Please refer to Appendix B
for details. Low quality score tracks are filtered out from coarse track matching and final clustering
modules and label their final track cluster IDs as Unknown.

3.7     F INAL C LUSTERING

To cluster tracks across common identities, we utilize the SSL loss function in Eq. (2) as an embed-
ding similarity metric. Prior works incorporate Euclidean or other pre-defined distance metrics to
compare model embeddings Sharma et al. (2019); Tapaswi et al. (2019). Our proposed metric has
significant benefit. A finetuned model’s embedding space is directly optimized w.r.t. this metric,
thus making it optimal for evaluating embedding similarity. As such, there are no implicit assump-
tions made about the space through generic distance functions. Unlike other methods that define a
global matching threshold Defays (1977), our approach automatically computes a custom threshold
per face track, which measures how well the model has learned about that particular facial identity.


                                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Comparative t-SNE embedding visualizations der Maaten & Hinton (2008) on MovieFaceCluster:The Hidden Soldier dataset.
Left: Ground truth, Right: Our method. Each dot in the diagram above represents the finetuned model’s extracted embedding for a given face
crop Itn in a given track’s sampled crop set t. Face embeddings assigned to a given color constitute a single cluster. Our method predicts
almost perfectly the cluster designations (22 clusters) w.r.t. ground truth (21 clusters).



The proposed algorithm is described in Algorithm 1. We begin by creating all possible pair combi-
nations among sampled face crops within a given track. Here, we exclude tracks filtered out by the
track face quality estimation module described in Section 3.6. A pair’s similarity value is computed
via the loss metric by passing the respective face crops through each of the model branches. As
the loss metric is not commutative, a mean value is computed by alternatively sending both images
through each of the branches. A custom track matching threshold is set as the average of all curated
pair similarity values in the given track. This threshold represents quantitatively how well the model
matches face crops belonging to a given common facial identity since the crops are part of the same
track. We repeat this step for all tracks in the dataset.
                                                          Algorithm 1: Face Track Clustering
The next stage comprises of merging tracks in a Input:
bottom-up approach, akin to Hierarchical Agglom- Filtered Face Tracks T = {tj | j = 1, 2, ..., N }
erative Clustering (HAC) Defays (1977). Initially, finetuned    ∋ tj = {It1 , It2 , ...Itn | tn = 12 ∗ n + f1 },
                                                                      model θf t , Similarity metric S
each track is assigned an individual cluster, and
tracks are iteratively merged if they satisfy a match- Stage     3.1 (Compute track crop embedding set):
                                                          for tj in T do
ing criterion. It involves creating all pairwise com-           for Itn in tj do
binations of face crops across both tracks for a given                Etn ←− θf t (Itn )
                                                                end
candidate pair of tracks. Given the similarity (loss)           tjE = {Et1 , Et2 , ..., Etn }
value for every crop pair combination, taking a mean end
across them provides a matching potential value for TE = {t1E , t2E , ...tN E }
that candidate track pair. If this match potential is Stage 3.2 (Compute custom track threshold):
lower than either of the track’s custom match thresh- for tjE in TE do
                                                                SimtjE = {S(Etl , Etm ) ∀ (l, m) ∈ n C2 }
olds, then the track pair is considered a positive              T hrestj ←− mean(SimtjE )
match. This process is repeated for all possible track end
combinations in the dataset. All positively matched Tthres = {T hrest1 , T hrest2 , ..., T hrestN }
pairs are searched for common tracks so that they Stage 3.3 (Perform track clustering):
can be combined together into a bigger cluster. For Initialize
example, if track pair 1,2 and 2,3 are matched, then i = 0, C = {Cj = {tjE } ∀ j = 1, 2, ..., N }
                                                          repeat
tracks 1, 2, and 3 are combined together. This entire           for Cj in C do
matching process is run in an iterative fashion. For                  for Ck in C if k ̸= j do
                                                                           Simjk ←−
later iterations, where clusters could have more than                        mean({S(tjEa , tkEb )
one track, mean track embeddings are considered                              ∀ (a, b) ∈ n C2 })
instead of a combined set of face crops for cluster                        if Simjk < T hrestj / T hrestk
pair matching, to avoid exponentially growing match                          then
                                                                                 Cj ←− merge(Cj , Ck )
computations. The algorithm terminates when no                             end
new clusters are merged in the new iteration.                         end
                                                                                 end
                                                                                 C = link merges (C)
                                                                                 NCi = ClusterCount(C)
4     R ESULTS                                                                   Repeat Stage 2 for new merged cluster set C
                                                                                 i=i+1
                                                                           until NCi − NCi−1 = 0;
We present our experimental analysis on popular
benchmark datasets and our curated movie dataset.                          Output: Clustered track IDs C



                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1      B ENCHMARK DATASETS

Following prior work Bäuml et al. (2013); Tapaswi et al. (2019); Sharma et al. (2019), we evaluate
our proposed method on TV series episodes of Big Bang Theory (BBT) and Buffy The Vampire
Slayer (BVS), specifically the first six episodes of BBT season 1 and BVS season 5, respectively.
BBT is a TV series with primarily indoor setting, a cast of 5∼8 different characters and 625 average
face tracks per episode. Here, all shots include wide-angle scenes, and faces are relatively small. The
most common face ID challenges are pose and lighting variations. BVS poses different challenges.
The main cast comprises 12∼18 characters, and there are 919 average face tracks per episode. Shots
are mainly captured outdoors, and scenes are dark. It also has more close-up shots and, thus, larger
face sizes. Detailed statistics on these datasets are shown in Tab. 1 in Bäuml et al. (2013). To
compare against previous methods, we use the same face detection, tracking, and clustering labels
as provided in Tapaswi et al. (2019); Sharma et al. (2019). Tab. 1 compares our method with state-
of-the-art methods on BBT and BVS, respectively.
4.2      M ETRICS

We define two primary metrics at face                                       Method                                           BBT Episode            BVS Episode
                                                                                                                           S1E1   Combined        S5E2   Combined
track level for evaluating video face                                       Wu et al. (2013a)                              66.48      -             -        -
clustering performance, namely Weighted                                     MLR Bäuml et al. (2013)
                                                                            HMRF Wu et al. (2013b)
                                                                                                                           95.18
                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                    83.71
                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                  61.27
                                                                                                                                                  50.30
                                                                                                                                                           66.37
                                                                                                                                                             -
Cluster Purity/Accuracy (WCP) and Pre-                                      WBSLRR Xiao et al. (2014)                        -        -           62.70      -
                                                                            Zhang et al. (2016b)                             -        -           92.10      -
dicted Cluster Ratio (PCR). WCP is de-                                      TSiam Sharma et al. (2019)                     96.40      -           92.46      -
                                                                            SSiam Sharma et al. (2019)                     96.20      -           90.87      -
fined as the fraction of common identity                                    BCL Tapaswi et al. (2019)                      98.63    89.63         79.76    83.62
tracks in a predicted cluster, weighted by                                  CP-SSC Somandepalli & Narayanan (2019)
                                                                            MvCorr Somandepalli et al. (2021)
                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                  65.20
                                                                                                                                                  97.70
                                                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                                             -
the cluster track count. PCR is the ratio                                   Ours*                                          99.72    97.35         99.10    96.10
between the predicted cluster and ground
truth cluster count. Note that a ratio closer                             Table 1: WCP/Clustering Accuracy on BBT Season 1 and BVS Season 5. The
                                                                          results on all six episodes combined are presented in column 2 and 4 for BBT
to 1 is deemed better. Here ”Unknown” is                                  and BVS respectively. *Note that here, we use ArcFace-R100 Deng et al.
considered as a separate ground truth clus-                               (2019) as our pre-trained base model.
ter if available.
4.3      M OVIE DATASET

Mainstream movies present challenges for face clustering due to extreme pose, illumination, and
appearance variations. Considering the lack of significant benchmark datasets in the academic re-
search community, we present a new movie benchmark dataset named MovieFaceCluster, con-
taining a collection of movies, hand-selected by film post-production specialists, with unique face
clustering challenges. Refer to Appendix E for additional details on the dataset. Given the set of
movies, we run the preprocessing mentioned in Section 3.2 to obtain a specific track dataset for each
movie. We hand-label each track with an ID using the main character cast from that track’s parent
movie. Also, false detections and extreme unidentifiable tracks are pre-filtered out using the track
face quality estimation module mentioned in Section 3.6. Tab. 2 provides detailed statistics on this
curated dataset.
Tab. 2 also compares our method to other similar state-of-the-art approaches on this benchmark to
provide empirical evidence of our algorithm’s effectiveness, specifically for extremely challenging
cases. We achieve the best cluster accuracy (WCP) and predicted cluster ratios closest to 1 for all
individual movies. Fig. 5 additionally shows a t-SNE plot visualization of our learned embeddings
for one of our dataset movie and Fig. 1 illustrates some hard case clustered tracks using our proposed
method on MovieFaceCluster dataset.
                                                                                               Movie
         Statistics                An            Armed          Angel        Death        American        The            Under          The       S.M.A.R.T.    Total
                                Elephant’s      Response       Of The        Do Us         Fright       Fortress          The         Hidden        Chase
                              Journey (2019)                    Skies      Part (2019)       Fest                       Shadow        Soldier
        Track Count                562            119            319           395           457          917             143           594          113        3619
      Character Count               18             14             29            7             37           64              9             21           10         209
  Avg. Track Length (secs)        3.625          2.912          4.064        4.775          3.702        5.357           5.458         4.058        5.190       4.349
          Method                                                   Weighted Cluster Accuracy (%) & Pred Cluster Ratio (Pred / GT)
 TSiam Sharma et al. (2019)    90.7 & 1.44     84.9 & 1.36   77.1 & 0.62 92.9 & 1.57 89.3 & 0.83 68.6 & 0.69 71.8 & 2.11            90.7 & 1.33   79.6 & 1.70     -
 SSiam Sharma et al. (2019)    88.1 & 1.61     86.6 & 1.21   75.5 & 0.59 94.4 & 1.28 86.2 & 0.78 71.1 & 0.73 68.3 & 2.33            88.7 & 1.24   82.3 & 1.80     -
    Zhang et al. (2016b)       91.4 & 1.33     85.2 & 1.50   73.4 & 0.62 90.8 & 0.71 91.5 & 0.86 65.3 & 0.77 73.1 & 2.00            92.6 & 1.19   85.8 & 1.70
           Ours                97.2 & 1.11     94.1 & 0.93   85.9 & 0.72 98.0 & 1.14 97.6 & 0.92 89.3 & 1.02 82.5 & 1.88            98.5 & 1.04   93.8 & 1.50     -


Table 2: Top: Statistics on our MovieFaceCluster Benchmark Dataset. Bottom: Quantitative comparisons on each individual movie. All
computed results are based on incorporating ArcFace-R100 Deng et al. (2019) as the pre-trained base model. We outperform SoTA methods
w.r.t. cluster accuracy and predicted cluster ratio. For implementation details on comparative methods please refer to Appendix A.4.



                                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5      A BLATIVE A NALYSIS
We ablate the central components of our method and analyze limitations and future directions.
Model Finetuning We ablate on the effectiveness of finetuning a generic face ID model to a
given set of face tracks as part of our proposed method. Tab. 3 provides a comparison of clustering
performance with and without using the model finetuning module. Note that our proposed final
clustering algorithm depends on the similarity metric learned during the finetuning stage. As such,
to compare both methods in a fair way, we adopt a common baseline clustering algorithm, i.e., HAC
with average linkage and cosine distance metric. Performing model finetuning results in roughly 6%
increase in cluster accuracy, which underlines its usefulness.
Final Clustering Algorithm We further ablate on the performance of our final clustering approach
vs. baseline algorithm, i.e., HAC with average linkage and cosine distance metric in Tab. 4. Here,
we keep the model finetuning stage constant in all methods to compare fairly. As for HAC, we take
the mean of a given track’s sampled crop embeddings to obtain a representative track embedding.
We further ablate on the loss function as a similarity metric. Specifically, we compare our final
clustering algorithm with using Euclidean and Cosine distances as similarity metrics. Our approach
involving the loss metric outperforms all other methods.
Generic face ID Model Architectures In Tab. 5, we ablate on our approach’s generalization ca-
pabilities to incorporate any generic face ID model, fairly agnostic to its architecture class. Specifi-
cally, we compare some prominent face ID models from both Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
and Transformer architecture classes incorporated as part of our method, against using them (w/o
finetuning) along with baseline clustering method (HAC). Regardless of the incorporated face ID
model, our finetuning method provides roughly a 5 ∼ 12% performance boost, which underlines
our method’s capability to adapt to and improve any generic face ID model.
                                          Clustering   Similarity   Cluster     Cluster        Face ID Model                     Cluster Acc. (%)
 Method                        Cluster    Algorithm      Metric     Accuracy     Ratio                                           Baseline Ours
                              Accuracy                                (%)     (Pred/GT)
                                 (%)
                                                                                               FaRL-P16 Zheng et al. (2022)      78.7     90.2
                                          Baseline      Cosine       91.52   1.43 (30 / 21)    VGGFace2-R50 Cao et al. (2018)    84.2     95.7
 Baseline - (Non-Finetuned)     86.10      (HAC)
 Ours - (Finetuned)             91.52                                                          ArcFace-R100 Deng et al. (2019)   86.1     98.5
                                            Ours        Cosine       93.70    2.0 (42 / 21)    AdaFace-R100 Kim et al. (2022)    86.9     98.4
                                            Ours       Euclidean     96.50    3.5 (74 / 21)
Table 3:      Ablation for model            Ours       Loss Func.    98.50    1.04 (22 / 21)
                                                                                               Table 5: Ablation for various base face ID
finetuning      module,    using
                                         Table 4: Ablation for final clustering algorithm,     models incorporated in our method. We per-
ArcFace-R100 as the base model.
                                         compared with baseline HAC, and using pre-            form comparisons using our proposed method
Experiments are performed on
                                         defined metrics within our algorithm. Experi-         and pre-trained model + baseline cluster-
MovieFaceCluster: The Hidden
                                         ments are performed on MovieFaceCluster: The          ing (HAC). Experiments are performed on
Soldier dataset and HAC as final
                                         Hidden Soldier dataset and using ArcFace-R100         MovieFaceCluster: The Hidden Soldier
clustering algorithm.
                                         as base model.                                        dataset.

Limitations and Future Work Usage of a generic face ID model means that any pre-existing
model biases may also be propagated through our method. For example, if the generic model has
learned an incorrect similarity between two distinct facial identities, then our algorithm might adapt
to it and provide a false positive cluster for that given pair. A future direction could be to auto-
matically detect such biases, such that a given pair’s embeddings are specifically pulled apart. This
could be done by incorporating an outlier detection technique based on pair similarity values for
a cluster’s tracks. Also, given that we finetune on a set of face tracks, it might not be optimal for
real-time applications depending on the track set size. A future extension of our work could be to
perform clustering on person rather than face bounding boxes, so that clustering is based on addi-
tional body cues rather than just focusing on the facial features. Comprehensive movie datasets such
as MovieNet Huang et al. (2020) could be used to train large-scale pretrained models for the same.

6      C ONCLUSION
We present a novel video face clustering algorithm that specifically adapts to a given set of face
tracks through a fully self-supervised mechanism. This helps the model better understand and adapt
to all observed variations for a given facial identity across the entire video without any human-in-
the-loop label guidance. Our fully automated approach at video face clustering specifically helps
avoid any sub-optimal solutions that maybe induced from non-intuitive user-defined parameters. In
addition, using a model-learned similarity metric over generic distance functions helps provide state-
of-the-art video face clustering performance over other competing methods. Extensive experiments
and ablation studies on our presented comprehensive movie dataset and traditional benchmarks un-
derline our method’s effectiveness under extremely challenging real-world scenarios.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Abhinav Aggarwal, Yash Pandya, Lokesh A. Ravindranathan, Laxmi S. Ahire, Manivel Sethu, and Kaustav
  Nandy. Robust actor recognition in entertainment multimedia at scale. ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia (ACM MM), pp. 2079–2087, 2022.

Nir Aharon, Roy Orfaig, and Ben-Zion Bobrovsky. Bot-sort: Robust associations multi-pedestrian tracking.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14651, 2022.

PySceneDetect API, 2022. URL https://www.scenedetect.com/api/. Version 0.6.0.3.

Martin Bäuml, Makarand Tapaswi, and Rainer Stiefelhagen. Semi-supervised learning with constraints for per-
  son identification in multimedia data. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 3602–3609. IEEE, 2013.

Tamara L. Berg, Alexander C. Berg, Jaety Edwards, Michael Maire, Ryan White, Yee Whye Teh, Erik G.
  Learned-Miller, and David A. Forsyth. Names and faces in the news. In Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 848–854. IEEE, 2004.

Qiong Cao, Li Shen, Weidi Xie, Omkar M Parkhi, and Andrew Zisserman. Vggface2: A dataset for recognising
  faces across pose and age. In International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition, pp. 67–
  74. IEEE, 2018.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. A simple framework for con-
   trastive learning of visual representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
   1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.

Neva Cherniavsky, Ivan Laptev, Josef Sivic, and Andrew Zisserman. Semi-supervised learning of facial at-
  tributes in video. In Trends and Topics in Computer Vision: ECCV 2010 Workshops, pp. 43–56. Springer,
  2010.

Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis, Jakob Verbeek, and Cordelia Schmid. Unsupervised metric learning for face identi-
  fication in tv video. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1559–1566. IEEE, 2011.

Dorin Comaniciu and Peter Meer. Mean shift: A robust approach toward feature space analysis. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI), 24(5):603–619, 2002.

Timothée Cour, Benjamin Sapp, Akash Nagle, and Ben Taskar. Talking pictures: Temporal grouping and
  dialog-supervised person recognition. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 1014–1021. IEEE, 2010.

RP Dahake et al. Face recognition from video using threshold based clustering. Turkish Journal of Computer
  and Mathematics Education (TURCOMAT), 12(1S):272–285, 2021.

Samyak Datta, Gaurav Sharma, and C. V. Jawahar. Unsupervised learning of face representations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition, pp. 135–142. IEEE, 2018.

Daniel Defays. An efficient algorithm for a complete link method. The Computer Journal, 20(4):364–366,
  1977.

Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for
   deep face recognition. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4690–4699.
   IEEE, 2019.

Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Yuxiang Zhou, Jinke Yu, Irene Kotsia, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Retinaface: Single-
   shot multi-level face localisation in the wild. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
   (CVPR), pp. 5203–5212. IEEE, 2020.

Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 9(11), 2008.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
  terthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil
  Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). Springer, 2021.

Elie El Khoury, Christine Sénac, and Philippe Joly. Face-and-clothing based people clustering in video content.
   In Proceedings of the International Conference on Multimedia Information Retrieval, pp. 295–304. ACM,
   2010.


                                                      10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, and Xiaowei Xu. A density-based algorithm for discovering
  clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 226–231.
  AAAI Press, 1996.

Mark Everingham, Josef Sivic, and Andrew Zisserman. Hello! my name is... buffy” – automatic naming of
  characters in TV video. In British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), pp. 899–908, 2006.

Mark Everingham, Josef Sivic, and Andrew Zisserman. Taking the bite out of automated naming of characters
  in tv video. Image and Vision Computing, 27(5):545–559, 2009.

Sixue Gong, Yichun Shi, Nathan D. Kalka, and Anil K. Jain. Video face recognition: Component-wise feature
   aggregation network (c-fan). In International Conference on Biometrics, pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2019.

Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H. Richemond, Elena Buchatskaya,
   Carl Doersch, Bernardo Ávila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Koray
   Kavukcuoglu, Rémi Munos, and Michal Valko. Bootstrap your own latent - A new approach to self-
   supervised learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross B. Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsupervised
  visual representation learning. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  9726–9735. IEEE, 2020.

Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian error linear units (gelus). arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.

Qingqiu Huang, Yu Xiong, Anyi Rao, Jiaze Wang, and Dahua Lin. Movienet: A holistic dataset for movie
  understanding. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 709–727. Springer, 2020.

Jiahao Huo and Terence L. van Zyl. Unique faces recognition in videos. In International Conference on
   Information Fusion (FUSION), pp. 1–7. IEEE, 2020.

Ashish Kapoor, Gang Hua, Amir Akbarzadeh, and Simon Baker. Which faces to tag: Adding prior constraints
  into active learning. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1058–1065. IEEE, 2009.

Minchul Kim, Anil K Jain, and Xiaoming Liu. Adaface: Quality adaptive margin for face recognition. In
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 18750–18759. IEEE, 2022.

Marc T. Law, Raquel Urtasun, and Richard S. Zemel. Deep spectral clustering learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 70, pp. 1985–1994. PMLR, 2017.

Christophe Leys, Christophe Ley, Olivier Klein, Philippe Bernard, and Laurent Licata. Detecting outliers: Do
  not use standard deviation around the mean, use absolute deviation around the median. Elsevier Journal of
  Experimental Social Psychology, 49(4):764–766, 2013.

Zhaoxiang Liu, Huan Hu, Jinqiang Bai, Shaohua Li, and Shiguo Lian. Feature aggregation network for video
  face recognition. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 990–998. IEEE, 2019.

Stuart P. Lloyd. Least squares quantization in pcm. In IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 28(2):
   129–136, 1982.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Conference on
   Learning Representations (ICLR). Springer, 2019.

Thomas Mensink, Jakob Verbeek, Florent Perronnin, and Gabriela Csurka. Metric learning for large scale
  image classification: Generalizing to new classes at near-zero cost. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), volume 7573, pp. 488–501. Springer, 2012.

Derya Ozkan and Pinar Duygulu. A graph based approach for naming faces in news photos. In Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1477–1482. IEEE, 2006.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
  Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Z. Yang, Zachary
  DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and
  Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 8024–8035, 2019.

Gay Paul, Khoury Elie, Meignier Sylvain, Odobez Jean-Marc, and Deleglise Paul. A conditional random field
  approach for audio-visual people diarization. In International Conference on Acoustics,Speech and Signal
  Processing (ICASSP), pp. 116–120. IEEE, 2014.


                                                    11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Phi The Pham, Marie-Francine Moens, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Cross-media alignment of names and faces. IEEE
  Transactions on Multimedia (TMM), 12(1):13–27, 2009.

Anna Rohrbach, Atousa Torabi, Marcus Rohrbach, Niket Tandon, Christopher Joseph Pal, Hugo Larochelle,
  Aaron C. Courville, and Bernt Schiele. Movie description. International Journal on Computer Vision (IJCV),
  123(1):94–120, 2017.

Shin’ichi Satoh, Yuichi Nakamura, and Takeo Kanade. Name-it: Naming and detecting faces in news videos.
  IEEE Multimedia, 6(1):22–35, 1999.

Vivek Sharma, Makarand Tapaswi, M. Saquib Sarfraz, and Rainer Stiefelhagen. Self-supervised learning of
  face representations for video face clustering. In International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture
  Recognition, pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2019.

Krishna Somandepalli and Shrikanth S. Narayanan. Reinforcing self-expressive representation with constraint
  propagation for face clustering in movies. In International Conference on Acoustics,Speech and Signal
  Processing (ICASSP), pp. 4065–4069. IEEE, 2019.

Krishna Somandepalli, Rajat Hebbar, and Shrikanth Narayanan. Robust character labeling in movie videos:
  Data resources and self-supervised feature adaptation. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 24:3355–3368,
  2021.

Hyun Oh Song, Stefanie Jegelka, Vivek Rathod, and Kevin Murphy. Deep metric learning via facility location.
  In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5382–5390. IEEE, 2017.

Bolan Su, Shijian Lu, and Chew Lim Tan. Blurred image region detection and classification. In ACM Interna-
  tional Conference on Multimedia (ACM MM), pp. 1397–1400. ACM, 2011.

Yi Sun, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deeply learned face representations are sparse, selective, and
  robust. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2892–2900. IEEE, 2015.

Zhiqiang Tang, Yifan Zhang, Zechao Li, and Hanqing Lu. Face clustering in videos with proportion prior. In
  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 2191–2197. Annual AAAI Conference
  on Artifical Intelligence (AAAI), 2015.

Makarand Tapaswi, Omkar M. Parkhi, Esa Rahtu, Eric Sommerlade, Rainer Stiefelhagen, and Andrew Zisser-
  man. Total cluster: A person agnostic clustering method for broadcast videos. In Indian Conference on
  Computer Vision Graphics and Image Processing, pp. 7:1–7:8. ACM, 2014.

Makarand Tapaswi, Yukun Zhu, Rainer Stiefelhagen, Antonio Torralba, Raquel Urtasun, and Sanja Fidler.
  Movieqa: Understanding stories in movies through question-answering. In Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4631–4640. IEEE, 2016.

Makarand Tapaswi, Marc T. Law, and Sanja Fidler. Video face clustering with unknown number of clusters. In
  International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 5027–5036. IEEE, 2019.

Philipp Terhörst, Jan Niklas Kolf, Naser Damer, Florian Kirchbuchner, and Arjan Kuijper. SER-FIQ: unsu-
  pervised estimation of face image quality based on stochastic embedding robustness. In Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5650–5659. IEEE, 2020.

Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Contrastive multiview coding. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 776–794. Springer, 2020.

Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.

Paul Vicol, Makarand Tapaswi, Lluı́s Castrejón, and Sanja Fidler. Moviegraphs: Towards understanding
  human-centric situations from videos. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 8581–8590. IEEE, 2018.

Baoyuan Wu, Siwei Lyu, Bao-Gang Hu, and Qiang Ji. Simultaneous clustering and tracklet linking for multi-
  face tracking in videos. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 2856–2863. IEEE,
  2013a.

Baoyuan Wu, Yifan Zhang, Bao-Gang Hu, and Qiang Ji. Constrained clustering and its application to face
  clustering in videos. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3507–3514.
  IEEE, 2013b.


                                                     12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shijie Xiao, Mingkui Tan, and Dong Xu. Weighted block-sparse low rank representation for face clustering in
  videos. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 123–138. Springer, 2014.

Rong Yan, Jian Zhang, Jie Yang, and Alexander G. Hauptmann. A discriminative learning framework with
  pairwise constraints for video object classification. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence (PAMI), 28(4):578–593, 2006.

Jianwei Yang, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Joint unsupervised learning of deep representations and image
   clusters. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5147–5156. IEEE, 2016.

Liyan Zhang, Dmitri V Kalashnikov, and Sharad Mehrotra. A unified framework for context assisted face
  clustering. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM conference on International conference on multimedia retrieval,
  pp. 9–16. ACM, 2013.

Shun Zhang, Yihong Gong, and Jinjun Wang. Deep metric learning with improved triplet loss for face clustering
  in videos. In Advances in Multimedia Information Processing, volume 9916, pp. 497–508. Springer, 2016a.

Zhanpeng Zhang, Ping Luo, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang. Joint face representation adaptation and
  clustering in videos. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 236–251. Springer, 2016b.

Yinglin Zheng, Hao Yang, Ting Zhang, Jianmin Bao, Dongdong Chen, Yangyu Huang, Lu Yuan, Dong Chen,
  Ming Zeng, and Fang Wen. General facial representation learning in a visual-linguistic manner. In Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 18697–18709. IEEE, 2022.

Chengju Zhou, Changqing Zhang, Huazhu Fu, Rui Wang, and Xiaochun Cao. Multi-cue augmented face
  clustering. In ACM International Conference on Multimedia (ACM MM), pp. 1095–1098. ACM, 2015.
Jinghao Zhou, Chen Wei, Huiyu Wang, Wei Shen, Cihang Xie, Alan L. Yuille, and Tao Kong. Image bert pre-
   training with online tokenizer. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). Springer,
   2022a.
Pan Zhou, Yichen Zhou, Chenyang Si, Weihao Yu, Teck Khim Ng, and Shuicheng Yan. Mugs: A multi-granular
  self-supervised learning framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14415, 2022b.

Sheng Zhou, Hongjia Xu, Zhuonan Zheng, Jiawei Chen, Zhao Li, Jiajun Bu, Jia Wu, Xin Wang, Wenwu Zhu,
  and Martin Ester. A comprehensive survey on deep clustering: Taxonomy, challenges, and future directions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07579, 2022c.


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.1   M ODEL A RCHITECTURE
As part of our method, any CNN or Transformer architecture can be incorporated as the base Face
ID model. For the attached MLP head, we incorporate a 3-layer network with GELU activation
Hendrycks & Gimpel (2016). The length of the head’s output feature embedding is kept the same
as the base model’s embedding length. Unnormalized model output embeddings are used for both
training and the final clustering stage. Also, teacher branch head weights are initialized separately
from their student counterpart. When using a transformer class base model, the head is shared
between the class and path token embeddings in both student and teacher branches respectively
(Fig. 3).


A.2   DATA P RE -P ROCESSING
Generation of tracks as part of given video dataset curation for finetuning and/or clustering purposes
involves processing the video through the four stage pipeline mentioned in detail in Section 3.2. To
further augment variations in a sampled face crop pair, ’global’ and ’local’ views are created from
the original crops. Specifically, crops are randomly resized and cropped with a scale between 0.7 and
1.0 to create multiple global crops, while a scale between 0.4 and 0.6 provides local crop variants.
Given a total of 6 views for each non-cropped original pair, we set the global and local crop count to
2 and 4 respectively. The loss for a given non-cropped original pair is computed using all possible
pairs within each global and local crop group separately. We further apply horizontal flipping and
color temperature variations as additional augmentations.
Face alignment is performed for each face crop prior to the model finetuning and final clustering
stages, in order to further enhance model learning of facial features and in turn for better face clus-
tering performance. For this, a given face crop is first resized to the pre-trained model’s expected
input image size. Then, five point face landmarks are predicted for that crop (we incorporate the
landmarks provided as an auxiliary output by the face detection model RetinaFace Deng et al. (2020)
as we empirically find them to be quite accurate). Given the facial landmarks, a similarity transform
is computed w.r.t. a mean landmark template. An affine warp is then computed to align the face
within the face crop.


A.3   M ODEL F INETUNING
For the initial finetuning iteration, we train the model for 30 epochs. Note that the first 10 epochs
are dedicated to finetuning the branch heads. All subsequent iterations include 10 training epochs
without individual head training stages since the heads aren’t randomly reinitialized for every new
iteration. The teacher branch weights are updated with the exponential moving average of the student
branch weights after every epoch. We adopt AdamW optimizer Loshchilov & Hutter (2019) and an
initial learning rate (lr) of 1 × 10−4 . We use cosine decay scheduling and reduce the lr to a final
value of 1 × 10−5 . The initial lr is linearly warmed up for the first 5 epochs for each iteration from
a starting value of 5 × 10−6 . Experiments were conducted using a Nvidia A10 GPU with 24 GB
VRAM, running CUDA 12.0, with code implemented in PyTorch 1.13 Paszke et al. (2019). For
finer details on the loss function and training hyperparameters, please refer to Zhou et al. (2022a).


A.4   BASELINE M ETHODS I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Implementation for TSiam and SSiam Sharma et al. (2019) The methods were implemented in
Pytorch 1.13 Paszke et al. (2019). For a fair comparison with other methods, we utilize ArcFace-
R100 Deng et al. (2019) instead of VGGFace2 Cao et al. (2018) as the base Face ID model. Since
finer details on training hyperparameters are unavailable, we assume standard values for batch size
(32 for TSiam) and training epochs (100). Besides, no image augmentations are added during train-
ing. We remark that we generate results on the MovieFaceCluster dataset tracks, excluding any bad
face quality tracks that the original method struggles to cluster. A global threshold which was empir-
ically deemed to be optimal for the entire MovieFaceCluster dataset was set as the cut-off threshold
for HAC clustering module. For additional implementation details (which weren’t modified in our
implementation), please refer to Sharma et al. (2019).


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Implementation for Joint Face Representation and Adaptation Zhang et al. (2016b) The ap-
proach was implemented in Pytorch 1.13 Paszke et al. (2019). For a fair comparison with other
methods, we adopt ArcFace-R100 Deng et al. (2019) instead of DeepID2+ Sun et al. (2015) as
the base Face ID model. We implement a Markov Random Field (MRF) approach in Python from
scratch for face clustering. For additional implementation details (which weren’t modified in our
implementation), please refer to Zhang et al. (2016b).


B        A DDITIONAL DETAILS FOR TRACK QUALITY ESTIMATION
Threshold value for filtering out bad face quality tracks                                                  For a given set of N tracks, a quality
score threshold is computed as follows:

                                              thres(tqs(N )) = tqs(N ) − (2.7 × M AD(tqs(N )))                                                                         (4)

where tqs(tn ) is the face quality score computed for the nth track using technique detailed in Sec-
tion 3.6, tqs(N ) = {tqs(t1 ), tqs(t2 ), ..., tqs(tj )} ∀ j = {1, 2.., N }. Tracks having score lower
than thres(tqs(N )) are filtered out from both coarse track matching and final clustering modules.
The value of 2.7 was empirically found to work well for removing bad quality tracks from a wide
range of movie track sets.


C        A LGORITHM PSEUDO - CODE
We present the pseudo-code of the different steps in our algorithm in Algorithm 2. Mentioned stage
numbers correspond to Fig. 2.
Algorithm 2: VideoClusterNet
Input:
Face Tracks T = {tj | j = 1, 2, ..., N }
     ∋ tj = {It1 , It2 , ...Itn | fn+1 − fn = 12} (obtained from stage 1)
pretrained model θm , cluster iterations total iters
Stage 2: Self Supervised model finetuning
θs , θt ←− replicate(θm )
θs ←− θs + attach head(θh )
θt ←− θt + attach head(θh )
Tf iltered = T, Tcm = N one
for i in total iters do
      θsi , θti ←− f inetune model(θsi−1 , θti−1 , Tf iltered , Tcm )
      Tf q ←− f ace quality estimation(T, θsi )
      Tf iltered ←− f ilter outliers(T, Tf q )
      Tcm ←− track coarse matching(θsi , Tf iltered )
      θf t ←− θsi
end
Stage 3: Fully Automated Face Track Clustering
Tf q ←− f ace quality estimation(T, θf t )
Tf iltered ←− f ilter outliers(T, Tf q )
C ←− cluster tracks(Tf iltered , θf t )
Output: Clustered track IDs C


D        A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR BBT AND BVS DATASETS
                                                                                                  Method                                         BVS Episode
                                                                                                                            S5E1    S5E2    S5E3 S5E4 S5E5      S5E6 Combined
          Method                                   BBT Episode                            HMRF Wu et al. (2013b)              -     50.3      -     -      -      -     -
                              S1E1    S1E2    S1E3 S1E4 S1E5      S1E6 Combined          WBSLRR Xiao et al. (2014)            -     62.7      -     -      -      -     -
     Wu et al. (2013a)        66.48     -       -     -     -       -     -              TSiam Sharma et al. (2019)           -     92.46     -     -      -      -     -
 TSiam Sharma et al. (2019)   96.4      -       -     -     -       -     -
                                                                                         SSiam Sharma et al. (2019)           -     90.87     -     -      -      -     -
 SSiam Sharma et al. (2019)   96.2      -       -     -     -       -     -
                                                                                   CP-SSC Somandepalli & Narayanan (2019)     -     65.2      -     -      -      -     -
  MLR Bäuml et al. (2013)    95.18   94.16   77.81 79.35 79.93   75.85 83.71
 BCL Tapaswi et al. (2019)    98.63   98.54   90.61 86.95 89.12   81.07 89.63         MvCorr Somandepalli et al. (2021)       -     97.7      -     -      -      -     -
                                                                                          MLR Bäuml et al. (2013)          71.99   61.27   66.60 67.07 69.59   61.72 66.37
          Ours⋆               99.70   99.67   98.60 98.80 99.10   97.10 98.70             BCL Tapaswi et al. (2019)         92.08   79.76   84.00 84.97 89.05   80.58 83.62
          Ours†               97.40   97.10   93.80 94.10 95.60   90.80 92.45
                                                                                                  Ours⋆                     96.30   99.10   98.70 97.43 99.00   96.78 98.10
                                                                                                  Ours†                     93.30   94.50   94.40 91.18 92.40   93.21 91.32
Table 6: WCP/Clustering Accuracy on BBT Season 1. Here
⋆ / † denote not including / including filtered out tracks as an                  Table 7: WCP/Clustering Accuracy on BVS Season 5. Here ⋆ / †
incorrect cluster, respectively. Note that we adopt ArcFace-                      denote not including / including filtered out tracks as an incorrect cluster,
R100 Deng et al. (2019) as our pre-trained base model.                            respectively. Note that we use ArcFace-R100 Deng et al. (2019) as our
                                                                                  pre-trained base model.


                                                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E      M OVIE FACE C LUSTER DATASET C URATION
The MovieFaceCluster dataset provides challenging face ID tracks within a set of hand-selected
mainstream movies. These challenges involve large variations in pose, appearance, illumination and
occlusions that are unavailable in any generic movie face ID datasets. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the most comprehensive Video Face Identification dataset for movies to be open sourced. It
consists of a total of 3619 face tracks across 209 different identities spanning nine movies. Each
constituent movie has an unique set of characteristics in terms of number of characters, average
track length, character age, ethnicity, and background environments, among other factors. Please
refer to Tab. 8 for further specific details on it.

              Movie / TV Series                                                    Specific Face ID challenges
          An Elephant’s Journey (2019)                                        Bright outdoor scenes, American cast
               Armed Response                      Low light scenes, facial occlusions with military helmets,sunglasses etc., African American
                                                                                     and Middle Eastern Cast
              Angel Of The Skies                                 Unique heavy occlusions with oxygen masks in bright settings
            Death Do Us Part (2019)                   Low light scenes, Extreme facial expressions like screaming, Extreme poses, Rapid
                                                                               movements, African American Cast
             American Fright Fest                             Facial occlusions like see through masks, sunglasses, extreme poses
                 The Fortress                           Facial occlusions like headgear, Large main cast with primarily Asian characters
              Under The Shadow                                                Low light scenes, Middle Eastern Cast
             The Hidden Soldier                                                   Low Light scenes, Asian Cast
              S.M.A.R.T. Chase                                             Extreme lighting in some scenes, Asian Cast
         Big Bang Theory (S1E01-06)                          Mainly Indoor scenes in constant well lit environments, American cast
     Buffy The Vampire Slayer (S5E01-06)                                      Overall darker scenes, American Cast

    Table 8: Specific Face ID challenges presented by each movie, as part of MovieFaceCluster dataset and literature benchmark datasets

Ground truth data is provided in form of tracks and face box spatial locations corresponding to
a global movie frame index, w.r.t. a specific frame rate. These tracks are generated using the
preprocessing module explained in detail in Section 3.2. As part of this processing stage, any bad
quality tracks are discarded from the dataset. Also, each dataset movie consists of a mix of main and
secondary characters. We remark that an unique face identity, which has at least two good quality
tracks, is included as part of the movie dataset.

F      V IDEO FACE C LUSTERING DATASET C OMPARISON
In order to provide evidence to the uniqueness and advantages of our proposed MovieFaceCluster
dataset compared to existing literature, in Tab. 9, we present a comparison across some dataset at-
tributes that are critical for the face clustering task. In Fig. 6, we present a dataset percent histogram
comparison across face crop quality scores computed per dataset track using a large scale pretrained
Face ID model (ArcFace-R100 Deng et al. (2019)). Similarly in Fig. 7, we present a dataset percent
histogram comparison for face crop parameters that are highly relevant for face clustering, namely
scene lighting and face blur level. Scene lighting values are estimated as the average of lightness (L)
parameter values in a given face crop image converted to HLS space. Face crop blur is estimated
using a Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) based method Su et al. (2011). Significant differences
weren’t observed in face pose attribute across all datasets.


Figure 6: Comparison of track face crop quality score distributions across The Big Bang Theory (BBT), Buffy, The Vampire Slayer (BVS) and
our MovieFaceCluster dataset. For a given dataset, face crop quality score is computed for each of its constituent track. It is estimated as the
average of scores calculated for a given track’s sampled crop set (using SER-FIQ Terhörst et al. (2020) and ArcFace-R100 Deng et al. (2019)
as the pre-trained model for extracting embeddings). The distribution mean is relatively lower for our MovieFaceCluster dataset compared to
other benchmark datasets, along with more bias towards lower quality score interval - 0.66 to 0.7. This provides empirical evidence towards
our dataset containing more challenging cases for face clustering due to lower face quality scores.



                                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         Attribute
       Dataset                 TV series               Unique          Track Count      Unique ethnicity (other than    Avg. Track Face
                             episode/Movie            characters                          White/Caucasian) (cast        Quality Score ††
                                                                                                percentage)
                                S01E01                    6                 647                  A (Minor)                   0.7193
                                S01E02                    5                 613                  A (Minor)                   0.7108
    The Big Bang                S01E03                    7                 562                  A (Minor)                   0.7094
    Theory (BBT)                S01E04                    8                 568                  A (Minor)                   0.7140
                                S01E05                    6                 463                  A (Minor)                   0.7177
                                S01E06                    6                 651                  A (Minor)                   0.7111
                                                    Average: 6.33       Total: 3504         Unique Count: 1 (A)          Average: 0.7136
                                S05E01                   12                 786                    None                      0.7090
                                S05E02                   13                 866                    None                      0.7117
      Buffy The                 S05E03                   14                1185                    None                      0.7150
    Vampire Slayer              S05E04                   15                 852                    None                      0.7125
       (BVS)                    S05E05                   15                 733                    None                      0.7081
                                S05E06                   18                1055                    None                      0.7142
                                                    Average: 14.5       Total: 5477           Unique Count: 0            Average: 0.7120
                         An Elephant’s Journey           18                 562                    None                      0.7112
                           Armed Response                14                 119          AA (Major), ME (Major)              0.7085
                          Angel Of The Skies             29                 319                    None                      0.7150
                        Death Do Us Part (2019)           7                 395                 AA (Major)                   0.7177
  MovieFaceCluster       American Fright Fest            37                 457                 AA (Minor)                   0.7098
                             The Fortress                64                 917                  A (Major)                   0.6918
                          Under The Shadow                9                 143                 ME (Major)                   0.7134
                          The Hidden Soldier             21                 594                  A (Major)                   0.7056
                          S.M.A.R.T. Chase               10                 113                  A (Major)                   0.7110
                                                    Average: 23.22     Total: 3619 †    Unique Count: 3 (A,AA,ME)        Average: 0.7062

Table 9: Specific dataset attribute comparisons across BBT, BVS and our MovieFaceCluster dataset. A: Asian, AA: African American, ME:
Middle Eastern characters. † Only tacks that contained decent quality face crops were added as part of each movie dataset. Bad face crop
quality and background character tracks were discarded. †† Score computed as average of all track crop quality scores as part of a given
TV series episode/movie. A given track quality score is computed as average of quality scores for each of its sampled crops, using SER-FIQ
Terhörst et al. (2020) and ArcFace-R100 Deng et al. (2019) as the pre-trained model for extracting embeddings. A lower average quality score
would mean that the given dataset contains on average more challenging cases for face clustering


Figure 7: Dataset attribute histogram comparisons for scene lighting and face bluriness across The Big Bang Theory (BBT), Buffy, The
Vampire slayer (BVS) and our MovieFaceCluster dataset. Each respective dataset attribute is computed per track, taken as average of each of
its sampled crops attributes. For Scene Lighting, MovieFaceCluster has higher distribution variance compared to literature datasets, with more
bias towards darker lighting (values have positive correlation to amount of track scene lighting). For Face Blur, MovieFaceCluster has higher
sample count in 0.65 to 0.75 value range compared to literature datasets, providing evidence of having higher level of bluriness in track face
crops (Blur values have negative correlation to amount of blur present in face crops).



                                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


With reference to Tab. 9, our proposed MovieFaceCluster dataset has on average lot more unique
character faces and significantly better cast racial diversity. Also, it manages to obtain a much lower
average face quality score, alluding to the fact that our dataset contains on average more challenging
data samples w.r.t. face clustering/identification task. Fig. 6 further strengthens this argument by
providing evidence of higher percent of dataset tracks having lower face quality scores within our
dataset. In addition, Fig. 7 signifies, firstly that MovieFaceCluster has higher variance in scene
lighting across its face samples with bias towards lot darker scenes which helps provide harder
scenarios for face clustering. Secondly, for facial blur, our dataset has higher count of track samples
with larger amount of facial blur compared to literature datasets, which again helps provide more
challenging scenarios for face clustering.



G       T RAINING AND EVALUATION TIMINGS
Our proposed algorithm comprises two main stages from a computation standpoint: 1) Model SSL
finetuning and 2) Final clustering. Tab. 10 presents run times of each of these stages for each movie
of MovieFaceCluster dataset.
                                                                                     Movie
        Statistics               An          Armed     Angel      Death       American       The       Under     The     S.M.A.R.T.   Average
                             Elephant’s     Response   Of The     Do Us        Fright      Fortress     The    Hidden      Chase        (Per
                            Journey(2019)               Skies   Part (2019)     Fest                  Shadow   Soldier                 Track)
       Track Count               562          119        319        395         457          917        143      594        113           -
   Finetuning Iterations          5            6          5          8           10           9          6        5          5            -
 Model Finetuning (mins)       193.76        38.45     110.16     397.24       298.41      645.06      57.21   307.12      48.19       0.579
  Final Clustering (secs)       66.36        6.74       28.42      40.82       61.94       167.32      13.93    81.32       9.13       0.132


Table 10: Training iteration count and runtimes for SSL finetuning and final clustering computed on MovieFaceCluster dataset. Here, the
training iteration count represents the SSL finetuning iteration at which the process was terminated, and final clustering was performed.


H       SSL FINETUNING ITERATION ABLATION
This section provides ablation results for the Self-      SSL Finetuning   Accuracy / WCP     Pred Cluster Ratio/
                                                             Iteration           (%)           PCR (Pred / GT)
Supervised Learning (SSL) finetuning iteration pa-               1              52.56            0.476 (10/21)
rameter, performed on the MovieFaceCluster:The                   2              72.12            0.571 (12/21)
                                                                 3              91.38            1.114 (24/21)
Hidden Soldier dataset. Our overall experiments                  4              96.93            1.000 (21/21)
showed that a minimum of 5 iterations are required               5              99.50            1.048 (22/21)
                                                                 6              99.41            1.095 (23/21)
to obtain optimal results. Additional few iterations             7              99.47            1.095 (23/21)
(e.g., 2 or 3) are necessary for harder datasets. This           8              99.50            1.190 (25/21)
                                                                 9              99.50            1.238 (26/21)
is assuming the first iteration is run for about 30             10              99.41            1.238 (26/21)
epochs, with each succeeding one comprising 10
epochs. For iteration 10 and above, our method Table 11: Ablation for SSL finetuning iterations parameter,
                                                        presented for MovieFaceCluster:The Hidden Soldier dataset.
might over-cluster the dataset, i.e., it finds sub- Finetuning until iteration 5 provides optimal results in terms of
clusters within the optimal clusters, optimizing for both metrics.
variants of a given character. Note that the first SSL
finetuning iteration involves image pair generation from within the same track only. For all succeed-
ing iterations, image pairs are generated across coarse-matched tracks, facilitated through the coarse
track matching process detailed in Section 3.5.


                                                                         18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I    A DDITIONAL T-SNE VISUALIZATIONS
Figs. 8 to 10 present additional t-SNE learned embedding visualizations for select movies that are
part of the MovieFaceCluster dataset.


Figure 8: Comparative t-SNE embedding visualizations on MovieFaceCluster:An Elephant’s Journey dataset. Left: Ground truth, Right:
Our method. Each dot in the diagram above represents the finetuned model’s extracted embedding for a face crop Itn in a given track’s
sampled crop set t. Face embeddings assigned to a given color constitute a single cluster.


Figure 9: Comparative t-SNE embedding visualizations on MovieFaceCluster:Death Do Us Part dataset. Left: Ground truth, Right: Our
method. Each dot in the diagram above represents the finetuned model’s extracted embedding for a face crop Itn in a given track’s sampled
crop set t. Face embeddings assigned to a given color constitute a single cluster.


Figure 10: Comparative t-SNE embedding visualizations on MovieFaceCluster:American Fright Fest dataset. Left: Ground truth, Right:
Our method. Each dot in the diagram above represents the finetuned model’s extracted embedding for a face crop Itn in a given track’s
sampled crop set t. Face embeddings assigned to a given color constitute a single cluster.


                                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J     A DDITIONAL HARD CASE CLUSTER VISUALIZATIONS
Fig. 11 presents an additional selection of hard case cluster results obtained with our proposed
method on the MovieFaceCluster dataset.


     Varying Parameter
         Pose       Lighting      (Partial) Occlusion     Expression       Facial Appearance Change

Figure 11: Select hard case clusters obtained through our proposed method on MovieFaceCluster dataset. The term “varying parameter”
depicts the dominant image attributes that are particularly challenging for a given face crop. It isn’t part of the available dataset annotations but
simply mentioned for enhanced reader understanding.


                                                                        20
