Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A DVERSARIAL DATA ROBUSTNESS                                                VIA        I MPLICIT
N EURAL R EPRESENTATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Despite its effectiveness, adversarial training requires that users possess a detailed
         understanding of training settings. However, many common users lack such ex-
         pertise, making adversarial training impossible and exposing them to potential
         threats. We propose “adversarial data robustness”, allowing the data to resist ad-
         versarial perturbations. Then, even if adversaries attack those data, these post-
         attack data can still ensure downstream models’ robustness at users’ end. This
         leads to our new setup, where we store the data as a learnable representation via
         Implicit Neural Representation (INR). Then, we can train such a representation
         adversarially to achieve data robustness. This paper analyzes the possible attacks
         to this setup and proposes a defense strategy. We achieve a comparable robustness
         level without resorting to model-level adversarial training.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Adversarial training, a common defense mechanism against adversarial attacks, operates at the
model level by specifically training deep learning models with adversarial examples. However,
model-level adversarial training may undermine the desired performance of deep learning models
when the robustness requirement is incorporated. Moreover, introducing large-scale base models
also makes model-level adversarial training difficult. Therefore, it is essential to investigate alterna-
tives to enhance these models’ robustness without resorting to model-level adversarial training.
As adversarial perturbations are directly injected to images (Szegedy et al., 2014; Madry et al.,
2018), a straightforward solution is to make those images robust to adversarial attacks, rather than
optimizing a model adversarially like existing solutions (Madry et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020).
This way, even when adversaries corrupt images as usual, ready-to-use models accessible to or-
dinary users can continue functioning properly. We call this adversarial data robustness, and
propose “training data adversarially” to achieve this goal. For images, one straightforward approach
is to consider image pixels as learnable parameters and optimize these learnable parameters adver-
sarially. However, such a straightforward solution significantly undermines image quality since the
pixel values are directly manipulated. Therefore, we employ the Implicit Neural Representation
(INR) as the cornerstone for our purposes. INRs represent data by optimizing a neural network to
continuously map the coordinates to the corresponding data values (Dupont et al., 2021; Mildenhall
et al., 2020; Sitzmann et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022). Once the optimization converges, image pix-
els are stored as network weights, and the user can query neural networks with the corresponding
coordinates to recover the whole image. Moreover, such a network-based representation framework
is compatible with classical adversarial optimization for networks, enabling the generalization of
existing model-level adversarial defense techniques.
We envision a setup for adversarial data robustness where typical model users or even the model
developers are not burdened with extensive modifications to established frameworks. In this setup,
images are pre-converted to their respective INRs and then sent to the model users. These users
can then invoke straightforward functions encapsulated within an API to obtain the images for sub-
sequent tasks. Since the generation process of representations incorporates adversarial robustness,
images obtained from the post-attack representations maintain stable performance for downstream
applications. For example, when the modifications to deep learning models are not permitted, or
such modifications are costly, the model developers are not capable of training the model adversar-
ially. By adversarially training the data, the adversarial data robustness can guarantee the function-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Attack during creation   Attack during transmission   ① INR creation ② Reconstruction
                                   Traditional setup
                                                               R                            Downstream
                                                               G                              model
                                                               B
                                              ①                                      ②


                                        Our setup


Figure 1: In the traditional setup, images can be manipulated by adversarial perturbations to fool
downstream models. In our setup, we represent images as INRs. By applying a defense strategy
at the INR creation stage, the data can defend against adversarial perturbations during data creation
and transmission. Downstream models’ robustness to adversarial attacks can be ensured without
adversarial training for models.
ality of the downstream model without altering the model’s parameters. This situation has become
common, especially when downstream tasks use frozen large models (Guo et al., 2023), as their
weights are difficult to modify.
We first explore possible attack types to the INR used as the data representation. Since only INR
representation is used during the data transmission, an attack approach is to add adversarial pertur-
bations to the network parameters for data representation. We, therefore, consider two strategies: 1)
Attack during creation, which transfers adversarial perturbations from post-attack images to net-
work parameters; and 2) Attack during transmission, which directly injects perturbations into the
representation during its transmission. Given that the network parameters of INR are more suscep-
tible to alterations due to external perturbations (Shu & Zhu, 2019), our emphasis is on balancing
between attack efficacy and the quality of images generated from post-attack representations. We
propose Double Projection Gradient Descent (DPGD) as a method for conducting attacks during
data transmission, which can achieve a better balance by implementing gradient constraints on the
image during the backpropagation process.
We propose defense-in-creation to defense above attacks within this setup. As Figure 1 depicts, our
goal is to achieve adversarial data robustness in the creation process of INR. The INR generated
by our method can defend against attacks during creation and attacks during transmission, ensuring
the performance of specific downstream applications. To generate robust INR, we solve a min-
max optimization problem by incorporating a robustness loss on top of the existing INR training
framework. The weights assigned to these two losses can be used to strike a balance between
reconstruction quality and robustness. Our research pioneers data robustness exploration, thereby
charting a new course towards AI safety. Our major contribution can be concluded as follows:

        • Our adversarial data robustness can guarantee the robustness of deep learning models
          against adversarial attacks, without necessitating model-level adversarial training.
        • We examine potential attack types to INR used for the data representation. A Double
          Projection Gradient Descent (DPGD) is proposed to ensure adversarial patterns’ invisibility
          when directly injected into INR parameters used for data representation.
        • We have formulated a defense-in-creation strategy to defense the possible attacks.

2    R ELATED WORK
Implicit neural representations. Implicit Neural Representation (INR) is a technique that lever-
ages neural networks to create a mapping between a coordinate and its corresponding signal value.
This method offers a continuous and memory-efficient way to model various signals, including 1D
audio (Gao et al., 2022), 2D images (Tancik et al., 2020), 3D shapes (Park et al., 2019), 4D light
fields (Sitzmann et al., 2021), and 5D radiance fields (Mildenhall et al., 2020). Direct supervision
can be used to train accurate INR models for these signals by comparing the network output to
ground truth data or indirect means, such as calculating the loss between the output after differen-
tiable operators and a variant of the ground truth signal. This makes INR a powerful tool for solving
inverse problems by taking advantage of the well-known forward processes in these problems. INR
has found widespread applications in various fields, including computer vision and graphics (Tewari
et al., 2022), computational physics (Karniadakis et al., 2021), biomedical engineering (Liu et al.,


                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2022; Zhu et al., 2022), material science (Chen et al., 2020), and fluid mechanics (Raissi et al., 2020;
Reyes et al., 2021). As INR is compatible with adversarial training framework, we propose to use
INR as cornerstone to achieve data-level robustness.

Adversarial attack and defense. Adversarial attacks and defense have emerged as significant re-
search areas in machine learning. To explore the vulnerability of DNNs, various attacks have been
proposed (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Croce & Hein, 2020; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al.,
2018), which can be generally categorized into white-box attacks and black-box attacks (Goodfellow
et al., 2015). Most white-box attacks use gradients to obtain the perturbations on the inputs which
maximize the loss function, including the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) (Szegedy et al., 2014),
Projection Gradient Descent (PGD) (Madry et al., 2018) and Carlini and Wagner (CW) (Carlini &
Wagner, 2017). Black-box attacks involve two methods, where attackers lack access to the victim
models’ information. Query-based methods approximate perturbations through a large number of
queries (Andriushchenko et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019), while transfer-based
methods utilize a surrogate model to generate adversarial examples with higher transferability (Liu
et al., 2016; Wang & He, 2021). To counter these attacks, researchers have developed various
defense mechanisms (Cohen et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021). One common approach is adversarial
training, which has shown relative resistance to most existing attacks. The vanilla adversarial train-
ing strategy involves incorporating adversarial examples into the training data to create a min-max
game during optimization (Madry et al., 2018). Numerous variants of adversarial training algorithms
have been developed to improve the performance of adversarial robustness, including early-stopping
strategy (Rice et al., 2020), TRADES (Zhang et al., 2019), FAT (Zhang et al., 2020), and CFA (Wei
et al., 2023). Other techniques for adversarial defense include defensive distillation (Papernot et al.,
2016), gradient regularization (Ross & Doshi-Velez, 2018), gradient masking (Folz et al., 2020),
and input denoising (Liao et al., 2018). LINAC (Rusu et al., 2022) proposes to transforms images
into INR to train downstream networks to improve the robustness. However, these defense methods,
which improve robustness via adversarially training downstream networks, are not feasible for net-
works with unmodifiable parameters and could undermine the desired performance. Therefore, we
propose a method to achieve adversarial data robustness to solve this problem.


3     A DVERSARIAL DATA ROBUSTNESS

3.1   O UR SETUP

Our setup is rooted in the reality that many model users often fail to understand the settings associ-
ated with adversarial training. Moreover, model-level adversarial training can potentially compro-
mise the intended performance of deep learning models. Therefore, when the adversarial training to
models are difficult for common users, we aim to make the data robust to adversarial perturbations.
Then, those robust data can ensure robust deep learning models.
Given that adversarial training has been an effective defense mechanism against adversarial attacks,
the robust data can only be created via adversarial training. We thus propose storing the image as a
network-based representation and enhancing this representation’s robustness to potential adversarial
perturbations. As depicted in Figure 1, even if this representation is attacked during its creation
or transmission, users can still restore its clean state, ensuring robust performance of downstream
tasks. We consider Implicit Neural Representation (INR) as the cornerstone of our formulation.
For an image I, its INR is given by a MLP fθ : R2 → R3 that maps the input spatial coordinate
p = (px , py ) ∈ R2 to its corresponding pixel value I(p) ∈ R3 as I (p) = fθ (p). θ represents the
MLP’s trainable parameters, which leave access for our adversarial data robustness.
Generally, fθ can only reach its optimum status via iterative optimization. The optimization can be
finished by overfitting fθ to the image by minimizing a reconstruction loss between true pixel values
I(pm,n ) and predicted values fθ (pm,n ) as
                                      1   X                           2
                         Lrecon =             ∥fθ (pm,n ) − I (pm,n )∥2 ,                           (1)
                                    M × N m,n

where (m, n) is the index of the corresponding pixel location, and (M, N ) is size of the image.
After optimization, the image can be stored or transmitted as network weights θ.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


car                  dog     ship    car                ship   car                                    0.025
         truck                                   bird                      bird
                                                                                                      0.02
                                                                                                      0.015
truck    cat         horse   car     bird        dog    car    bird        dog                        0.01
                                                                                                      0.005
                                                                                                      0
               (a)                         (b)                       (c)                   (d)

Figure 2: Samples after attack during creation. (a) are the ground truth images. (b) are the results
of (a) being attacked by PGD. (c) are the images reconstructed from INRs optimized for (b). (d) are
the residuals between (b) and (c). The output results of the classifier are labeled in the top left corner
of each image. The images reconstructed from the representations attacked during their creation are
almost the same to the images directly attacked by PGD, with a low average MSE value.


Once such a representation is received by model users, they can obtain the image Iˆ from this rep-
                                                           ˆ m,n ) = fθ (pm,n ), where (m, n) is
resentation by querying INR fθ at each pixel coordinate as I(p
                                                   ˆ
the pixel index on the image. We define Ψ : fθ 7→ I as the mapping from INR to the reconstructed
image. The image Iˆ is then fed into the downstream model to obtain the result.
In light of this setup, we examine the potential attack types to INR. Subsequently, we will delve into
the associated adversarial training to ensure data robustness.

3.2     ATTACK TYPES TO INR

An adversarial attack is to perturb the data used for downstream tasks (Szegedy et al., 2014). Usu-
ally, it is performed by introducing adversarial perturbations to input data, which is a designed slight
alteration to data that can significantly change the output of downstream models. Since the data has
been implicitly represented in our setup, the only way to conduct an adversarial attack is to inject
adversarial perturbations into the representation. Similar to an adversarial attack directly for images,
two criteria should be guaranteed: 1) invisibility: the perturbations are subtle and remain invisible
within the content (Laidlaw et al., 2021); and 2) attacking efficacy: the invisible perturbations can
still impair the efficacy of downstream applications (Szegedy et al., 2014). On the basis of these cri-
teria, we explore attack types that can introduce adversarial perturbations to the data representation.
Attack during creation. The first option is to attack the representation by transferring adversarial
perturbations from corrupted images to the respective network parameters of INRs. In this case,
adversaries introduce perturbations to images and subsequently strive to impart these perturbations
onto the network parameters of the INR during its construction. Consequently, the adversarial per-
turbations, when recovered from the representation along with the image content, intensify the loss
function for downstream tasks (e.g., cross-entropy loss for image classification).
Formally, the adversarial perturbation for the i-th image Ii can be modeled as the solution of the
following optimization problem, which is the same as the classical adversarial attacks (Madry et al.,
2018):
                             max    LCE (gϕ (Ii + ∆Ii ) , yi ) ,       s.t. ∥∆Ii ∥p ≤ ϵ,               (2)
                             ∆Ii

where gϕ denotes the neural network for downstream tasks (e.g., classification (Szegedy et al.,
2014)), ∆Ii is the adversarial perturbation for the i-th image, yi is the true label of Ii for classi-
fication task, and LCE (·) denotes the cross entropy loss function. The ∥·∥p denotes the ℓp -norm,
and the constraint limits the size of perturbation with maximum allowable value ϵ to avoid being
recognized by humans. Unless otherwise stated, the infinite norm is adopted by setting p = ∞ in
this paper following previous works (Dong et al., 2023).
INRs can accurately capture the very fine details of images (Chen et al., 2021; Strümpler et al., 2022).
Therefore, during the creation of an INR, the INR weights can accurately represent adversarial
perturbation ∆x. The reconstructed image from such an INR retains the adversarial information and
can deceive the downstream applications. As shown in Figure 2, the images reconstructed from INR
under attack during creation resemble the corrupted images with adversarial perturbation, allowing
the reconstructed image to fool the downstream applications.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Reconstruction loss                                              Downstream
                                                                                                    model
      ( )
                         R                                    ( )
                                                                                 R
                                                                                                  Ψ
                         G                                                       G
      ( )                                                     ( )
                         B Reconstructed
                              image
                                               To-be-fitted
                                                 image                           B
                              Adversarial perturbation                          Groudtruth label Predicted label
                                        Δ                              +Δ
                                           +                                            Robustness loss

Figure 3: Framework of defense-in-creation. We encode an image into the parameter of its corre-
sponding INR, θ. Left: we calculate the distance between the reconstructed image and the to-be-
fitted image to establish a reconstruction loss for high-quality reconstruction. Right: we introduce
adversarial perturbation into the parameter θ during INR creation process, and design a robustness
loss to ensure downstream models’ robustness by comparing its prediction with the groundtruth.
Attack during transmission. The second strategy is to attack the representation directly. This
attack typically occurs during the transmission of the data representation. When the adversaries
access the representation, they can directly inject adversarial perturbations into the network parame-
ters. The process of conducting an adversarial attack to the INR representation of i-th image during
its transmission can be concluded as follows:

                     max      LCE (gϕ (Ψ (fθi +∆θi )) , yi ) ,      s.t. ∥∆θi ∥p ≤ δ,                       (3)
                      ∆θi

where ∆θi is the adversarial perturbation for the i-th image INR, and we also use ℓ∞ -norm in Equa-
tion 3 to limit the size of the perturbation.
A simple method to conduct attack during transmission is to manipulate the INR parameters using
the traditional gradient-based attack methods, such as Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) (Szegedy
et al., 2014), Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) (Madry et al., 2018), and Carlini and Wagner
(CW) (Carlini & Wagner, 2017). These attacks are referred to as FGSM for INR, PGD for INR,
and CW for INR, respectively. While these methods are initially designed to operate on images,
integrating INR into the differentiable pipeline allows us to derive the gradient value of INR param-
eters by leveraging the loss value of the downstream classifier. The whole process of PGD attack for
INR is shown in Algorithm 1. Given an optimized INR, we start with randomly perturbed param-
eters within the maximum perturbation. In every iteration, we reconstruct the image from the INR
and feed it into the classifier to compute the loss. Then, we iteratively apply gradient updates and
ensure that the perturbed parameters remain within the allowable range through projection. How-
ever, as INR parameters are sensitive to direct manipulations, such a straightforward solution can
easily undermine the quality of images obtained from the post-attack representation.
To better balance the attacking efficacy and the image quality, we propose a Double Projection Gra-
dient Descent (DPGD) that aims to directly manipulate the INR parameters while preserving the
reconstructed image’s quality. The detailed process of DPGD can be found in Algorithm 2. Unlike
PGD for INR, we incorporate an additional projection in each iteration. This projection involves
projecting the gradient backpropagated to the reconstructed image onto a boundary controlled by
the factor ζ. The motivation of this step is to directly limit the difference between the reconstructed
image and the original image at the pixel level. For detailed derivation, please refer to Section B in
appendix. The projected gradient is then further backpropagated to update the INR parameters. The
quality of images derived from the representations remains high by constraining the gradient on the
reconstructed image. The factor ζ can control the balance between the attacking efficacy and the
image quality.

3.3   DEFENSE - IN - CREATION

To achieve data-level robustness, we propose a defense-in-creation strategy that generates robust
INR during the creation process to defend against adversarial attacks effectively. The perturbations
generated in attacks during creation can be eliminated in optimizing phase, and the INR derived us-
ing defense-in-creation can further defend against potential attacks during transmission. By employ-
ing this approach, we can ensure the performance of downstream networks at a data level. Besides,
since the basic function of INR is to store the content of images, we also consider the quality of the
reconstructed image in our method.


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 PGD for INR
Input: Optimized INR fθ , ground truth label y, and pre-trained downstream model gϕ
Parameter: Number of iterations N , step size α, maximum perturbation δ
Output: Parameters of adversarial INR θadv
 1: Let θadv = θ.
 2: Random start: θ0 = θadv + ∆θ0 , θ0 ∼ U(−δ, δ).
 3: for t = 1, 2, · · · , N do
 4:   Reconstruct image Iˆt−1 = Ψ(fθt−1 );
 5:   θt = θt−1 + α · sign(∇θ LCE (gϕ Iˆt−1 , y));
                                t−1

 6:   Update θt = Proj∥θt −θ∥p ≤δ (θt ).
 7: end for
 8: return θadv = θN


Algorithm 2 Double Projection Gradient Descent (DPGD)
Input: Optimized INR fθ , ground truth label y, and pre-trained downstream model gϕ
Parameter: Number of iterations N , step size α, maximum perturbation δ, gradient control factor
ζ
Output: Parameters of adversarial INR θadv
  1: Reconstruct original image Iˆorg = Ψ(fθ );
  2: Let θadv = θ.
  3: Random start: θ0 = θadv + ∆θ0 , θ0 ∼ U(−δ, δ).
  4: for t = 1, 2, · · · , N do
  5:   Reconstruct image Iˆt−1 = Ψ(fθt−1 );
                    ∂LCE (gϕ (Iˆt−1 ),y)
  6:   GradI =              ∂ Iˆ
                                         ;
                         t−1
 7:    Update GradI = Proj∥Iˆt−1 +GradI −Iˆorg ∥ ≤ζ (GradI ); ▷ Projecting gradient of image pixels
                                                 p

               ∂ Iˆt−1
 8:    Gradθ = ∂θ  t−1
                       · GradI ;
 9:   θt = θt−1 + α · sign(Gradθ );
10:   Update θt = Proj∥θt −θ∥p ≤δ (θt ).                    ▷ Projecting gradient of INR parameters
11: end for
12: return θadv = θN

As shown in Figure 3, defense-in-creation is implemented by designing a robust loss on top of the
original reconstruction loss defined in Equation 1. The robustness loss is obtained by adding adver-
sarial perturbations to the INR parameters and calculating the loss after feeding the reconstructed
image into the classifier gϕ . The whole defense process can be formulated as follows:
            min    λ1 Lrecon + λ2 max LCE (gϕ (Ψ(fθ+∆θ )) , yi ) ,      s.t. ∥∆θ∥p ≤ δ,           (4)
              θ                       ∆θ

where ∆θ is the adversarial perturbation added in the training phase. The parameters λ1 and λ2
balance the reconstruction quality and robustness. The detailed solution to the above optimization
problem is shown in Algorithm 3. We use the robustness loss generated from Algorithm 1 to enhance
the robustness, and employ reconstruction loss to guarantee the image quality. By minimizing the
loss obtained from classifier gϕ , we can effectively remove the adversarial perturbation embedded in
the target image when performing attack during creation. By introducing adversarial samples during
the training process of INR, INR can gradually learn to have better robustness against parameter
perturbations, thereby defending against attack during transmission.

4     E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
4.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS
Dataset. We follow established settings (Zhang et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2023) on adversarial at-
tack and defense to evaluate our proposed mechanism. Our experiments are conducted on three
real-world datasets: CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009),
and SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011). CIFAR-10/100 dataset contains 60K color images with the size


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 Proposed defense method to produce INR against adversarial attacks
Input: Image I, ground truth label y, and pre-trained downstream model gϕ
Parameter: Number of iterations T , learning rate η
Output: INR fθ for image I
 1: Initialize model parameters θ.
 2: for t = 1 to T do
 3:    Generate INR adversarial example fθadv using Algorithm 1;
 4:    Compute reconstruction loss Lrecon as Equation 1;
 5:    Compute robustness loss as LCE (gϕ (Ψ(fθadv )) , y);
 6:    Compute the total loss Ltotal as Equation 4;
 7:    Update parameters using adversarial example: θ ← θ − η · ∇θ Ltotal
 8: end for
 9: return Trained INR parameters θ

of 32 × 32, including 50K training images and 10K test images in 10 and 100 classes, respec-
tively. SVHN is a dataset collected by Google Street View, consisting of 32 × 32 color images of
house numbers, with 73, 257 training images and 26, 032 test images in 10 classes. The classifier
is trained using training images. We train INRs for test images to evaluate our attack approaches
and defense methods. As suggested in previous work (Wei et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2022), we eval-
uate the performance of attacks and defenses based on the PreActResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) and
WideResNet34-10 (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) architectures on CIFAR-10/100 and SVHN.
Implementation Details. We implement our method using PyTorch. The INR is a 5-hidden layer
MLP with 256 channels per layer and ReLU activation functions for all the data. Following Milden-
hall et al. (2020), we also use a positional encoding for pixel coordinates with 5 frequencies. For
adversarial defense training, 10-step PGD attack for INR is applied, with maximum perturbation
size for parameters δ = 0.0006. We use the Adam optimizer with default values and a learning rate
of 0.001. A cosine learning rate decay schedule is used with the minimum value of the multiplier
0.0001. We optimize each INR for 1000 iterations. Other hyper-parameters are specified in each
experiment. We conduct experiments on FGSM (Szegedy et al., 2014), PGD (Madry et al., 2018),
Carlini and Wagner (CW) (Carlini & Wagner, 2017), and AutoAttack (AA) (Croce & Hein, 2020)
for attack during creation. The maximum perturbation size ϵ is set to 8/255 for FGSM and PGD.
PGD is used with steps 100, and step size 0.2/255. We apply FGSM for INR, PGD for INR, CW
for INR, and DPGD for attack during transmission. The steps of PGD for INR, and DPGD are set to
100, and maximum perturbation size for INR parameters δ = 0.0006, with step size 2.5 · δ/steps in
all experiments. CW attack is applied by optimizing 100-step PGD (Zhou et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2021). All the experiments are performed on NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs.
Baselines. We found no method specifically for enhancing the robustness at the data level. There-
fore, we compare with other three settings for comparison: 1) Normal training: optimizing the
INR with only reconstruction loss; 2) Direct pixel manipulation 1 : direct manipulating the pixel
values without INR encoding; 3) Model-level adversarial training: adversarial training for model
robustness including AT (Madry et al., 2018), TRADES (Zhang et al., 2019), FAT (Zhang et al.,
2020), GAIRAT (Zhang et al., 2021), and LAS-AT (Jia et al., 2022). Although the latter method
aims to enhance the robustness through training the downstream classifier, we conduct a comparison
with them, and the analysis can be found in Section 4.3.
Evaluation metrics. We assess all methods’ performance by evaluating image quality, attack ef-
fectiveness, and defense ability. For image quality, we evaluate the performance by using PSNR,
SSIM, and LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018). Higher PSNR and SSIM value indicates better performance,
while lower LPIPS value indicates better performance for both attack and defense. To assess the
effectiveness of attacks, we utilize the attack success rate (ASR). In terms of defense, we evaluate
the defense ability by considering the classification accuracy of the downstream classifier.

4.2      E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT ATTACKS

This section evaluates the performance of the attacks used in our research. Specifically, we assess
the attacks during creation and transmission to evaluate their invisibility and attacking efficacy.
   1
       Please refer to Section A.4 for more information.


                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Evaluation of attack during creation with different image-based attack methods. The results
are averaged on all examples in CIFAR-10 test dataset.
              Clean    Clean               FGSM         Creation      PGD         Creation        CW         Creation      AA       Creation
  Method                       Method
             images     INR               on images   after FGSM    on images    after PGD     on images     after CW   on images   after AA
 Accuracy    94.97%   94.73%    ASR        60.45%       59.26%      100.00%       99.83%        99.93%        99.84%    100.00%     99.89%
  PSNR          -      48.42   PSNR         30.14         31.01       32.70        33.70         32.68         34.12      32.71       33.85
  SSIM        1.000    0.998   SSIM         0.921         0.935       0.956        0.967         0.957         0.970      0.956       0.968
  LPIPS       0.000    0.002   LPIPS        0.146         0.134       0.082        0.071         0.082         0.067      0.082       0.070


Table 2: Reconstruction qualities and accuracies of downstream classifiers compared with normal
training and direct pixel manipulation. The results are averaged on all examples in each dataset with
different classifier architectures. Image quality evaluations are obtained by comparing with original
clean images. The classifier architectures used for CIFAR-10/100 and SVHN are PreActResNet-18
and WideResNet34-10, respectively. More results can be found in the appendix.
                                                  Accuracy            Attack during creation             Attack during transmission
  Dataset             Method           PSNR
                                                without attacks      PGD       CW       AA         DPGD      FGSM         PGD       CW
                  Normal image            -        94.97%              -        -         -            -     39.55% 0.00%         0.07%
                Pixel manipulation      33.16       100%            100% 100% 100%                     -     99.88% 33.80% 27.88%
  CIFAR-10
                 Normal training        48.38      94.73%           0.17% 0.16% 0.11%              20.80% 57.36% 18.84% 17.72%
               Defense-in-creation      42.92       100%            100% 100% 100%                 99.60%     100%      98.68% 61.36%
                  Normal image            -        76.92%              -        -         -            -      8.44%      0.01%    0.00%
                Pixel manipulation      29.63       100%            100% 100% 100%                     -     99.96% 30.08% 0.56%
 CIFAR-100
                 Normal training        48.26      76.44%           0.16% 0.12% 0.11%               4.32% 17.68% 2.16%            1.76%
               Defense-in-creation      40.50       100%            100% 100% 100%                 98.96%     100%      98.44% 74.52%
                  Normal image            -        95.80%              -        -         -            -     41.84% 1.32%         0.96%
                Pixel manipulation      35.78       100%            100% 100% 100%                     -      100%      76.60% 18.24%
   SVHN
                 Normal training        53.03      95.80%           1.28% 1.20% 0.18%              39.04% 65.96% 36.24% 35.76%
               Defense-in-creation      46.98       100%            100% 100% 100%                 99.88%     100%      99.88% 84.84%

Attack during creation. We validate the attack during creation, and the findings are presented
in Table 1. We compare the results of this attack on the INR parameters with those obtained by
directly inputting the images attacked by FGSM, PGD, CW, and AA into the downstream classifier.
The reconstructed images display comparable attack effectiveness and image quality to those manip-
ulated using FGSM, PGD, CW, and AA methods. Due to the excellent representation capabilities of
INR, the performance of the attack during creation is determined by attacks applied to the images.
  82                                                           32            100

  80                                                           30               80           DPGD ( = 0.9)
                                                                                             DPGD ( = 1.3)
                                                                                             FGSM for INR
                                                                                             PGD for INR
  78                                                           28               60           CW for INR



  76                                                           26               40
   0.5                 1                1.5                2                          22             24         26         28         30



Figure 4: Evaluation of attack during transmission. Left: we present the ASRs and PSNRs across
varying gradient control factors in DPGD. Right: we compare the ASR v.s. PSNR curves with vary-
ing the maximum perturbation across different methods. The results are averaged on all examples
in CIFAR-10 test dataset.
Attack during transmission. We evaluate the impact of the image gradient control factor ζ on
the invisibility and attacking efficacy in the DPGD algorithm. We fix the maximum perturbation at
δ = 0.0006, and the ASR and image quality results are shown in Figure 4(left). The results indicate
that the factor ζ can regulate the balance between invisibility and attacking efficacy. Specifically,
a larger value of ζ indicates higher attacking efficacy, while a smaller value of ζ indicates a closer
resemblance to the original image. We further compare our DPGD algorithm with FGSM for INR,
PGD for INR, and CW for INR in Figure 4(right). We take ζ = 0.9 and 1.3, respectively, and vary
the maximum perturbation δ to obtain curves illustrating the relationship between image quality
and ASR. At the same level of image quality, our method achieves higher ASR, indicating a higher
attacking efficacy. Therefore, our proposed DPGD achieves better performance.

4.3    E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR DEFENSE
In this section, we present experimental results of our proposed adversarial defense method and
compare them with the baselines.


                                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Accuracies compared with model-level adversarial training. The classifier structures are all
WideResNet34-10. The results are averaged on all examples in CIFAR-10 test dataset.
            Defense method   Defense-in-creation     AT     TRADES     FAT     GAIRAT   LAS-AT
                Natural           94.32%           85.90%    85.72%   87.97%   86.30%   86.23%
                 PGD              92.51%           53.42%    53.40%   47.48%   40.30%   53.58%

Robustness and reconstruction quality. We further evaluate our proposed adversarial defense
for achieving data robustness. We set λ1 = 1, λ2 = 0.0022, 0.0006, 0.001 for CIFAR-10, CIFAR-
100, and SVHN, respectively. The results are shown in Table 2. We study the performance of the
proposed defense in defending against various attack methods. Our method achieves the highest
accuracy and produces high-quality reconstructions across different attacks, datasets, and classifier
architectures. While normal training achieves the best reconstruction results, it is vulnerability to all
attacks, resulting in low accuracy under various attack scenarios. Although pixel manipulation can
defend against attacks during creation, it leads to lower accuracy when encountering attacks during
transmission, such as PGD for INR and CW for INR.

                                                                                              46
Comparison with different λ2 . To           100
evaluate the balance between recon-
                                             90                                               44
struction quality and robustness in our
defense-in-creation strategy, we adjust      80
                                                                                              42
the weight ratio between reconstruction      70
loss λ1 and weight of robustness loss                                                         40
λ2 . We conduct a series of experi-          60
ments under attacks during transmission                                                       38
by fixing λ1 = 1 and varying the weight             0.5     1    1.5      2   2.5      3
of robustness loss λ2 . As shown in Fig-                                                 10-3
ure 5, a smaller value of λ2 leads to
higher reconstruction quality, while a Figure 5: Balance between reconstruction quality and ro-
larger value of λ2 enhances robustness bustness against attacks during transmission. The results
against attacks.                         are averaged on all examples in CIFAR-10 test dataset.

Comparison with model-level adversarial training. Our method aims to enhance data-level ad-
versarial robustness, and its motivation differs from traditional adversarial training approaches. As
attacks on INRs are different from those on images, we apply PGD for INR in our method. Fur-
thermore, to ensure a fair comparison, we use the predicted labels generated by the downstream
classifier instead of the ground truth labels in the creation process of INR. As illustrated in Table 3,
our method demonstrates better performance with natural data and stronger robustness compared
with model-level adversarial training methods.


5   C ONCLUSION
We demonstrate adversarial data robustness in this paper by utilizing implicit neural representations.
Instead of adversarially training deep learning models, we focus on adversarially training the data.
Doing so ensues that the data retains robust performance even if it is subjected to attacks before it
reaches the model users. To accomplish this, we initially represent the data implicitly and focus on
adversarial training of this representation during its formation. By analyzing the potential attacks,
we unveil an adversarial training scheme that bolsters the robustness of implicit data representa-
tions against potential adversarial attacks. In our proposed approach, ready-to-use image classifiers
exhibit adversarial robustness on par with models that undergo model-level adversarial training.
Limitations. Though our method is successful in achieving robustness at the data level, it cannot
handle some extreme cases. For example, if malicious users gain access to the reconstructed images
from the INR, they can directly apply adversarial perturbations to the image pixels, thereby circum-
venting attacks on the INR. This problem can be solved through system design by protecting the
process from image reconstruction to downstream model input, to ensure that the recovered images
are not accessible. Besides, we only consider risks caused by malicious technical designs. How-
ever, as security is not solely a technical problem, we still need to collaborate with various parties to
consider the legal and social impact. We will further explore the feasibility of our approach in other
data types and downstream tasks in the future.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS STATEMENT

Our goal is to ensure the security of deep neural networks. We did not employ crowdsourcing and
did not involve human subjects in our experiments. When utilizing existing assets such as code,
data, or models, we have properly cited the original creators.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

We present the detailed network structure and some main hyper-parameter settings in Section 4.1.
Other hyper-parameters are specified in each experiment. More experimental details can be found
in Section A in appendix. We also provide a demo code in Supplementary Material. We plan to
release the entire source code with random seeds for reproducibility at a later time.

R EFERENCES
Maksym Andriushchenko, Francesco Croce, Nicolas Flammarion, and Matthias Hein. Square at-
 tack: a query-efficient black-box adversarial attack via random search. In European Conference
 on Computer Vision, 2020.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017
  IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2017.
Yinbo Chen, Sifei Liu, and Xiaolong Wang. Learning continuous image representation with local
  implicit image function. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Yuyao Chen, Lu Lu, George Em Karniadakis, and Luca Dal Negro. Physics-informed neural net-
  works for inverse problems in nano-optics and metamaterials. Optics Express, 2020.
Zeyuan Chen, Yinbo Chen, Jingwen Liu, Xingqian Xu, Vidit Goel, Zhangyang Wang, Humphrey
  Shi, and Xiaolong Wang. VideoINR: Learning video implicit neural representation for continuous
  space-time super-resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Minhao Cheng, Thong Le, Pin-Yu Chen, Huan Zhang, JinFeng Yi, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Query-
 efficient hard-label black-box attack: An optimization-based approach. In International Confer-
 ence on Learning Representations, 2018.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
   smoothing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Francesco Croce and Matthias Hein. Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness with an ensemble
  of diverse parameter-free attacks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Junhao Dong, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Jianhuang Lai, and Xiaohua Xie. The enemy of
  my enemy is my friend: Exploring inverse adversaries for improving adversarial training. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Emilien Dupont, Adam Golinski, Milad Alizadeh, Yee Whye Teh, and Arnaud Doucet. COIN:
  COmpression with implicit neural representations. In Neural Compression: From Information
  Theory to Applications ICLRW, 2021.
Joachim Folz, Sebastian Palacio, Joern Hees, and Andreas Dengel. Adversarial defense based on
  structure-to-signal autoencoders. In IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision,
  2020.
Ruohan Gao, Zilin Si, Yen-Yu Chang, Samuel Clarke, Jeannette Bohg, Li Fei-Fei, Wenzhen Yuan,
  and Jiajun Wu. Objectfolder 2.0: A multisensory object dataset for sim2real transfer. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2015.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chuan Guo, Jacob Gardner, Yurong You, Andrew Gordon Wilson, and Kilian Weinberger. Simple
  black-box adversarial attacks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Jiaxian Guo, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Boyang Li, Dacheng Tao, and
   Steven Hoi. From images to textual prompts: Zero-shot visual question answering with frozen
   large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual
  networks. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2016.
Hanxun Huang, Yisen Wang, Sarah Erfani, Quanquan Gu, James Bailey, and Xingjun Ma. Explor-
  ing architectural ingredients of adversarially robust deep neural networks. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Xiaojun Jia, Yong Zhang, Baoyuan Wu, Ke Ma, Jue Wang, and Xiaochun Cao. LAS-AT: adversarial
  training with learnable attack strategy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Gaojie Jin, Xinping Yi, Wei Huang, Sven Schewe, and Xiaowei Huang. Enhancing adversarial
  training with second-order statistics of weights. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Gaojie Jin, Xinping Yi, Dengyu Wu, Ronghui Mu, and Xiaowei Huang. Randomized adversarial
  training via taylor expansion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang.
  Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics, 2021.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua Bengio
  and Yann LeCun (eds.), International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Technical report, University of Toronto, 2009.
Cassidy Laidlaw, Sahil Singla, and Soheil Feizi. Perceptual adversarial robustness: Defense against
  unseen threat models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Yanxi Li, Zhaohui Yang, Yunhe Wang, and Chang Xu. Neural architecture dilation for adversarial
  robustness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Fangzhou Liao, Ming Liang, Yinpeng Dong, Tianyu Pang, Xiaolin Hu, and Jun Zhu. Defense against
  adversarial attacks using high-level representation guided denoiser. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Renhao Liu, Yu Sun, Jiabei Zhu, Lei Tian, and Ulugbek S Kamilov. Recovery of continuous 3d
  refractive index maps from discrete intensity-only measurements using neural fields. Nature Ma-
  chine Intelligence, 2022.
Yanpei Liu, Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Delving into transferable adversarial exam-
  ples and black-box attacks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In Inter-
   national Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. NeRF: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In Proceedings
  of the European Conference on Computer Vision, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. In Proceedings of the NIPS Workshop
  on Deep Learning and Unsupervised Feature Learning, 2011.

Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Xi Wu, Somesh Jha, and Ananthram Swami. Distillation as
  a defense to adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks. In IEEE Symposium on
  Security and Privacy, 2016.

Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove.
  Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.

Maziar Raissi, Alireza Yazdani, and George Em Karniadakis. Hidden fluid mechanics: Learning
 velocity and pressure fields from flow visualizations. Science, 2020.

Brandon Reyes, Amanda A Howard, Paris Perdikaris, and Alexandre M Tartakovsky. Learning
  unknown physics of non-newtonian fluids. Physical Review Fluids, 2021.

Leslie Rice, Eric Wong, and Zico Kolter. Overfitting in adversarially robust deep learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

Andrew Ross and Finale Doshi-Velez. Improving the adversarial robustness and interpretability of
  deep neural networks by regularizing their input gradients. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.

Andrei A Rusu, Dan Andrei Calian, Sven Gowal, and Raia Hadsell. Hindering adversarial attacks
  with implicit neural representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.

Hai Shu and Hongtu Zhu. Sensitivity analysis of deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019.

Vincent Sitzmann, Julien Martel, Alexander Bergman, David Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Im-
  plicit neural representations with periodic activation functions. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020.

Vincent Sitzmann, Semon Rezchikov, Bill Freeman, Josh Tenenbaum, and Fredo Durand. Light field
  networks: Neural scene representations with single-evaluation rendering. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Yannick Strümpler, Janis Postels, Ren Yang, Luc Van Gool, and Federico Tombari. Implicit neural
  representations for image compression. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2022.

Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian J. Goodfel-
  low, and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2014.

Matthew Tancik, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan, Utkarsh
 Singhal, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Jonathan Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier features let networks learn
 high frequency functions in low dimensional domains. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
 cessing Systems, 2020.

Ayush Tewari, Justus Thies, Ben Mildenhall, Pratul Srinivasan, Edgar Tretschk, Wang Yifan,
  Christoph Lassner, Vincent Sitzmann, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Stephen Lombardi, et al. Ad-
  vances in neural rendering. In Computer Graphics Forum, 2022.

Xiaosen Wang and Kun He. Enhancing the transferability of adversarial attacks through variance
  tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, 2021.

Zeming Wei, Yifei Wang, Yiwen Guo, and Yisen Wang. CFA: Class-wise calibrated fair adver-
  sarial training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2023.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In Procedings of the British
  Machine Vision Conference 2016. British Machine Vision Association, 2016.
Hongyang Zhang, Yaodong Yu, Jiantao Jiao, Eric Xing, Laurent El Ghaoui, and Michael Jordan.
  Theoretically principled trade-off between robustness and accuracy. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2019.
Jingfeng Zhang, Xilie Xu, Bo Han, Gang Niu, Lizhen Cui, Masashi Sugiyama, and Mohan Kankan-
   halli. Attacks which do not kill training make adversarial learning stronger. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Jingfeng Zhang, Jianing Zhu, Gang Niu, Bo Han, Masashi Sugiyama, and Mohan Kankanhalli.
   Geometry-aware instance-reweighted adversarial training. In International Conference on Learn-
   ing Representations, 2021.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Dawei Zhou, Nannan Wang, Bo Han, and Tongliang Liu. Modeling adversarial noise for adversarial
  training. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Hao Zhu, Zhen Liu, You Zhou, Zhan Ma, and Xun Cao. DNF: diffractive neural field for lensless
  microscopic imaging. Optics Express, 2022.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      ( )         256      256      256      256      256     RGB
                      22


                             Figure 6: A visualization of our INR architecture.
A     M ORE IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
A.1   N ETWORK STRUCTURE

We show the details our INR structure in Figure 6. Input vectors, hidden layers, and output vectors
are depicted in green, blue, and orange, respectively. The number inside each block indicates the
dimension of the corresponding vector. Following Mildenhall et al. (2020), we utilize a positional
encoding technique to transform pixel coordinates into a higher-dimensional space, enabling us to
effectively capture higher-frequency information. Every pixel coordinate, d, is first normalized to
the range of [−1, 1], and then subjected to the following transformation:
  γ(d) = sin 20 πd , cos 20 πd , sin 21 πd , cos 21 πd , . . . , sin 2F −1 πd , cos 2F −1 πd .

                                                                                                (5)
After concatenating the original coordinates with the results of positional encoding, the input is fed
into the network. In all of our experiments, we employ F = 5 frequencies and utilize 5-hidden layer
MLP, where each layer consists of 256 units and uses ReLU non-linearities.

A.2   INR TRAINING DETAILS

The optimizer that we use for training the INR is Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), with default pa-
rameters and a learning rate of µ = 0.001. A total of 1000 optimization steps are performed,
with each step involving the entire set of pixels of the to-be-fitted image. We utilized a cosine
learning rate decay schedule to enhance convergence, setting the minimum value of the multiplier
α = 0.0001 (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017).

A.3   D OWNSTREAM CLASSIFIERS

In our experiments, we should first train a classifier in a regular way. We select two typical clas-
sifier architectures, namely PreActResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) and WideResNet34-10 (Zagoruyko
& Komodakis, 2016). We strictly follow the instructions in the original paper to construct the net-
work. For both architectures, we utilize SDG as the optimizer, with an initial learning rate of 0.01,
momentum of 0.9, and weight decay of 5e − 4. The total training epoch is 200. The learning rate is
multiplied by 0.2 at epoch (60, 120, 160) respectively.

A.4   D IRECT PIXEL MANIPULATION

Direct pixel manipulation is one of our baselines. In this method, we consider image pixels as
learnable parameters and optimize these learnable parameters adversarially. The process of direct
pixel manipulation can be formulated as a min-max game as follows:


                     min        λ1 ∥Im − I∥22 + λ2 max LCE (gϕ (Im + ∆I), yi ) ,                   (6)
                      Im                             ∆I
                      s.t.      ∥∆I∥p ≤ ϵ,                                                         (7)
where I is the to-be-manipulated image, Im is the variable to be optimized and represents the ma-
nipulation result. ϵ is the maximum allowable value of attacks, which we set to be 8/255. The
first term is to guarantee the quality of the manipulated image. The second term is to enhance the
robustness of downstream models against attacks during creation and transmission.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We do not construct deep neural networks for data representation in this method. Similarly, we
use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) as the optimizer, with default parameters and a learning rate of
µ = 0.01. A total of 1000 optimization steps are performed, with each step involving the entire set
of pixels of the to-be-manipulated image.



B     M OTIVATION OF DPGD
In PGD attacks against images, the perturbation is projected to a specified pixel range in each iter-
ation. However, attacks on INR do not directly manipulate the image. If only the fluctuation range
of INR parameters is considered, the image decoded from the perturbed INR could be severely
damaged. Therefore, we consider adding constraints directly on the image level for the gradients.
The detailed analysis is as follows. The loss function is defined as J(θ) = LCE (gϕ (I),    ˆ y). Here,
ˆ
I = Ψ(fθ ) represents the image reconstructed by INR fθ . The original input’s INR weight is θorg ,
and the image it reconstructs is Iˆorg . In the t-th iteration, the image reconstructed by the INR with
weights θt−1 before the attack is Iˆt−1 , and the loss is J(θt−1 ). The gradient of the loss at θt−1 is
calculated as ∇θt−1 = ∂θ∂J t−1
                                . Updating against the gradient direction, we get θt = θt−1 + α ∂θ∂J
                                                                                                   t−1
                                                                                                       .
                              ′
At this point, the new loss J can be estimated as:
                                                                ∂J
                                J(θt ) ≈ J(θt−1 ) + (θt − θt−1 )
                                                              ∂θt−1
                                                              2                                      (8)
                                                        ∂J
                                      = J(θt−1 ) + α            .
                                                       ∂θt−1
Since the second term in the equation above is always positive, it allows for updates in a direction
that increases the loss gradually. Now, we consider the impact of weight updates on the reconstructed
image. The reconstructed image can be approximated as
                                                                  ∂ Iˆ
                                   Iˆt ≈ Iˆt−1 + (θt − θt−1 )
                                                                ∂θt−1
                                                     ∂J      ∂ Iˆ
                                       = Iˆt−1 + α
                                                   ∂θt−1 ∂θt−1
                                                                                                     (9)
                                                   ∂J ∂ Iˆ ∂ Iˆ
                                       = Iˆt−1 + α
                                                   ∂ Iˆ ∂θt−1 ∂θt−1
                                                             !2
                                          ˆ             ∂ Iˆ       ∂J
                                       = It−1 + α                       .
                                                      ∂θt−1        ∂ Iˆ
To prevent significant differences between the reconstructed image and the original image, we
project Iˆt onto the ℓp ball around the original reconstructed image Iˆorg . Therefore, the following
constraint is added:
                                           ||Iˆt − Iˆorg ||p ≤ ζ.                                (10)
That is
                                                ∂ Iˆ 2 ∂J
                                ||Iˆt−1 + α(         )       − Iˆorg ||p ≤ ζ.                    (11)
                                             ∂θt−1 ∂ Iˆ
            ˆ                                                                          ˆ
Since α( ∂θ∂t−1
             I
                )2 is always positive, for ease of computation, we simplify it as α( ∂θ∂t−1
                                                                                         I
                                                                                            )2 = 1, which
leads to line 7 in Algorithm 2.

C     A DDITIONAL RESULTS
C.1   A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR OUR DEFENSE - IN - CREATION

We provide additional results for our defense-in-creation approach. In our experiment, we select
PreActResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) and WideResNet34-10 (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) as the


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


downstream classifier architectures. The weight of reconstruction loss λ1 in Equation 4 is fixed
as λ1 = 1, and the weight of reconstruction loss λ2 varies to balance the reconstruction quality
and robustness. For CIFAR-10, the results for PreActResNet-18 and WideResNet34-10 are pre-
sented in Table 4 and Table 5, respectively. For CIFAR-100, the results for PreActResNet-18 and
WideResNet34-10 are presented in Table 6 and Table 7, respectively. For SVHN, the results for
PreActResNet-18 and WideResNet34-10 are presented in Table 8. The case where the weight of re-
construction loss λ2 = 0 in the results represents the normal INR optimization, considering only the
reconstruction loss. Our findings demonstrate that our approach effectively strengthens the robust-
ness of the downstream models built on the PreActResNet-18 and WideResNet34-10 architectures
for all datasets.

C.2   A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR DIRECT PIXEL MANIPULATION

Direct pixel manipulation is to solve a min-max game defined in Equation 6. The hyper-parameter
λ1 and λ2 in Equation 6 are used to balance the image quality and the robustness of downstream
models. We present additional results showcasing direct pixel manipulation using various ratios
of λ1 and λ2 . The results are shown in Table 9. Although direct pixel manipulation can provide
some defense against adversarial attacks, it exhibits significant image distortion and inferior defense
efficacy compared to our defense-in-creation approach.

D     C OMPARISON WITH IMAGE - BASED ADVERSARIAL ATTACK & DEFENSE
Our method is different from image-based adversarial attacks as we perform attacks on the param-
eters of INR. When evaluating defense capabilities, it is necessary to select appropriate parameters
to ensure consistent attack strength. Due to the inconsistency between these two attack forms, it is a
challenge to correlate the strength of these two attacks.
In this article, considering that adversarial samples should be imperceptible to humans, our approach
is to use image quality as a criterion. Specifically, when conducting traditional image-based adver-
sarial attacks, we select parameters widely used in existing literature (Szegedy et al., 2014; Madry
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). We then evaluate the image quality after the attack. When attacking
INR, we try to make the quality of the reconstructed image after the attack as close as possible to
the image quality after the image-based attack. At this point, we can consider these two attacks, one
targeting images and the other targeting INR, to be consistent. In the actual execution process, due
to the inability to achieve complete accuracy, we make the reconstructed quality after the attack on
INR worse, which indicates that our method will encounter greater attack intensity. The results can
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Evaluation of our defense-in-creation using different weights of robust loss λ2 . We evaluate
the performance of the defense against attacks during transmission. The results are averaged on all
examples in CIFAR-10 test dataset. The classifier architecture employed is PreActResNet-18.

                  λ2         0      0.0002   0.0004    0.0006      0.0008   0.001    0.0012   0.0014   0.0016
                Accuracy   94.73%   100%     100%          100%    100%     100%     100%     100%     100%
                 PSNR      48.384   45.832   45.194    44.766      44.395   44.132   43.907   43.666   43.489
    Natural      LPIPS     0.002    0.004    0.005         0.006   0.007    0.007    0.008    0.008    0.009
                 SSIM      0.998    0.997    0.996         0.996   0.995    0.995    0.995    0.994    0.994
                Accuracy   20.80%   97.84%   98.56%    98.84%      99.40%   99.32%   99.28%   99.32%   99.28%
                 PSNR      28.551   28.122   28.201    28.313      28.287   28.364   28.374   28.414   28.502
    DPGD         LPIPS     0.060    0.053    0.051         0.051   0.051    0.050    0.049    0.049    0.049
                 SSIM      0.975    0.979    0.979         0.978   0.978    0.978    0.978    0.977    0.977
                Accuracy   57.36%   100%     100%          100%    100%     100%     100%     100%     100%
                 PSNR      24.564   25.501   25.651    25.708      25.766   25.775   25.877   25.918   25.946
 FGSM for INR    LPIPS     0.111    0.086    0.083         0.082   0.080    0.080    0.077    0.077    0.076
                 SSIM      0.959    0.966    0.966         0.965   0.965    0.964    0.965    0.964    0.963
                Accuracy   18.84%   93.96%   96.12%    97.44%      97.72%   97.76%   98.60%   98.60%   98.38%
                 PSNR      26.474   27.919   28.050    28.221      28.246   28.260   28.362   28.400   28.433
 PGD for INR     LPIPS     0.077    0.054    0.051         0.050   0.050    0.050    0.049    0.049    0.049
                 SSIM      0.970    0.979    0.978         0.978   0.978    0.978    0.978    0.977    0.977
                Accuracy   17.72%   52.24%   55.64%    56.88%      58.12%   58.72%   58.68%   58.36%   59.44%
                 PSNR      26.622   27.157   27.276    27.262      27.314   27.298   27.332   27.419   27.437
  CW for INR     LPIPS     0.075    0.067    0.065         0.064   0.064    0.065    0.064    0.063    0.063
                 SSIM      0.970    0.975    0.975         0.974   0.974    0.973    0.973    0.973    0.972


                  λ2       0.0018   0.002    0.0022    0.0024      0.0026   0.0028   0.003    0.0032
                Accuracy   100%     100%     100%          100%    100%     100%     100%     100%
                 PSNR      43.251   43.146   42.920    42.750      42.662   42.443   42.265   42.194
    Natural      LPIPS     0.009    0.010    0.010         0.011   0.011    0.012    0.013    0.013
                 SSIM      0.994    0.994    0.993         0.993   0.992    0.992    0.992    0.992
                Accuracy   100%      99%     100%          99%      99%     100%     100%     100%
                 PSNR      28.457   28.537   28.539    28.526      28.600   28.652   28.565   28.590
    DPGD         LPIPS     0.048    0.048    0.049         0.049   0.049    0.049    0.050    0.049
                 SSIM      0.977    0.977    0.976         0.976   0.976    0.975    0.975    0.975
                Accuracy   100%     100%     100%          100%    100%     100%     100%     100%
                 PSNR      25.942   26.001   25.967    25.995      26.059   26.059   26.058   26.033
 FGSM for INR    LPIPS     0.075    0.075    0.075         0.075   0.074    0.074    0.075    0.074
                 SSIM      0.963    0.963    0.963         0.962   0.962    0.961    0.961    0.960
                Accuracy    98%      98%      99%          99%      99%      99%      99%      99%
                 PSNR      28.450   28.473   28.482    28.490      28.560   28.639   28.555   28.586
 PGD for INR     LPIPS     0.048    0.049    0.049         0.050   0.049    0.049    0.050    0.049
                 SSIM      0.977    0.977    0.976         0.976   0.976    0.975    0.975    0.975
                Accuracy    59%      60%      61%          60%      60%      62%      60%      61%
                 PSNR      27.459   27.473   27.468    27.474      27.502   27.514   27.482   27.528
  CW for INR     LPIPS     0.062    0.062    0.062         0.063   0.063    0.063    0.063    0.063
                 SSIM      0.972    0.972    0.971         0.971   0.970    0.970    0.970    0.970


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Evaluation of our defense-in-creation using different weights of robust loss λ2 . We evaluate
the performance of the defense against attacks during transmission. The results are averaged on all
examples in CIFAR-10 test dataset. The classifier architecture employed is WideResNet34-10.

                                    λ2          0        0.0006     0.001     0.002
                                 Accuracy    94.56%      100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
                                   PSNR      48.430      44.509    43.794    42.634
                    Natural        LPIPS      0.002       0.006     0.008     0.011
                                   SSIM       0.998       0.995     0.994     0.993
                                 Accuracy    17.12%      98.60%    98.92%    98.92%
                                   PSNR      27.578      27.780    27.867    27.965
                    DPGD           LPIPS      0.075       0.059     0.059     0.057
                                   SSIM       0.968       0.975     0.974     0.973
                                 Accuracy    55.92%      100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
                                   PSNR      24.762      25.855    25.942    26.028
                FGSM for INR       LPIPS      0.113       0.085     0.082     0.079
                                   SSIM       0.957       0.964     0.962     0.960
                                 Accuracy    15.28%      95.80%    97.20%    98.08%
                                   PSNR      25.952      27.727    27.790    27.939
                 PGD for INR       LPIPS      0.090       0.060     0.059     0.057
                                   SSIM       0.964       0.975     0.974     0.972
                                 Accuracy    12.80%      43.48%    43.68%    42.20%
                                   PSNR      26.041      26.803    26.859    26.806
                  CW for INR       LPIPS      0.087       0.074     0.073     0.074
                                   SSIM       0.964       0.969     0.968     0.965


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Evaluation of our defense-in-creation using different weights of robust loss λ2 . We evaluate
the performance of the defense against attacks during transmission. The results are averaged on all
examples in CIFAR-100 test dataset. The classifier architecture employed is PreActResNet-18.

                  λ2          0      0.0002    0.0004     0.0006   0.0008     0.001    0.0012    0.0014    0.0016
                Accuracy   76.44%    100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
                 PSNR      48.265    42.595    41.344     40.498   39.761    39.165    38.608    38.161    37.762
    Natural      LPIPS      0.002     0.011     0.015     0.018     0.022     0.025     0.028     0.031     0.034
                 SSIM       0.998     0.992     0.989     0.987     0.985     0.982     0.980     0.978     0.976
                Accuracy   4.32%     98.32%    98.96%    98.96%    99.40%    99.44%    99.56%    99.32%    99.56%
                 PSNR      30.065    28.228    28.015     28.112   27.953    28.126    28.069    28.062    28.232
    DPGD         LPIPS      0.044     0.050     0.051     0.052     0.055     0.055     0.058     0.059     0.061
                 SSIM       0.974     0.971     0.969     0.966     0.963     0.962     0.960     0.958     0.957
                Accuracy   17.68%    100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
                 PSNR      24.508    25.857    25.945     25.974   26.024    26.027    26.066    26.152    26.059
 FGSM for INR    LPIPS      0.107     0.081     0.080     0.080     0.081     0.082     0.084     0.084     0.086
                 SSIM       0.952     0.961     0.959     0.957     0.954     0.952     0.951     0.949     0.947
                Accuracy   2.16%     95.84%    98.24%    98.44%    98.60%    99.20%    98.84%    98.68%    99.20%
                 PSNR      26.560    27.647    27.604     27.738   27.699    27.716    27.791    27.738    27.805
 PGD for INR     LPIPS      0.070     0.055     0.056     0.057     0.060     0.061     0.064     0.065     0.067
                 SSIM       0.966     0.971     0.969     0.968     0.965     0.964     0.962     0.960     0.958
                Accuracy   1.76%     67.32%    73.24%    74.52%    75.00%    75.24%    75.56%    76.60%    76.12%
                 PSNR      26.734    27.189    27.193     27.143   27.232    27.245    27.288    27.252    27.241
  CW for INR     LPIPS      0.067     0.062     0.063     0.065     0.066     0.068     0.070     0.072     0.073
                 SSIM       0.967     0.969     0.967     0.965     0.963     0.961     0.959     0.957     0.955


                  λ2       0.0018     0.002    0.0022     0.0024   0.0026    0.0028     0.003    0.0032
                Accuracy    100%      100%      100%      100%      100%      100%      100%      100%
                 PSNR      37.389    37.010    36.744     36.457   36.147    35.916    35.622    35.450
    Natural      LPIPS      0.037     0.039     0.042     0.044     0.047     0.050     0.052     0.054
                 SSIM       0.974     0.972     0.970     0.968     0.966     0.964     0.962     0.960
                Accuracy   99.08%    99.36%    99.48%    99.52%    99.72%    99.76%    99.68%    99.72%
                 PSNR      28.044    28.009    27.944     28.026   27.966    27.904    27.865    27.803
    DPGD         LPIPS      0.063     0.065     0.067     0.068     0.071     0.073     0.075     0.076
                 SSIM       0.954     0.953     0.951     0.950     0.948     0.946     0.944     0.943
                Accuracy   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
                 PSNR      26.223    26.061    26.157     26.152   26.091    26.128    26.107    26.189
 FGSM for INR    LPIPS      0.089     0.090     0.091     0.093     0.095     0.095     0.098     0.099
                 SSIM       0.945     0.943     0.942     0.940     0.938     0.937     0.934     0.933
                Accuracy   98.88%    98.92%    99.04%    99.12%    99.08%    99.28%    99.24%    99.16%
                 PSNR      27.769    27.697    27.731     27.712   27.662    27.674    27.649    27.635
 PGD for INR     LPIPS      0.070     0.072     0.074     0.075     0.077     0.079     0.081     0.083
                 SSIM       0.956     0.954     0.953     0.951     0.949     0.948     0.945     0.944
                Accuracy   76.64%    77.20%    75.60%    77.12%    76.88%    76.60%    78.64%    76.96%
                 PSNR      27.225    27.185    27.190     27.201   27.181    27.163    27.176    27.197
  CW for INR     LPIPS      0.075     0.078     0.079     0.081     0.084     0.086     0.087     0.089
                 SSIM       0.953     0.951     0.949     0.948     0.946     0.944     0.943     0.941


                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Evaluation of our defense-in-creation using different weights of robust loss λ2 . We evaluate
the performance of the defense against attacks during transmission. The results are averaged on all
examples in CIFAR-100 test dataset. The classifier architecture employed is WideResNet34-10.

                                                         λ2                  0            0.001         0.002
                                                  Accuracy             80.00%           100.00%        100.00%
                                                    PSNR               48.340             40.087       37.847
                                   Natural          LPIPS               0.002             0.020         0.033
                                                    SSIM                0.998             0.985         0.975
                                                  Accuracy              8.56%            99.40%        99.32%
                                                    PSNR               29.433             28.022       27.876
                                   DPGD             LPIPS               0.045             0.057         0.067
                                                    SSIM                0.974             0.967         0.958
                                                  Accuracy             33.68%           100.00%        100.00%
                                                    PSNR               24.912             26.525       26.455
                           FGSM for INR             LPIPS               0.098             0.070         0.077
                                                    SSIM                0.955             0.956         0.947
                                                  Accuracy              7.44%            98.56%        98.40%
                                                    PSNR               26.824             27.955       27.818
                            PGD for INR             LPIPS               0.067             0.057         0.067
                                                    SSIM                0.969             0.967         0.958
                                                  Accuracy              5.88%            46.44%        51.04%
                                                    PSNR               26.986             27.000       26.920
                             CW for INR             LPIPS               0.065             0.070         0.077
                                                    SSIM                0.970             0.961         0.952



Table 8: Evaluation of our defense-in-creation using different weights of robust loss λ2 . We evaluate
the performance of the defense against attacks during transmission. The results are averaged on all
examples in SVHN test dataset. The classifier architectures are indicated in the table.

                   PreActResNet-18                                                             WideResNet34-10
                  λ2         0        0.0006    0.001         0.002                           λ2         0        0.001     0.002     0.003
                Accuracy   95.64%    100.00%   100.00%    100.00%                           Accuracy   95.80%    100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
                 PSNR      53.004     47.722   46.785         45.229                         PSNR      53.032    46.985    45.676    44.748
    Natural      LPIPS     0.002      0.010     0.013         0.018           Natural        LPIPS      0.002     0.012     0.016     0.019
                 SSIM      0.999      0.995     0.993         0.990                          SSIM       0.999     0.994     0.992     0.990
                Accuracy   37.40%     99.80%   99.88%         99.96%                        Accuracy   39.04%    99.88%    100.00%   99.96%
                 PSNR      28.541     29.297   29.396         29.717                         PSNR      27.401    28.427    28.736    28.846
    DPGD         LPIPS     0.072      0.078     0.076         0.076              DPGD        LPIPS      0.089     0.103     0.101     0.101
                 SSIM      0.972      0.978     0.977         0.975                          SSIM       0.967     0.977     0.976     0.975
                Accuracy   66.44%    100.00%   100.00%    100.00%                           Accuracy   65.96%    100.00%   100.00%   100.00%
                 PSNR      27.291     27.675   27.859         28.160                         PSNR      27.254    27.829    28.139    28.254
 FGSM for INR    LPIPS     0.128      0.115     0.112         0.108     FGSM for INR         LPIPS      0.133     0.120     0.116     0.113
                 SSIM      0.965      0.970     0.969         0.966                          SSIM       0.964     0.973     0.972     0.971
                Accuracy   34.88%     99.48%   99.84%         99.72%                        Accuracy   36.24%    99.88%    99.92%    99.92%
                 PSNR      29.032     29.299   29.415         29.726                         PSNR      28.443    28.429    28.708    28.871
 PGD for INR     LPIPS     0.086      0.078     0.077         0.077         PGD for INR      LPIPS      0.103     0.103     0.101     0.100
                 SSIM      0.973      0.978     0.977         0.975                          SSIM       0.969     0.977     0.976     0.975
                Accuracy   35.52%     82.72%   84.80%         83.76%                        Accuracy   35.76%    84.84%    84.68%    85.16%
                 PSNR      29.187     29.144   29.193         29.432                         PSNR      28.572    28.564    28.646    28.715
  CW for INR     LPIPS     0.084      0.084     0.083         0.084         CW for INR       LPIPS      0.100     0.100     0.100     0.100
                 SSIM      0.974      0.976     0.974         0.971                          SSIM       0.970     0.973     0.970     0.968


                                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: Evaluation of direct pixel manipulation using different weights of robust loss λ2 . We
evaluate the performance of the defense against attacks during transmission. The results are averaged
on all examples in SVHN test dataset. The classifier architectures are indicated in the table.

                       PreActResNet-18                           WideResNet34-10
                       λ2       0.0006     0.001                  λ2       0.0006     0.001
                     Accuracy   100.00%   100.00%               Accuracy   100.00%   100.00%
                      PSNR      34.498    33.395                 PSNR      35.780    34.771
           Natural    LPIPS     0.185     0.209      Natural     LPIPS     0.148     0.170
                      SSIM      0.895     0.874                  SSIM      0.918     0.903
                     Accuracy   100.00%   100.00%               Accuracy   100.00%   100.00%
                      PSNR      29.061    28.685                 PSNR      29.454    29.238
           FGSM       LPIPS     0.297     0.307          FGSM    LPIPS     0.265     0.272
                      SSIM      0.808     0.794                  SSIM      0.823     0.814
                     Accuracy   57.24%    72.36%                Accuracy   76.60%    87.84%
                      PSNR      30.830    30.348                 PSNR      31.181    30.909
            PGD       LPIPS     0.252     0.265          PGD     LPIPS     0.231     0.239
                      SSIM      0.857     0.842                  SSIM      0.871     0.861
                     Accuracy   26.24%    35.48%                Accuracy   18.24%    27.48%
                      PSNR      30.673    30.195                 PSNR      30.942    30.655
             CW       LPIPS     0.264     0.275          CW      LPIPS     0.246     0.254
                      SSIM      0.852     0.836                  SSIM      0.865     0.856


                                                    21
