Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S YSTEM I DENTIFICATION OF N EURAL S YSTEMS : G O -
ING B EYOND I MAGES TO M ODELLING DYNAMICS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Vast literature has compared the recordings of biological neurons in the brain to
         deep neural networks. The ultimate goal is either reporting insights to interpret
         deep networks or to have a better understanding and encoding of biological neu-
         ral systems. Recently, there has been a debate on whether system identification
         is possible and how much it can tell us about the brain computation. System
         identification recognizes whether one model is more valid to represent the brain
         computation over another. Nonetheless, previous work did not consider the time
         aspect and how video and dynamics (e.g., motion) modelling in deep networks
         relate to these biological neural systems within a large-scale comparison. Towards
         this end, we propose a system identification study focused on comparing single
         image versus video understanding models with respect to the visual cortex record-
         ings. Our study encompasses two sets of experiments; a real environment setup
         (i.e., regressing on the output of the visual cortex in the human brain recorded as
         fMRI responses) and a simulated environment setup (i.e., regressing on another
         network architecture representations that we know its modelling scheme). This
         study encompasses more than 30 models and, unlike prior works, we focus on
         convolutional versus transformer-based, single versus two-stream, and fully versus
         self-supervised video understanding models. The goal is to capture a greater variety
         of architectures that model dynamics. As such, this signifies the first large-scale
         study of video understanding models from a neuroscience perspective. Our results
         in the simulated experiments, show that system identification can be attained to a
         certain level in differentiating image versus video understanding models. Moreover,
         we provide key insights on how video understanding models predict visual cortex
         responses; showing video understanding better than image understanding models,
         convolutional models are better in the early-mid regions than transformer based
         except for multiscale transformers that are still good in predicting these regions,
         and that two-stream models are better than single stream.


1   I NTRODUCTION
There has been a recent increase in studies that compare how deep neural networks process input
stimuli to the processing that occurs in the brain whether in humans Zhou et al. (2022); Conwell et al.
(2021b); Schrimpf et al. (2018); Cichy et al. (2019; 2021), non-human primates, or rodents Conwell
et al. (2021a); Schrimpf et al. (2018). The benefits of these studies are two-fold. First, such a
comparison can be used to interpret and have a better understanding of black-box deep neural
networks and even provide inspirations on how to improve them. Second, it can provide a better
understanding and encoding of biological neural systems which is the focus of this work. Towards
achieving the latter, recent benchmarks have been released to improve the capabilities of machine
learning models in neural encoding and comparing them to biological neural systems Schrimpf et al.
(2018); Cichy et al. (2019; 2021); Gifford et al. (2023). The current established benchmark from
The Mini-Algonauts Project 2021 Cichy et al. (2021), has provided neuro-imaging data for the brain
responses from participants watching short video clips. Such a benchmark enables neuroscientists to
study the question of how the brain understands actions and dynamics (e.g., motion).
Machine learning models have been investigated in encoding such neuro-imaging data Lahner (2022);
Zhou et al. (2022). One recent approach proposed an improved regression scheme that considers the
hierarchical nature of deep networks Zhou et al. (2022). The method does not assume a one-to-one


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


mapping between the layers and the regions, but rather learns a re-weighted combination of all
selected layers in a deep network mapped to different visual regions. Yet, the focus of that study was
on single image architectures that are not designed for video understanding, except for one model
(i.e., TimeSformer) that was included in their study. Thus, there is still a lack of a unified large-scale
study of deep video understanding models. Such a study can help us compare the dynamics modelling
and action understanding between deep spatiotemporal networks and biological neural systems.
Moreover, the previous study did not include any video understanding models that are trained in a
self-supervised setting. There is an increased interest in self-supervised training, due to the rise of
foundation models Bommasani et al. (2021). Foundation models refer to the set of models trained on
broad datasets with tasks that allow powerful generalization typically in a self-supervised manner.
However, there is a question that needs to be investigated first before tackling such comparison. Is
system identification feasible in both the real environment with the target model as the human visual
cortex and a simulated environment where deep networks are used as the target model? A recent work
has started such a quest to verify whether system identification is plausible or not Han et al. (2023).
Yet, they focused on single image architectures, and their real environment data was a simple set of
data from Brain-Score dataset Schrimpf et al. (2018) that does not include video stimuli. Additionally,
their study used a simple encoding model for deep regression on brain signals that did not take the
hierarchical nature and complex interactions between layers into consideration.
In this paper, our goal is to answer this system identification question and provide a large-scale study
of video understanding models in encoding the human visual cortex. Furthermore, we aim to address
the previously mentioned gaps in the literature. Our contributions are threefold:

       • We conduct a system identification study that goes beyond single images to videos. We
         establish the simulated environment setup using video understanding models as the target
         and the real environment setup with the target model as the human visual cortex.
       • We showcase the first large-scale study of deep video understanding models including
         convolutional vs. transformer-based, single vs. two stream and fully vs. self-supervised.
       • We improve the encoding model in system identification, where we account for the hierarchi-
         cal nature and complex cross-scale interactions through the previously proposed weighted
         neural encoding scheme Zhou et al. (2022).

2    R ELATED WORK

Biological neural systems encoding. Brain encoding is concerned with mapping the input stimuli
to the neural activations in the brain. Learning this mapping has been heavily investigated in the
literature Zhou et al. (2022); Conwell et al. (2021b); Lahner (2022), where most of the approaches
conduct a form of deep regression. The study of brain encoding has been advanced by the release of
naturalistic neuroscience datasets and benchmarks, with text, audio, image or video stimuli. One of
the well established benchmarks that studied how deep networks compare to biological neural systems
is the Brain-Score benchmark and framework Schrimpf et al. (2018) which relied on grayscale image
stimuli. Another recent well established dataset and benchmark, The Algonauts project Cichy et al.
(2019; 2021); Gifford et al. (2023), released datasets and challenges that focused on stimuli as natural
objects images Cichy et al. (2019), action videos Cichy et al. (2021); Lahner et al. (2023) and natural
scenes Gifford et al. (2023). In these benchmarks, fMRI responses were recorded from different
subjects and used to study how the human brain encodes these different kinds of stimuli.
Recent works investigated the ability of deep networks to regress on the brain responses for different
stimuli Conwell et al. (2021b); Zhou et al. (2022), where one approach Zhou et al. (2022) focused
on action videos from The Algonauts Project 2021. However, they only worked with single-image
deep neural network architectures. The regression on the brain responses can be conducted with
simple ridge regression to more sophisticated methods that do not assume one-to-one mapping and
leave the regression to learn re-weighing of different layers Zhou et al. (2022). In this work, we
follow this approach closely, but we focus on studying video understanding models to draw insights
on how the brain understands actions and models dynamics. While some works in neuroscience
studied the time aspect Zhuang et al. (2021); Nishimoto et al. (2011); Khosla et al. (2021); Nishimoto
(2021); Lahner et al. (2023); Güçlü & Van Gerven (2017); Shi et al. (2018); Sinz et al. (2018);
Huang et al. (2023), they did not focus on large-scale comparison to deep video understanding. Our


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


work focuses on studying the state-of-the-art deep video understanding models from a neuroscience
perspective, in the first large-scale study of its kind. Moreover, we tackle the important question of
whether we can differentiate single image vs. video modelling techniques. A recent work Han et al.
(2023) questioned whether the comparison between deep networks and biological neural systems
can help us identify the inner workings of the brain with the simple question “if we got it right,
would we know”. They designed a real setup where the target model is the brain and demonstrated
their results using the Brain-Score framework with recorded responses from primates Majaj et al.
(2015); Freeman et al. (2013). More importantly, they proposed a simulated setup where the target
model is another deep network representation from the different layers. Nonetheless, their real and
simulated experiments focused on single-image architectures and stimuli. We aim to bridge the gap
and study whether system identification can be attained when working with video understanding
models in both simulated and real environments. Moreover, we provide insights on how deep video
understanding models compare to the human visual cortex. Additionally, we study self-supervised
video representation learning methods that are not explored in previous works.
Video understanding and dynamics modelling. Video understanding is the task of identifying
the objects, actions and events within a video and can include object detection/segmentation, action
localization and object/actor localization. Vast literature has focused on the sub-task of action
recognition especially in deep learning Kong & Fu (2022). The goal of action recognition is
to identify the correct action using an input clip sampled from a video. Approaches in action
recognition differ in their spatio-temporal and dynamics modelling, methods that relied on 3D
convolution Carreira & Zisserman (2017) or some form of it Tran et al. (2018); Li et al. (2019)
were the early directions towards that. There was also a widespread use of two-stream architectures
inspired by biological neural systems, some required explicit optical flow Carreira & Zisserman
(2017) and others relied on extracting slow vs. fast features through controlling the sampling rate
of the input clips to each stream Feichtenhofer et al. (2019). Recently, with the wide adoption
of transformers in the computer vision field, video transformers started to see wide adoption as
well. One of the earliest, TimeSformer Bertasius et al. (2021), focused on comparing sparse vs.
dense and spatial vs. temporal vs. unified spatiotemporal modelling. Another recent development
in the transformer-based approaches is the multiscale vision transformer (MViT) Fan et al. (2021).
All of the aforementioned models are trained in a fully supervised fashion. The recent advances
in self-supervised learning and its connection to foundation models that are deployed in various
applications, demonstrates the motivation behind our choice of investigating them. Some methods
relied on masked modelling Feichtenhofer et al. (2022), others extended it to multi-modal masked
modelling Girdhar et al. (2023). In this work, we focus on studying the aforementioned models and
more beyond that to investigate the connection between deep networks and the human visual cortex.

3     M ETHOD

In this section, we describe our environment design for the neural encoding and the simulated one.
Then, we discuss the deep regression model and encoding technique, followed by a discussion of the
candidate video understanding models.

3.1   E NVIRONMENT DESIGN

In biological neural systems encoding, we aim to study how different stimuli map to the recorded
brain responses. It is usually studied within the framework of aligning and comparing deep network
architectures and biological neural systems. In this case, the biological neural system is considered
the target model, and the candidate deep network architecture, that extracts features from the stimuli
to be mapped to the brain responses through deep regression, is considered the source model. In
general, computational models of brain responses can be evaluated in two schemes: either using a
regression on the brain responses from the deep network features extracted or using a representational
similarity analysis. In our case, we focus only on the regression on the brain responses as it has
practical benefits to predict responses with different stimuli.
Our first goal is to answer the question: “Can we perform system identification for the underlying
modelling scheme?”. To answer that, inspired by previous work Han et al. (2023), we use the features
extracted from known architectures as the target, on which we apply our regression, instead of the
brain responses as an upper bound. This allows us to identify the dynamics modelling, which serves


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as a form of ground truth for comparing different models. However, unlike previous work that focused
only on studying the architecture (i.e., convolutional vs. transformer-based), we go beyond that to
study the dynamics modelling. We use the dynamics modelling to refer to the model’s ability to learn
from dynamic information provided in an input clip and/or static information from a single image.
Furthermore, we study the identification across families of models when encoding the brain responses
by looking into the statistical significance of the difference between these families. Specifically,
families are defined based on: (i) the input, whether models learned from single images or videos
encouraging them to learn dynamics and motion, (ii) the supervision, whether they are trained in
a fully-supervised framework for a certain downstream task or in a self-supervised manner using
unlabeled data, and (iii) the architecture, whether the model architecture relies on local convolutional
operations or transformer-based global operations. While previous works focused on the architecture
aspect, we argue it is even more important to look into whether the model is learning dynamics
(e.g., motion) or simply using static information from a single image. Moreover, it is important to
understand the impact of the supervision signal used to train the model. In the following, we describe
the design details of both the simulated environment, where the target is yet another deep network
representation, and the real environment, where the target is the visual cortex responses.
Simulated environment. We select three target models from our candidate models that are detailed
in Table 1. These three target models are from both the image/video understanding models and
convolutional-/transformer-based models. Specifically, we use I3D ResNet-50 Carreira & Zisser-
man (2017), ViT-B Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) and MViT-B Fan et al. (2021). I3D ResNet-50 is a
convolutional-based models, while ViT-B and MViT-B are transformer-based models. On the other
hand, I3D ResNet-50 and MViT-B are video understanding models, while ViT-B is a single image
model. For each target, we use the other candidate models as source. The layers representations are
extracted from each target model, with the layers selected as detailed in Table 2. A dimensionality
reduction is first conducted on the output representations for computational efficiency reasons.
Real environment. In the real set of experiments, our target is the brain responses. In this case, we
use the public fMRI dataset from Mini-Algonauts Cichy et al. (2021). We only use the training set
since the test data is not provided. We perform cross-validation over four folds throughout all our
experiments. The dataset provides fMRI recordings of ten subjects who watched short video clips
of three seconds average duration. Each video and voxel in the brain was represented by a single
activation value. We use the brain responses from nine regions of interest of the visual cortex, these
are across two levels: (i) early and mid-level visual cortex (V1, V2, V3, and V4), and (ii) high-level
visual cortex (EBA, FFA, STS, LOC, and PPA). The early and mid-level visual cortex regions are
concerned with lower-level features such as orientations and frequencies, while the high-level ones
are concerned with semantics in terms of objects, scenes, bodies, and faces.

3.2   E NCODING TECHNIQUE

Inspired by the recent work Zhou et al. (2022), we use a layer-weighted region of interest encoding
that takes the hierarchical nature of deep networks into consideration. Initially, we pre-process the
input features from the different layers of a candidate model through averaging the features on the
temporal dimension. This is followed by performing sparse random projection Li et al. (2006) for
dimensionality reduction and computational efficiency reasons. Assume input features for layer, l,
after dimensionality reduction as, Xl ∈ RC×1 , with C features. We learn the weights of one fully
connected layer to provide the predictions of the voxels of one region of interest in the visual cortex
as, Ŷl = Wl Xl . Where Wl ∈ RN ×C , Ŷ ∈ RN ×1 and N is the number of voxels in the region of
interest. Instead of simple linear or ridge regression, we learn a weighted sum of the predictions of
all layers and use the following loss to train our regression model,
                                      XL                  L
                                                          X
                          L = ∥Y −        ωl Ŷl ∥22 + β1   ∥Wl ∥2 + β2 ∥ω∥1 ,                      (1)
                                     l=1               l=1

where ωl is a learnable scalar weight for layer, l, and, ω, is the vector of weights. Each ωl , controls
the contribution of layer, l, to the final regression of the region of interest, and β1 , β2 are hyper-
parameters of the regularization. We use L1 regularization for the layer weights to enforce sparsity.
This encoding scheme avoids unnecessary assumptions that there is a one-to-one alignment between
layers and visual brain regions of interest. Accordingly, this encoding scheme allows for more
complex interactions among the layers and the brain regions of interest.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: List of the candidate models and their families and configurations that were used during
their training. We list the backbone/s, the training datasets, and the configuration as frame length ×
sampling rate. For the training datasets we use ImageNet Deng et al. (2009) (IN), Kinetics-400 Kay
et al. (2017) (K400), Charades Kay et al. (2017) (Ch) and Something-something v2 Sigurdsson et al.
(2016) (SSV2).
 Input      Supervision        Architecture      Network (Backbone/s - Dataset/s - Config.)
                                                 C2D (R50-K400-8 × 8)
                                                 CSN (R101-K400-32 × 2)
                                                 I3D (R50-K400-8 × 8)
 Video
                               Convolutional     R(2+1)D (R50-K400-16 × 4)
            Fully-supervised                     SlowFast (R50,101-K400,Ch,SSV2-8 × 8,4 × 16)
                                                 3DResNet (R18,50-K400,Ch,SSV2-8 × 8,4 × 16)
                                                 X3D (XS,S,M,L-K400-Matched Sampling Rate)
                                                 MViT (B-K400-16 × 4,32 × 3)
                               Transformers
                                                 TimeSformer (B-K400,SSV2-8 × 8)
                                                 OmniMAE finetuned (B-SSV2-8 × 8)
                                                 stMAE (L-K400-8 × 8)
            Self-supervised    Transformers
                                                 OmniMAE (B,L-IN/SSV2-8 × 8)
                               Convolutional     ResNet (R50,18-IN-8 × 8)
            Fully-supervised
                               Transformers      ViT (B16,32,L16,32-IN-8 × 8)
 Image
                                                 DINO (B-IN-8 × 8)
            Self-supervised    Transformers
                                                 MAE (B-IN-8 × 8)

      Table 2: Detailed description per architecture of the number of layers and which ones.

         Architecture                # Layers     Sampled Layers
         CSN, R(2+1)D, 3DResNet          6       5 convolutional blocks and last fully con-
                                                 nected layer
         C2D, I3D                        7       5 convolutional blocks, max pooling and
                                                 last fully connected layer
         SlowFast                        12      5 convolutional blocks for each branch
                                                 (slow & fast) and the last 2 layers combined
         X3D                             6       5 convolutional blocks and last fully con-
                                                 nected layer
         ViT, TimeSformer                4       Grouped 3 blocks, each block 4 layers and
                                                 last fully connected layer
         Dino - B                        4       3 Grouped blocks (4 layers) and CLS token
         ResNet                          7       5 convolutional blocks, average pooling and
                                                 last fully connected layer
         MViT                            5       Grouped 4 blocks (4 layers) and last fully
                                                 connected layer
         OmniMAE, MAE                    3       Grouped 3 blocks (4 layers)
         stMAE                           6       Grouped 6 blocks (4 layers)


3.3   C ANDIDATE MODELS

Here we describe the candidate models that are used in our experiments. We choose to run our
experiments on more than 30 source models that are listed in Table 1, along with their model
family and configurations. Video understanding models include C2D Li et al. (2019), CSN Tran
et al. (2019), I3D Carreira & Zisserman (2017), R(2+1)D Tran et al. (2018), SlowFast and the
Slow branch (3D ResNet-50) Feichtenhofer et al. (2019), X3D Feichtenhofer (2020), MViT Fan
et al. (2021) and TimeSformer Bertasius et al. (2021). Self-supervised video understanding models,
stMAE Feichtenhofer et al. (2022) and OmniMAE Girdhar et al. (2023) are used as well. Single
image models include ResNets He et al. (2016), ViTs Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) and the self-supervised
DINO Caron et al. (2021) and MAE He et al. (2022). Families of models are categorized based


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on the input, supervision and architecture type as discussed earlier. Since our focus is on video
understanding, most of our models are from the video understanding literature. We also detail the
number of layers and which layers are sampled for each deep network used in our experiments in
Table 2. Note that for transformer-based architectures instead of using all layers to be selected we
rather group layers into blocks of four layers for efficiency reasons and we noticed it gave better
results than learning the regression with all input layers at once. Also note that OmniMAE finetuned
is trained for the action recognition task on SSV2 dataset Goyal et al. (2017).

4     E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
4.1   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

In this subsection, we describe our experiment design and details of our implementation for both the
simulated and real sets of experiments. Across both, there are common hyper-parameters that we use.
In the case of both video and image understanding, we sample a clip from the input video to extract
features for that clip. In image understanding models, we extract features per frame and combine the
output features from the clip. The input clips to all models are constructed based on a sampling rate
that corresponds to the sampling rate used during its training for video understanding models. As
for image understanding models we use the default sampling rate eight. The clip length is computed
based on the sampling rate and the input video length and changes according to the video length.
Before training the regressor, a hyperparameter tuning is conducted using two-fold cross-validation
on the training set of the first subject, following previous work Zhou et al. (2022). The two main
hyper-parameters we tune are the β1 , β2 , using grid search β1 ∈ {1, 10, 100} and β2 ∈ {0.1, 1, 10}.
Moreover, an early-stopping strategy is employed through the hyperparameter tuning and training
phases. The main metric used throughout the experiments is the average Pearson’s correlation
coefficient across all voxels within a specific region of interest in the brain. All results are averaged
over the subjects. We conduct experiments on four folds and report the average and standard deviation.
We report the statistical significance across families of models using Welch’s t-test.
The real setup is conducted on the Mini-Algonouts2021 dataset Cichy et al. (2019) of fMRI responses
recorded from ten subjects who watched three repetitions of 1,000 video stimuli with an average
duration of three seconds. In our analysis, we averaged the fMRI responses across the video repetitions
to represent each single video with one activation value at each voxel. In each fold of the four folds
we used in our experiments, the 1,000 videos are split into training and testing sets as 90% and 10%,
respectively. Each of our candidate models’ features are used to regress on the fMRI data with the
regularized regression that allows for re-weighing the features from the different layers for each
region in the brain. In the simulated setup, we conduct it on three target models and follow the same
setup for the real environment with the video stimuli used as input to the target deep network.

4.2   C AN WE PERFORM SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION WITH RESPECT TO THE DYNAMICS
      MODELLING ?

We first investigate the question of whether system identification of single image vs. video understand-
ing models is possible. Towards that end, we study two families of models in a simulated environment
with five single image and 13 video understanding models as source models, and the target models
defined in Section 3.3. Figure 1 shows that for MViT and ViT target models, the correct family of
models (either image or video family) is better able to represent each. Specifically, we see the video
understanding models for MViT and the single image one for ViT show higher regression scores. In
the case of MViT, all layers show statistically significant results between image and video families of
models. As an example, video understanding models achieved an average score of 0.58 while image
understanding ones achieved an average score of 0.49 in representing the first block (i.e., third layer)
in MViT (presented as B1 in the figure). As for ViT, it shows statistically significant results across all
layers except the last one. Note that we include in the video understanding family, models that are
trained on three different datasets which are Kinetics, Charades, and Something-Something v2 to
ensure the results are not dependent on a certain training dataset.
When looking at I3D ResNet-50, we notice that the difference between the two families of models is
statistically insignificant across most layers, especially the early ones. Our interpretation of these
results is tied to one of the recent interpretability studies of video understanding models Kowal et al.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 (a)                                (b)                               (c)

Figure 1: Simulated experiments showing regression scores as Pearson’s correlation coefficient of
image (blue) vs. video (red) model families on three target models; (a) MViT-B, (b) ViT-B, (c)
I3D ResNet-50. Statistical significance is shown at the bottom as ‘ns’ not significant, ‘∗, ∗∗, ∗ ∗ ∗’
significant with p-values < 0.05, 0.01, 0.001, resp.

(2022). The aforementioned study showed that I3D was the weakest in modelling dynamics with
respect to other video understanding models. Hence, it might be the reason behind the insignificant
difference between image and video-based models in the early layers when I3D is the target.
In summary, we have demonstrated that with MViT and ViT there is a strong indication that system
identification can be attained to a certain level with most of the layers showing statistical significance.
Additional simulated experiments are provided in Appendix A.3 Since we can identify the ground
truth modelling scheme in terms of image vs. video understanding in the simulated setup, in the
following section we investigate the same but for the unknown biological neural system.

4.3   H OW DOES THE HUMAN VISUAL CORTEX COMPARE TO DEEP NETWORKS WHEN TAKING
      DYNAMICS MODELLING INTO CONSIDERATION ?

Since we have established the feasibility of identifying the target image vs. video understanding
models to an extent with regression scores, it brings the question of how can we use this information to
identify the underlying mechanisms in biological neural systems. The results for the real experiments,
where the target model is the biological neural system, are shown in Figure 2. We conduct three
comparisons; a comparison of single image vs. video understanding families of models, a comparison
of convolutional-based vs. transformer-based models, and a comparison of fully-supervised vs.
self-supervised models. Figure 2 (a) clearly demonstrates that across most brain regions, video
understanding models have better capability to model the visual cortex responses than single image
architectures. As an example, video understanding models have an average score of 0.28 in predicting
V1 region responses while image understanding ones have an average score of 0.24. This result
questions the previous large-scale studies when comparing deep networks to biological neural
systems, as they have missed a crucial aspect that should be considered which is modelling dynamics.
Moreover, our results are statistically significant across all regions except the PPA, which is concerned
with scenes and might be giving less weight to modelling dynamics.
Figure 2 (b) shows the comparison between transformer-based and convolutional-based models. It
shows that convolutional models have higher regression scores across early-mid regions in the visual
cortex with relatively high statistical significance. Interestingly, it has been noted in recent works that
transformers lack the ability to capture high-frequency components Bai et al. (2022). On the other
hand, early layers in convolutional models tend to capture high-frequency components by detecting
oriented gradients. This also might relate to empirical results that demonstrated vision transformers
with shallow convolutional stem (i.e., three convolutional layers) perform better than the ones that
directly take patches as input Xiao et al. (2021). As such, brain modelling in the early and mid
regions of the visual cortex relates better to convolutional-based models, as they are concerned with
high-frequency components. It also brings insight into the design of transformer-based models to
encourage the adoption of shallow convolutional stem widely in transformers, beyond the patchifying
stem that renders vision transformers as less capable of capturing high-frequency components.
Surprisingly, Figure 2 (c) shows that fully-supervised models are better able to model the early regions
than self-supervised models. It also shows that the differences between fully and self-supervised
are statistically significant across the four early regions of the visual cortex (V1, V2, V3, and V4).


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 (a)                               (b)                               (c)

Figure 2: Real experiments showing regression scores as Pearson’s correlation coefficient of model
families on brain fMRI data. (a) Comparison of image vs. video understanding models, (b) comparison
of convolutional vs. transformer-based models and (c) comparison of fully supervised vs. self-
supervised models. Statistical significance is shown in the bottom as ‘ns’ not significant, ‘∗, ∗∗, ∗ ∗ ∗’
significant with p-values < 0.05, 0.01, 0.001, resp.


                           (a)                                             (b)


                                                   (c)

Figure 3: Fine-grained analysis of the video understanding models across the nine regions of the
human visual cortex showing the Pearson’s correlation coefficient as the regression scores. (a)
Comparison between single stream and two stream SlowFast architectures. (b) Comparison between
OmniMAE pre-trained in a self-supervised manner, TimeSformer and OmniMAE fine-tuned to a
downstream task with full supervision. All models are based on ViT-B and trained on SSV2. (c)
Comparison between six video understanding models. Statistical significance is shown on top of bar
pairs as ‘ns’ not significant, ‘∗, ∗∗, ∗ ∗ ∗’ significant with p-values < 0.05, 0.01, 0.001, resp.
However, the results are not significant in the later regions (LOC, EBA, FFA, STS, and PPA). In the
following sections, we will show a more fine-grained analysis of such result to confirm it.

4.4   F INE - GRAINED ANALYSIS

In this section, we conduct a fine-grained analysis that goes beyond families of models. We start
with studying two stream vs. single stream architectures across three video understanding datasets.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Figure 4: Layers contribution of four models for the nine regions of interest in the visual cortex.


Figure 3 (a) shows clearly that the two stream architectures have better ability to model the visual
cortex than single stream ones in the low level regions. Additionally, they show either better or on-par
scores with respect to the single stream in the high level regions. We then discuss the self-supervised
learning results that showed worse regression scores in the families of models comparison with
respect to full supervision. Towards this end, we investigate OmniMAE variants (i.e., self supervised
and finetuned with full supervision) and TimeSformer. Figure 3 (b) shows that fully supervised
models gives better scores than the self-supervised ones across the nine regions.
Furthermore, we investigate which model is better at predicting the visual cortex responses. Figure 3
(c) shows that both SlowFast, a two-stream architecture, and MViT, a multiscale vision transformer,
are the best in modelling the visual cortex across the nine regions. SlowFast which is a convolutional
approach is better on average than MViT in the early-mid regions except the last three high-level
regions (i.e., FFA, STS and PPA). These last three regions MViT shows either on-par or better
regression scores. This might relate to the previous findings on how the transformers family are
generally lower than the convolutional one in the early regions. However, note that MViT is equipped
with multiscale processing making it better in capturing these orientations and frequencies than other
transformers. Moreover, we see self-supervised models (i.e., stMAE and OmniMAE) lagging behind
fully supervised ones. Additional fine-grained analysis is provided in Appendix A.2 and A.3.
Finally, we demonstrate the layer contribution of the studied video understanding models across
different regions to have a better understanding of the hierarchical nature of biological neural systems.
We show the layer contribution to the regression according to the regularized encoding technique
in Section 3.2. Figure 4 shows the layer contribution for three video understanding models; MViT,
I3D and SlowFast (Slow and Fast branches). It clearly demonstrates that across the four early layers
in these networks, there is a higher contribution to the early and mid-level regions (V1-4), and the
opposite occurs as we go deeper.



4.5     S UMMARY

Here we summarize our findings: (i) our results in the simulated experiments show that system
identification between image and video understanding models is attainable to a certain level. (ii) We
show that video understanding models are better in regressing the visual cortex responses than image
ones. (iii) We show that convolutional models predict better the early-mid regions than transformer
based ones. (iv) We show that multiscale ViT (MViT) tends to perform similar to convolutional
models in early-mid regions. (v) We show that two-stream video understanding models perform better
than their single stream counter-part. (vi) Finally, we show that models trained with full supervision
tend to surpass the ones trained in a self supervised manner.


5      C ONCLUSION

This paper has provided a large-scale study of video understanding models with more than 30
models from a neuroscience perspective. We have shown the feasibility of system identification
for the modelling scheme comparing single image vs. video understanding models. Moreover, we
have shown in neural encoding experiments that modelling dynamics should be considered when
comparing biological neural system responses to deep networks. Finally, we have provided insights
on different families of models and fine-grained analysis considering the modelling scheme (video vs.
single image), the supervision signal, and the architecture (convolutional vs. transformer based).


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jiawang Bai, Li Yuan, Shu-Tao Xia, Shuicheng Yan, Zhifeng Li, and Wei Liu. Improving vision
   transformers by revisiting high-frequency components. In Proceedings of the European Conference
   on Computer Vision, pp. 1–18. Springer, 2022.
Gedas Bertasius, Heng Wang, and Lorenzo Torresani. Is space-time attention all you need for video
  understanding? In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 2,
  pp. 4, 2021.
R. Bommasani, D. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von Arx, M. Bernstein, J. Bohg,
  A. Bosselut, E. Brunskill, et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.
Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics
  dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  6299–6308, 2017.
Radoslaw Martin Cichy, Gemma Roig, and Aude Oliva. The algonauts project. Nature Machine
  Intelligence, 1(12):613–613, 2019.
Radoslaw Martin Cichy, Kshitij Dwivedi, Benjamin Lahner, Alex Lascelles, Polina Iamshchin-
  ina, M Graumann, Alex Andonian, NAR Murty, K Kay, Gemma Roig, et al. The algonauts
  project 2021 challenge: How the human brain makes sense of a world in motion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.13714, 2021.
Colin Conwell, David Mayo, Andrei Barbu, Michael Buice, George Alvarez, and Boris Katz. Neural
  regression, representational similarity, model zoology & neural taskonomy at scale in rodent visual
  cortex. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:5590–5607, 2021a.
Colin Conwell, Jacob S Prince, George A Alvarez, and Talia Konkle. What can 5.17 billion regression
  fits tell us about artificial models of the human visual system? In Shared Visual Representations
  in Human and Machine Intelligence workshop at Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021b.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-
   scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
   Recognition, pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Haoqi Fan, Bo Xiong, Karttikeya Mangalam, Yanghao Li, Zhicheng Yan, Jitendra Malik, and
  Christoph Feichtenhofer. Multiscale vision transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 6824–6835, 2021.
Christoph Feichtenhofer. X3d: Expanding architectures for efficient video recognition. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 203–213, 2020.
Christoph Feichtenhofer, Haoqi Fan, Jitendra Malik, and Kaiming He. Slowfast networks for video
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  6202–6211, 2019.
Christoph Feichtenhofer, Yanghao Li, Kaiming He, et al. Masked autoencoders as spatiotemporal
  learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:35946–35958, 2022.
Jeremy Freeman, Corey M Ziemba, David J Heeger, Eero P Simoncelli, and J Anthony Movshon. A
   functional and perceptual signature of the second visual area in primates. Nature Neuroscience, 16
  (7):974–981, 2013.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alessandro T Gifford, Benjamin Lahner, Sari Saba-Sadiya, Martina G Vilas, Alex Lascelles, Aude
  Oliva, Kendrick Kay, Gemma Roig, and Radoslaw M Cichy. The algonauts project 2023 challenge:
  How the human brain makes sense of natural scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03198, 2023.
Rohit Girdhar, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mannat Singh, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Armand Joulin, and
  Ishan Misra. Omnimae: Single model masked pretraining on images and videos. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10406–10417, 2023.
Raghav Goyal, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Vincent Michalski, Joanna Materzynska, Susanne Westphal,
  Heuna Kim, Valentin Haenel, Ingo Fruend, Peter Yianilos, Moritz Mueller-Freitag, et al. The”
  something something” video database for learning and evaluating visual common sense. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 5842–5850, 2017.
Umut Güçlü and Marcel AJ Van Gerven. Modeling the dynamics of human brain activity with
 recurrent neural networks. Frontiers in computational neuroscience, 11:7, 2017.
Yena Han, Tomaso A Poggio, and Brian Cheung. System identification of neural systems: If we got
  it right, would we know? In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12430–12444.
  PMLR, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.
Liwei Huang, ZhengYu Ma, Huihui Zhou, and Yonghong Tian. Deep recurrent spiking neural
  networks capture both static and dynamic representations of the visual cortex under movie stimuli.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01354, 2023.
Will Kay, Joao Carreira, Karen Simonyan, Brian Zhang, Chloe Hillier, Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan,
 Fabio Viola, Tim Green, Trevor Back, Paul Natsev, et al. The kinetics human action video dataset.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06950, 2017.
Meenakshi Khosla, Gia H Ngo, Keith Jamison, Amy Kuceyeski, and Mert R Sabuncu. Cortical
 response to naturalistic stimuli is largely predictable with deep neural networks. Science Advances,
 7(22):eabe7547, 2021.
Yu Kong and Yun Fu. Human action recognition and prediction: A survey. International Journal of
  Computer Vision, 130(5):1366–1401, 2022.
Matthew Kowal, Mennatullah Siam, Md Amirul Islam, Neil DB Bruce, Richard P Wildes, and Kon-
 stantinos G Derpanis. A deeper dive into what deep spatiotemporal networks encode: Quantifying
 static vs. dynamic information. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13999–14009, 2022.
Benjamin Lahner. An fMRI dataset of 1,102 natural videos for visual event understanding. PhD
  thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2022.
Benjamin Lahner, Kshitij Dwivedi, Polina Iamshchinina, Monika Graumann, Alex Lascelles, Gemma
  Roig, Alessandro Thomas Gifford, Bowen Pan, SouYoung Jin, N Apurva Ratan Murty, et al. Bold
  moments: modeling short visual events through a video fmri dataset and metadata. bioRxiv, pp.
  2023–03, 2023.
Chao Li, Qiaoyong Zhong, Di Xie, and Shiliang Pu. Collaborative spatiotemporal feature learning
  for video action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7872–7881, 2019.
Ping Li, Trevor J Hastie, and Kenneth W Church. Very sparse random projections. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 287–296, 2006.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Najib J Majaj, Ha Hong, Ethan A Solomon, and James J DiCarlo. Simple learned weighted
  sums of inferior temporal neuronal firing rates accurately predict human core object recognition
  performance. Journal of Neuroscience, 35(39):13402–13418, 2015.
Shinji Nishimoto. Modeling movie-evoked human brain activity using motion-energy and space-time
  vision transformer features. BioRxiv, pp. 2021–08, 2021.
Shinji Nishimoto, An T Vu, Thomas Naselaris, Yuval Benjamini, Bin Yu, and Jack L Gallant.
  Reconstructing visual experiences from brain activity evoked by natural movies. Current biology,
  21(19):1641–1646, 2011.
Martin Schrimpf, Jonas Kubilius, Ha Hong, Najib J Majaj, Rishi Rajalingham, Elias B Issa, Kohitij
 Kar, Pouya Bashivan, Jonathan Prescott-Roy, Franziska Geiger, et al. Brain-score: Which artificial
 neural network for object recognition is most brain-like? BioRxiv, pp. 407007, 2018.
Junxing Shi, Haiguang Wen, Yizhen Zhang, Kuan Han, and Zhongming Liu. Deep recurrent neural
  network reveals a hierarchy of process memory during dynamic natural vision. Human brain
  mapping, 39(5):2269–2282, 2018.
Gunnar A Sigurdsson, Gül Varol, Xiaolong Wang, Ali Farhadi, Ivan Laptev, and Abhinav Gupta.
  Hollywood in homes: Crowdsourcing data collection for activity understanding. In Proceedings of
  the European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 510–526. Springer, 2016.
Fabian Sinz, Alexander S Ecker, Paul Fahey, Edgar Walker, Erick Cobos, Emmanouil Froudarakis,
  Dimitri Yatsenko, Zachary Pitkow, Jacob Reimer, and Andreas Tolias. Stimulus domain transfer
  in recurrent models for large scale cortical population prediction on video. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Du Tran, Heng Wang, Lorenzo Torresani, Jamie Ray, Yann LeCun, and Manohar Paluri. A closer
  look at spatiotemporal convolutions for action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6450–6459, 2018.
Du Tran, Heng Wang, Lorenzo Torresani, and Matt Feiszli. Video classification with channel-
  separated convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
 Computer Vision, pp. 5552–5561, 2019.
Tete Xiao, Mannat Singh, Eric Mintun, Trevor Darrell, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Early
  convolutions help transformers see better. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  30392–30400, 2021.
Qiongyi Zhou, Changde Du, and Huiguang He. Exploring the brain-like properties of deep neural
  networks: a neural encoding perspective. Machine Intelligence Research, 19(5):439–455, 2022.
Chengxu Zhuang, Siming Yan, Aran Nayebi, Martin Schrimpf, Michael C Frank, James J DiCarlo, and
  Daniel LK Yamins. Unsupervised neural network models of the ventral visual stream. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(3):e2014196118, 2021.


                                                12
