Z ERO -S HOT ROBOTIC M ANIPULATION W ITH
P RETRAINED I MAGE -E DITING D IFFUSION M ODELS

          Kevin Black∗1 Mitsuhiko Nakamoto∗1 Pranav Atreya1 Homer Walke1
                    Chelsea Finn2,3 Aviral Kumar1,3 Sergey Levine1,3
         1
             University of California, Berkeley 2 Stanford University   3
                                                                            Google DeepMind
                                            *
                                              Equal contribution



                                            A BSTRACT

         If generalist robots are to operate in truly unstructured environments, they need to
         be able to recognize and reason about novel objects and scenarios. Such objects
         and scenarios might not be present in the robot’s own training data. We propose
         SuSIE, a method that leverages an image-editing diffusion model to act as a high-
         level planner by proposing intermediate subgoals that a low-level controller can
         accomplish. Specifically, we finetune InstructPix2Pix on video data, consisting
         of both human videos and robot rollouts, such that it outputs hypothetical fu-
         ture “subgoal” observations given the robot’s current observation and a language
         command. We also use the robot data to train a low-level goal-conditioned pol-
         icy to act as the aforementioned low-level controller. We find that the high-level
         subgoal predictions can utilize Internet-scale pretraining and visual understand-
         ing to guide the low-level goal-conditioned policy, achieving significantly bet-
         ter generalization and precision than conventional language-conditioned policies.
         We achieve state-of-the-art results on the CALVIN benchmark, and also demon-
         strate robust generalization on real-world manipulation tasks, beating strong base-
         lines that have access to privileged information or that utilize orders of mag-
         nitude more compute and training data. The project website can be found at
         http://rail-berkeley.github.io/susie.


1   I NTRODUCTION
A useful generalist robot must be able to — much like a person — recognize and reason about novel
objects and scenarios it has never encountered before. For example, if a user instructs the robot to
“hand me that jumbo orange crayon,” it ought to be able to do so even if it has never interacted
with a jumbo orange crayon before. In other words, the robot needs to possess not only the physical
capability to manipulate an object of that shape and size but also the semantic understanding to
reason about an object outside of its training distribution. As much as robotic manipulation datasets
have grown in recent years, it is unlikely that they will ever include every conceivable instance
of objects and settings, any more so than the life experiences of a person ever include physical
interactions with every type of object. While these datasets contain more than enough examples of
manipulating elongated cylindrical objects, they lack the broad semantic knowledge necessary to
ground the particular objects that robots will encounter during everyday operation.
How can we imbue this semantic knowledge into language-guided robotic control? One approach
would be to utilize models pretrained on vision and language to initialize different components of
the robotic learning pipeline. Recent efforts, for example, initialize robotic policies with pretrained
vision-language encoders [7] or apply pretrained models to semantic scene augmentation [11, 64].
While these methods bring semantic knowledge into robot learning, it remains unclear if these ap-
proaches realize the full potential of Internet pretraining in improving robotic policy execution at
every level, or whether they simply improve the high-level visual generalization of the policy.
We propose an approach for leveraging pretrained image-editing models to enable generalizable
robotic manipulation. We finetune the image-editing model on video data such that, given the cur-
rent frame and a language description of the current task, the model generates a hypothetical future


                                                  1
Figure 1: (SuSIE) Our method leverages a pretrained image-editing model to generate future subgoals based
on language commands. A low-level goal-reaching policy then executes the actions needed to reach each
subgoal. Alternating this loop enables us to solve the task.


frame. This does not require the model to precisely understand the intricacies of the robot’s low-level
dynamics and therefore should facilitate transfer from other data sources (e.g., human videos) where
the low-level physical interactions and precise embodiment do not match. At test time, we employ
a low-level goal-reaching policy trained on robot data to reach this hypothetical future frame; this
policy, in turn, only needs to infer visuo-motor relationships to determine the correct actuation and
does not need to understand the overlying semantics. Furthermore, such subgoals can simplify the
task by inferring likely poses for the arm at intermediate substeps, such as the pose corresponding
to grasping an object (see Figure 1). In fact, we observe in our experiments that even when existing
approaches possess sufficient semantic understanding to solve a task, they often fail due to impre-
cise localization of obstacles and objects; following the generated subgoals enables our method to
perform well in such scenarios. Much like a person first constructs a high-level plan to complete a
task before deferring to muscle memory for the low-level control, our method can also be viewed
as first running a high-level planner with integrated semantic reasoning and visual understanding
before deferring to a low-level controller to execute the plan.
The main contribution of our work is SUbgoal Synthesis via Image Editing (SuSIE), a simple
and scalable method for incorporating semantic information from pretrained models to improve
robotic control. A pretrained image-editing model is used with minimal modification, requiring only
finetuning on video data. The low-level goal-conditioned policy is trained with standard supervised
learning, and faces the comparatively easy problem of reaching nearby image subgoals; this typically
only requires attending to a single object or the arm position, ignoring most parts of the scene.
Together, this approach achieves state-of-the-art results on the CALVIN benchmark and solves real
robot control tasks involving novel objects, novel distractors, and even novel scenes. It outperforms
all prior approaches on these real-world tasks, including oracle baselines with privileged information
and RT-2-X [14] — a 55 billion parameter model trained on Internet-scale vision-language data as
well as an order of magnitude more robot data than SuSIE.


2   R ELATED W ORK
Incorporating semantic information from pretrained vision-language models. Prior works that
incorporate semantic information from pretrained vision-language models (VLMs) into robot learn-
ing can be classified into two categories. The first category aims to improve visual scene under-
standing in robot policies with information from VLMs. For instance, GenAug [11], ROSIE [64],
DALL-E-Bot [34], and CACTI [43] use text-to-image generative models to produce semantic aug-
mentations of a given scene with novel objects and arrangements and train the robot policy on the
augmented data to enable it to perform well in a similar scene. MOO [57] uses a pretrained object
detector to extract bounding boxes to guide the policy towards the target object. Other works di-


                                                   2
rectly train language and image-based policies [6, 7, 55], some using VLM initializations [15, 52],
to produce action sequences.
While these approaches do utilize pretrained models, we find in our experiments that pretraining
using VLMs [7] does not necessarily enhance low-level policy execution in the sense that learned
policies often localize the object or move the gripper imprecisely (see Figure 3). On the other hand,
our approach is able to incorporate benefits of pretraining into low-level control by synthesizing
subgoals that carefully steer the motion of the low goal reaching policy, improving its precision.
While our approach can be directly applied in unstructured open-world settings, applying methods
from [11, 64, 43] requires additional prior information, such as object bounding boxes or 3D meshes.
This significantly restricts their applicability to scenarios where this additional information is not
available: for example, GenAug [11] is not applicable in our experiments since 3D object meshes
for new target objects were not available. Distinct from our approach for utilizing generative models,
other works design representation learning objectives for vision-language pretraining for control [49,
42, 35, 4], but these methods still need to utilize limited amounts of data from the target task to learn
a policy. In contrast, our approach solves the target task in zero-shot, without any task-specific data.
The second category of approaches incorporates semantic information from pretrained models for
informing low-level controllers. Typically, these prior methods use pretrained models to imagine
visual [16, 2] or textual plans [8, 28, 29, 39], which then inform a low-level robot control policy. Of
these, methods that train a low-level policies conditioned on text suffer from a grounding problem,
which our approach circumvents entirely since the low-level policy only sees images.
Perhaps the most related methods to our approach in this second category are UniPi [16] and HiP [2],
which train video models to generate a sequence of frames achieving the target task, and then extract
robot actions by training an inverse dynamics model. Our approach does not attempt to generate full
videos (i.e., all frames in a rollout), but only the next waypoint that a low-level policy must achieve
to solve the commanded task. While this difference might appear small, it has major implications:
modeling an entire video puts a very high burden on the generative model, requiring the frames
to obey strict physical consistency. Unfortunately, we find that open-source video models often
produce temporally inconsistent frames, which confuse the low-level controller (see Appendix C).
Our method provides more freedom to the low-level controller to handle the physical aspects of the
task over a longer time interval while guiding it at a level that is suitable to the diffusion model’s
ability to preserve physical plausibility. In our experiments, we find that our method significantly
improves over an open-source reimplementation of UniPi [16].
Classical model-based RL and planning with no pretraining. The idea behind our approach
is also related to several methods in the deep RL literature that do not use pretrained models and
generally do not study language-guided control. For instance, [21, 37, 63, 60, 53, 22] train action-
conditioned dynamics models and run RL in the model. While our approach also models multi-step
dynamics, our model is not conditioned on an action input. Removing the dependency on an action
input enables us to de-couple the finetuning of the (large) image-editing model from the policy
entirely, improving simplicity and time efficiency. APV [54] trains an action agnostic dynamics
model from videos but finetunes it in a loop with the policy, and hence, does not enjoy the above
benefits. Finally, these model-based RL methods do not exhibit zero-shot generalization abilities to
new tasks, which is an important capability that our method enjoys. Our approach is also related to
several video prediction methods [17, 38, 3, 58] but utilizes a better neural network architecture (i.e.,
diffusion models instead of LSTMs and CNNs). Most related is to our method is hierarchical visual
foresight (HVF) [48]: while HVF uses MPC to find an action, our approach uses a goal-reaching
policy thereby eliminating the cost of running MPC with large dynamics models.
Our approach is also related to prior works that use generative models for planning in a single-task
setting, with no pretraining. Trajectory transformer (TT) [31], decision transformer (DT) [10], and
their extensions condition the policy on the target return or goal. While diffusion-based variants of
these methods [32, 1] use diffusion models like our approach, they still require training data from
the target task to learn a policy, unlike our zero-shot planning approach.

3   P RELIMINARIES AND P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
We consider the problem setting of language-conditioned robotic control. Specifically, we want a
robot to accomplish a task described by a novel language command. We divide sources of data into
3 categories: language-labeled video clips Dl that do not include robot actions; language-labeled


                                                   3
robot data Dl,a that include both language labels and robot actions; and unlabeled robot data Da
that include only actions (e.g., play data).

Formally, we define Dl,a = { τ 1 , l1 , τ 2 , l2 , · · · , τ N , lN }, where each trajectory τ n consists
of a sequence of images (or states) sni ∈ S and actions ani ∈ A that were executed while collecting
this data, i.e. τ n = (sn0 , an0 , sn1 , an2 , · · · ), following the standard assumptions of a Markov decision
process. ln is a natural language command describing the task accomplished in the trajectory. Dl
and Da are organized similarly, but are missing either actions ani or language annotations ln , respec-
tively. At test time, given a new scene stest        0 and a new natural language description l
                                                                                                test
                                                                                                     of a task, we
evaluate a method in terms of its success rate at accomplishing this task starting from stest        0 .


4     S U SIE: S UBGOAL S YNTHESIS VIA I MAGE E DITING
Our goal is to utilize semantic information from the Internet to improve language-guided robot con-
trol in the presence of novel environments, scenes, and objects. How can we do this when models
trained on general-purpose Internet data do not provide guidance in selecting low-level actions? Our
key insight is that we can effectively leverage the capabilities of the pretrained model if we decouple
the robot control problem into two phases: ( I ) generating subgoals that would need to be attained
to succeed at the task, and ( II ) learning low-level control policies for reaching these generated sub-
goals. Our method incorporates semantic information from both text-image pretraining on Internet
data as well as non-robot video data in Phase (I) by finetuning a text-guided image-editing model
on Dl ∪ Dl,a . Phase (II) is accomplished via a goal-conditioned policy trained on the robot data
Dl,a ∪ Da . We describe each of these phases below and then summarize the resulting algorithm.
4.1   P HASE ( I ): S YNTHESIZING S UBGOALS F ROM I MAGE -E DITING M ODELS
The primary component of our method is a generative model that, given a target task specified by
natural language, can guide a low-level controller to a state that advances the task. One way to
accomplish this is to train a generative model to produce an immediate next subgoal image. We
can then incorporate semantic information from the Internet into our algorithm by initializing this
generative model with a suitable pretrained initialization, followed by finetuning it on multi-task,
diverse video data consisting of robot rollouts as well as other videos from the Internet.
What is a good pretrained initialization for this model? Our intuition is that, since accomplishing
a task is equivalent to “editing” the pixels of an image of the robot workspace under constraints
prescribed by the language command, a good pretrained initialization may be provided by a text-
guided image-editing model. We instantiate our approach with Instruct Pix2Pix [9], though other
image-editing models could also be used. Formally, this model is given by pθ (sedited | sorig , l). Then,
using the dataset Dl ∪ Dl,a of language-labeled video clips and robot trajectories, we finetune pθ
to produce valid subgoals sedited given an initial image sorig and a language label l. Formally, the
training objective is given by
                   max E (τ n ,ln )∼Dl ∪Dl,a ; sni ∼τ n ; j∼q(j|i) log pθ snj | sni , ln ,

                                                                                                      (1)
                      θ

where q(j | i) is a distribution of our choosing that controls what subgoals the model is trained
to produce. We want the diffusion model to generate subgoals that are a consistent distance in the
future from the current state — close enough to be reachable by the low-level policy, but far enough
to achieve significant progress on the task. As such, we choose dataset-dependent hyperparameters
kmin and kmax , and set q to select subgoals uniformly between kmin and kmax steps in the future, i.e.,

                                 q(j | i) = U j; [i + kmin , i + kmax ) .

4.2 P HASE ( II ): R EACHING G ENERATED S UBGOALS WITH G OAL -C ONDITIONED P OLICIES
In order to utilize the finetuned image-editing model to control the robot, we additionally need to
train a low-level controller to select suitable robot actions. In this section, we present the design of
our low-level controller, followed by a full description of our test-time control procedure. Since the
image-editing model in SuSIE produces images of future subgoals conditioned on natural language
task descriptions, our low-level controller can simply be a language-agnostic goal-reaching policy.
Training a goal-reaching policy. Our goal-reaching policy is parameterized as πϕ (a | si , sj ),
where sj is a future frame that the policy intends to reach by acting at si . At test time, we only


                                                        4
need the low-level policy to be proficient at reaching close-by states that lie within kmax steps of the
current state, since the image-editing model from Phase (I) is trained to produce subgoals within
kmax steps of any state. To train this policy, we run goal-conditioned behavioral cloning (GCBC) on
the robot data Dl,a ∪ Da . Formally, the training objective is given by
              max E τ n ∼Dl,a ∪Da ; (sni ,ani )∼τ n ; j∼U ([i,i+kmax +kδ )) log πϕ (ani | sni , snj ) ,

                                                                                                        (2)
               ϕ

where kδ is another hyperparameter that provides a small amount of overhead, since the image-
editing model is not perfect and may not always produce subgoals that are reachable in less than
kmax steps, especially for unseen tasks.
Test-time control with πϕ and pθ . Once both the goal-reaching policy πϕ and the subgoal gen-
eration model pθ are trained, we utilize them together to solve new manipulation tasks based on
user-specified natural language commands. Given a new scene stest 0 and a language command l ,
                                                                                                   test

SuSIE attempts to solve the task by iteratively generating subgoals and commanding the low-level
policy to reach these subgoals. At the start, we sample the first subgoal b s+ ∼ pθ (s+ | stest  test
                                                                                            0 , l ).
Once the subgoal is generated, we then roll out the goal-reaching policy πϕ conditioned on b   s+ for
ktest timesteps where ktest is a test-time hyperparameter. After ktest timesteps, we refresh the sub-
goal by sampling from the subgoal generation model again and repeat the process. In practice, for
computational efficiency, we set ktest to be similar to the corresponding kmax used with the robot
data and found this to be sufficient for obtaining good performance. However, given an unlimited
computational budget, conventional wisdom would suggest that regenerating subgoals more often
would lead to more robust control. Pseudocode for test-time control is provided in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 SuSIE: Zero-Shot, Test-Time Execution
Require: Subgoal model pθ (s+ | st , l), policy πϕ (a | st , s+ ), time limit T , subgoal sampling
    interval ktest , initial state stest
                                    0 , language command l
                                                           test

 1: t ← 0
 2: while t ≤ T do
 3:     Sample b  s+ ∼ pθ (s+ | stest      test
                                      t ,l )                   ▷ Generate a new subgoal every ktest steps
 4:     for j = 1 to ktest do
 5:         Sample at ∼ πϕ (a | stest    t ,b s+ )  ▷ Predict the action from current state and subgoal
 6:         Execute at
 7:         stest
             t+1 ← robot observation
 8:         t←t+1
 9:     end for
10: end while


4.3   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In Phase (I), we utilize the pretrained initialization from the InstructPix2Pix model [9]. We imple-
ment Equation 1 using the standard variational lower bound objective for training diffusion models
[25]. Our diffusion model and policy operate on images of size 256 × 256. To ensure that this model
pays attention to the input image and the language command, we apply classifier-free guidance [24]
separately to both the language and the image, following InstructPix2Pix. To obtain a robust goal-
reaching policy in Phase (II), we use a diffusion policy [12, 23] that predicts chunks of 4 actions and
performs temporal averaging over these predictions at test time [65]. More details about the training
hyperparameters and architecture are provided in Appendix A.1.

5     E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
The goal of our experiments is to evaluate the efficacy of SuSIE at improving generalization and the
low-level policy execution in open-world robotic manipulation tasks. To this end, our experiments
aim to study the following questions:

      1. Can SuSIE solve a task in a novel environment, with novel objects, and with a novel lan-
         guage command, in zero-shot?
      2. Does SuSIE exhibit an elevated level of precision and dexterity compared to other ap-
         proaches that do not use subgoals?


                                                    5
      3. How crucial is pretraining on Internet data, as well as cotraining on non-robot video data,
         for attaining zero-shot generalization?

To answer these questions, our experiments compare SuSIE to several prior methods including state-
of-the-art approaches for training language-conditioned policies that leverage pretrained vision-
language models in a variety of ways.

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S CENARIOS AND C OMPARISONS
Real-world experimental setup and datasets. We conduct our real-robot experiments on a Wid-
owX250 robot platform. Our dataset is BridgeData V2 [59], a large and diverse dataset of robotic
manipulation behaviors designed for evaluating open-vocabulary instructions. The dataset contains
over 60k trajectories, 45k of which are language-labeled, which we use as our language-labeled
robot dataset Dl,a . We use the remaining 15k trajectories as our action-only dataset Da .
Our video-only dataset Dl is the Something-Something dataset [19], a dataset consisting of short
video clips of humans manipulating various objects. We chose Something-Something because it
primarily contains examples of object manipulation with a still camera frame and hence exhibits a
smaller domain gap to the robot data collected with an over-the-shoulder camera compared to other
video datasets that contain substantial egocentric motion. We filter the Something-Something dataset
using its labels to remove trajectories that contain egocentric motion or otherwise lack significant
manipulation behavior, producing a final dataset size of approximately 75k video clips.
Our evaluations present three different scenes (Figure 2) designed specifically to test the ability of
various methods at different levels of open-world generalization: Scene A: this scene includes an
environment and objects that are well-represented in BridgeData V2; Scene B: this scene is situated
in an environment with a seen tabletop but a novel background and distractors, where the robot must
move a seen object (bell pepper) into a choice of seen container (orange pot) or unseen container
(ceramic bowl); and Scene C: this scene includes a table texture unlike anything in BridgeData
V2 and requires manipulating both seen and unseen objects. Semantically, Scene C is the most
challenging since the robot needs to carefully ground the language command to identify the correct
object while resisting its affinity for an object that is well-represented in the robot data (the spoon).
Scene B also requires semantic grounding to distinguish between the seen and unseen receptacles,
while adding the additional challenge of manipulating the plastic bell pepper — this object requires
particular precision to grasp due to being light, smooth, and almost as wide as the gripper.


Figure 2: (Experimental setup) (L) We evaluate our method on 9 tasks across 3 real-world scenes. In terms
of semantic generalization, the scenes become progressively more difficult, due to both an increasing visual
departure from the robot training data and an increasingly confounding mixture of both seen and unseen objects.
(R) In simulation, we evaluate our method in the zero-shot setting of the CALVIN benchmark, which involves
training on 3 environments (A, B, and C) and testing on a 4th environment (D). The environments differ in
table texture, positioning of furniture elements, and possible configurations of various colored blocks. Each
environment comes with 34 language-specified tasks.

                                                      6
Simulation tasks. We run our simulation experiments in CALVIN [45], a benchmark for long hori-
zon, language-conditioned manipulation. CALVIN consists of four simulated environments, labeled
A through D, and each environment comes with a dataset of human-collected play trajectories. Ap-
proximately 35% of the play data is annotated with language, which we use as our language-labeled
robot dataset Dl,a . We use the remaining 65% of the play data as our action-only robot dataset Da ,
and do not use any video-only dataset Dl in our simulation experiments.
Each environment consists of a Franka Emika Panda robot arm positioned next to a desk with various
manipulatable objects, including a drawer, sliding cabinet, light switch, and various colored blocks.
Environments are differentiated by their table textures, positions of the furniture objects, and con-
figurations of colored blocks. With this benchmark, we study the most challenging zero-shot multi-
environment scenario: training on A, B, and C, and testing on D. We follow the evaluation protocol
from Mees et al. [45]. During evaluation, a policy is given 360 timesteps to complete a chain of five
language instructions. We provide more details about our experimental setup in Appendix B.
Comparisons. Our experiments cover methods that utilize pretrained models of vision and language
in language-guided robot control in a variety of ways. Several prior methods tackle language-based
robotic control as discussed in Section 2. In our experiments, we choose to compare to a repre-
sentative subset of these prior methods to maximally cover the possible set of comparisons. In our
real-world experiments, we compare to the following methods:

  • RT-2-X [14], a 55 billion parameter vision-language model finetuned on the full Open X-
    Embodiment dataset to produce robot actions. The robot training data includes all of Bridge-
    Data V2, as well as a vast quantity of additional robot manipulation data totaling over 1.1
    million trajectories.
  • MOO [57], which utilizes pretrained object detectors to obtain 2D localization information for
    the manipulation targets and trains a language-conditioned behavioral cloning (LCBC) policy
    with this extra information. We re-implement MOO by using a large language model to extract
    the manipulation targets from the unstructured language labels in BridgeData V2, then OWL-
    ViT [46] to extract 2D bounding boxes for these objects. Unlike MOO, at test time we manually
    give the policy the ground truth 2D bounding boxes of the manipulation targets.
  • UniPi [16], which finetunes a language-conditioned video prediction model on robot data.
    Since the original UniPi model utilized proprietary pretrained initializations that are not avail-
    able publicly, we replicated this method in two different ways: (1) using the UniPi model from
    HiP [2], which is a PVDM [62] latent video diffusion model, and (2) by implementing our own
    image-space video diffusion model with a factorized spatial-temporal 3D UNet similar to Ho
    et al. [27]. We found that (1) was not able to produce reasonable-looking videos in the real
    robot scene (Appendix C), so we only evaluated (2) in our real-world experiments.
  • LCBC, which trains a low-level policy conditioned on the language labels in BridgeData V2.
    This method is broadly representative of prior language-conditioned behavioral cloning meth-
    ods such as RT-1 [6] and BC-Z [30]. We use the same architecture and hyperparameters as the
    low-level policy in SuSIE, as we found that they outperformed RT-1 on the BridgeData tasks.

We provide more details about the baselines and their implementations in Appendix A.2.
In our simulation experiments, we compare to additional methods previously studied on CALVIN.
This includes methods that explicitly tackle long-horizon language-based control on CALVIN
such as multi-context imitation (MCIL) [41], hierarchical universal language-conditioned policy
(HULC) [44], and improved variants of HULC [18]. We also compare to other state-of-the-art meth-
ods from Ge et al. [18] that employ an identical training and evaluation protocol as our experiments,
namely MdetrLC [33] and AugLC [50].
5.2 C AN S U SIE P ERFORM Z ERO -S HOT ROBOTIC M ANIPULATION ?
Simulation results. We present performance in Table 1, in terms of success rates (out of 1.0) for
completing chains of language instructions. SuSIE obtains superior zero-shot performance (train
A, B, C → test D) compared to the previous state-of-the-art. We find that our reimplementation of
UniPi achieves nontrivial success, but is still significantly outperformed by SuSIE.
Real-world results. We present performance of real-world evaluations in Table 2. SuSIE achieves
the best performance across the board, beating RT-2-X, a 55 billion parameter model trained on


                                                 7
                        Success Rate for No. of Instructions in a Row               Avg. No. of
                            1        2         3          4        5          Instructions Completed
  HULC [44]                0.43    0.14      0.04        0.01     0.00                   0.62
  MCIL [41]                0.20    0.00      0.00        0.00     0.00                   0.20
  MdetrLC [18]             0.69    0.38      0.20        0.07     0.04                   1.38
  AugLC [18]               0.69    0.43      0.22        0.09     0.05                   1.43
  LCBC                     0.67    0.31      0.17        0.10     0.06                   1.31
  UniPi (HiP) [2]          0.08    0.04      0.00        0.00     0.00                   0.12
  UniPi (Ours) [16]        0.56    0.16      0.08        0.08     0.04                   0.92
  SuSIE (Ours)             0.87    0.69      0.49        0.38     0.26                   2.69
Table 1: (CALVIN benchmark performance) SuSIE is able to chain together more instructions with a higher
success rate than all prior methods in the zero-shot (train A, B, C → test D) setting. We provide an example
rollout in Appendix D.

                    Task                     LCBC        MOO     UniPi    RT-2-X      SuSIE (Ours)
                    Eggplant on plate         0.9        0.4      0.0        0.3           1.0
                    Carrot on plate           0.4        0.3      0.0        0.6           0.9
      Scene A       Eggplant in pot           0.6        0.7      0.0        0.4           0.7
                    Average                   0.63       0.47     0.0       0.43           0.87
                    Bell pepper in pot        0.1        0.0      0.0        0.0           0.5
      Scene B       Bell pepper in bowl       0.3        0.1      0.1        0.0           0.5
                    Average                   0.20       0.05    0.05       0.00           0.50
                    Toothpaste in bowl        0.0        0.0      0.0        0.5           0.6
                    Crayon in bowl            0.0        0.0      0.0        0.9           1.0
      Scene C       Spoon in bowl             0.1        0.3      0.1        0.7           0.9
                    Bowl to top               0.6        0.1      0.1        0.9           1.0
                    Average                   0.18       0.10    0.05       0.75           0.88
Table 2: (Real-world performance) SuSIE achieves the best success rate across the board, demonstrating both
high precision as well as the ability to generalize to novel environments, objects, and language commands.


significantly more robot and Internet data. As expected, all methods perform well in Scene A,
which is well-represented in the robot data. SuSIE performs uniquely well in Scene B, as it is the
only method that can consistently grasp the bell pepper.
In Scene C, while SuSIE still achieves the best performance, RT-2-X comes in a close second. We
hypothesize that this is because — in contrast to Scene B — all of the objects in Scene C are easy
to grasp. Therefore, the low-level precision of the policy is less important, which is the primary
weakness of RT-2-X, as we discuss further in the next section. Qualitatively, we observed that the
failure cases in Scene C for both SuSIE and RT-2-X were almost always imprecise manipulations
(failed grasps or early dropping) rather than semantic misunderstanding; of the 4 objects, the tooth-
paste is the most difficult to grasp, which is why its success rate is the lowest. That is, both methods
solve the semantic understanding component of the tasks, but SuSIE’s improved low-level precision
allows it to perform slightly better.
The performance of LCBC is as expected: since it is trained only on BridgeData V2, it has no
way of grounding novel objects, and often puts the bell pepper in the wrong receptacle (in Scene
B) or attempts to grasp the wrong object (in Scene C). Surprisingly, it can recognize the wooden
bowl in Scene C, even though that exact object does not appear in the training data; we hypothesize
that the wooden bowl is distinctive enough to recognize from the word “bowl” alone combined
with the many other bowls in BridgeData V2. MOO underperforms expectations, even with its
privileged test-time information in the form of ground-truth bounding boxes. We hypothesize that,
despite our best attempts, the target objects and bounding boxes extracted at train time are noisy
due to the unstructured nature of BridgeData V2 and therefore only serve to confuse the policy (see
Appendix A.2.1). UniPi’s poor performance is due to the video model often producing temporally
inconsistent frames (see Appendix C).

                                                     8
Figure 3: (Visualizing rollouts) Visualized rollouts from SuSIE, RT-2-X, and Oracle GCBC on the task “put
the yellow bell pepper in the ceramic bowl” from Scene B. While RT-2-X and Oracle GCBC fail to grasp the
object, the generated subgoals from SuSIE precisely guide the low-level controller, improving low-level skill
execution for difficult manipulation tasks.


                              Task                       Oracle GCBC        SuSIE (Ours)
                              Eggplant on plate                0.7                1.0
                              Carrot on plate                  0.8                0.9
                Scene A       Eggplant in pot                  1.0                0.7
                              Average                          0.83              0.87
                              Bell pepper in pot               0.1                0.5
                Scene B       Bell pepper in bowl              0.0                0.5
                              Average                          0.05              0.50
                              Toothpaste in bowl               0.7                0.6
                              Crayon in bowl                   1.0                1.0
                Scene C       Spoon in bowl                    0.8                0.9
                              Bowl to top                      0.6                1.0
                              Average                          0.78              0.88
                              Move slider right/left           0.52              0.86
                              Turn on/off light bulb           0.74              0.96
                CALVIN        Open/close drawer                1.00              0.98
                              Turn on/off LED                  0.36              1.00
                              Average                          0.66              0.95
Table 3: (Comparison to GCBC with oracle goals) Executing generated subgoals improves performance
even compared to executing privileged ground-truth final goals.

5.3   D OES S U SIE I MPROVE P RECISION AND L OW-L EVEL S KILL E XECUTION ?

Our real-world and simulated results clearly demonstrate the efficacy of SuSIE in executing novel
language commands in a variety of scenes. In Section 5.2, we hypothesize that the advantage of
SuSIE is twofold: semantic generalization due to Internet and video pretraining, and low-level pre-
cision due to subgoal guidance. In this section, we aim to validate the latter half of this hypothesis.
To this end, we train an Oracle GCBC policy, which is identical to the low-level policy in SuSIE
except that it is trained with a goal horizon that extends to the end of each trajectory. At test time, we
provide the policy with a privileged real goal image of the fully completed task, eliding the need for


                                                     9
               Task                    BridgeData Only      BridgeData + Something-Something
               Bell pepper in pot             0.2                            0.5
    Scene B    Bell pepper in bowl            0.4                            0.5
               Average                       0.30                           0.50
               Toothpaste in bowl             0.7                            0.6
               Crayon in bowl                 0.9                            1.0
    Scene C    Spoon in bowl                  0.9                            0.9
               Bowl to top                    0.7                            1.0
               Average                       0.80                           0.88
Table 4: (Comparison to BridgeData-only subgoal generation model) Cotraining the subgoal generation
model on the Something-Something dataset improves performance in Scenes B and C, which are unseen in
BridgeData V2.

any semantic understanding. Thus, the only advantage of SuSIE over Oracle GCBC is the subgoal
guidance, while SuSIE is disadvantaged by additionally needing to interpret the language instruction
and generate subgoals for the correct task.
As demonstrated in Table 3, although Oracle GCBC is a strong baseline, SuSIE is still the best-
performing method on average. In particular, we observed that Oracle GCBC is still unable to grasp
the bell pepper in Scene B due to a lack of low-level precision. Figure 3 provides a qualitative
visualization of SuSIE grasping the bell pepper while Oracle GCBC and RT-2-X fail to do so. These
results validate the hypothesis that, in addition to enabling semantic generalization, SuSIE also
improves low-level precision and dexterity by decomposing the problem into a two-level hierarchy.
5.4 A RE I NTERNET AND V IDEO T RAINING C RUCIAL FOR Z ERO -S HOT G ENERALIZATION ?
Finally, we conduct an experiment to understand the effect of both Internet-scale pretraining (in the
form of InstructPix2Pix initialization) and video cotraining (in the form of training on BridgeData
V2 and Something-Something simultaneously). We train two additional subgoal generation models:
one robot-only model trained with InstructPix2Pix initialization but only on BridgeData V2, and one
from-scratch model trained without InstructPix2Pix initialization at all. The from-scratch model
uses the same frozen text encoder, image encoder, and UNet architecture as InstructPix2Pix, but
initializes the UNet with random weights.
We present sample generations from these models in Figure 4. The generations of the from-scratch
model are consistently low-quality, either misunderstanding the task, producing significant artifacts,
or failing to edit the image at all; this demonstrates the importance of initializing from Internet-
scale pretrained weights. As one might expect, the BridgeData-only model is on par with the full
Something-Something model on in-distribution tasks, which come from the BridgeData V2 val-
idation set. However, on out-of-distribution tasks, the BridgeData-only model has an increased
propensity to hallucinate background items or misunderstand the task. We found that for moving
the wooden bowl, in particular, the full Something-Something model is the only one that can produce
fully correct subgoals.
As additional evidence, we present a quantitative evaluation of the BridgeData-only model on the
tasks from Scenes B and C in Table 4. In real-world task execution, the difference between the
BridgeData-only model and the full Something-Something model is not as pronounced as in the
qualitative samples. This is because we find that the low-level goal-conditioned policy is fairly
robust to hallucinations of background items, suggesting that it primarily attends to the gripper pose
and the target object. However, the overall increased quality of the subgoals from the full model still
produces a small quantitative improvement on average.

6   D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
We presented a method for robotic control from language instructions that generates subgoals to
guide a low-level goal-conditioned policy. The subgoals are generated by an image-editing diffusion
model finetuned on video data. This system improves both zero-shot generalization to new objects
and the overall precision of the policy because the subgoal model incorporates semantic benefits
from pretraining and commands the low-level policy with fine-grained guidance. Our experiments
show that SuSIE improves over prior techniques on the CALVIN benchmark and improves visual


                                                    10
Figure 4: (Comparison of subgoal quality) A comparison between 3 subgoal generation models: one trained
on both robot and video data (Bridge + Smthn-Smthn), used throughout this paper; one trained on robot data
only (Bridge Only); and one trained without InstructPix2Pix initialization (From Scratch). The top half (In
Distribution) comes from the BridgeData V2 validation set, while the bottom half (Out of Distribution) comes
from our evaluation Scenes B and C, unseen in BridgeData V2. Both Internet-scale pretraining and video
cotraining and important for generating high-quality subgoals, especially in the zero-shot generalization setting.


                                                       11
generalization and low-level control on real-world manipulation tasks. In the real world, SuSIE
outperforms language-conditioned behavioral cloning, a privileged goal-conditioned policy that gets
access to a ground-truth final goal, as well the state-of-the-art instruction-following approach, RT-2-
X, which is trained on more than an order of magnitude more robot data (over 1.1 million trajectories
for RT-2-X, vs. 60k for ours).
Our method is simple and provides good performance, but it does have limitations that suggest
promising directions for future work. For instance, the diffusion model and the low-level policy are
trained separately, meaning the diffusion model is unaware of the capabilities of the low-level policy
— it is trained on the same data, but assumes that anything that is reachable in the data can also be
reached by the policy. We hypothesize that performance can be improved by making the diffusion
model aware of the low-level policy’s capabilities. More broadly, we found the performance of
our method to often be bottlenecked by the performance of the low-level policy, suggesting that
addressing either of these limitations might lead to a more performant method for importing Internet-
scale knowledge into robotic manipulation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Quan Vuong, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karl Pertsch, and Oleg Rybkin for their feedback on
earlier versions of the paper. We thank Anurag Ajay, Zoey Chen, and Quan Vuong for their support
with baseline approaches. Aviral Kumar thanks Abhishek Gupta, Sherry Yang, and Boyi Li for
informative discussions. We also thank the TRC program from Google Cloud for their cloud TPU
donations that were crucial for running our experiments.
This research was partly supported by the Office of Naval Research through N00014-22-1-2773
and N00014-20-1-2383, AFOSR FA9550-22-1-0273, and NSF grant IIS-2150826. Kevin Black and
Pranav Atreya are supported by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. Mitsuhiko Nakamoto is
supported by the Nakajima Foundation Fellowship.


R EFERENCES
 [1] Anurag Ajay, Yilun Du, Abhi Gupta, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Tommi S. Jaakkola, and Pulkit
     Agrawal. Is conditional generative modeling all you need for decision making? In The
     Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://
     openreview.net/forum?id=sP1fo2K9DFG.
 [2] Anurag Ajay, Seungwook Han, Yilun Du, Shaung Li, Abhi Gupta, Tommi Jaakkola, Josh
     Tenenbaum, Leslie Kaelbling, Akash Srivastava, and Pulkit Agrawal. Compositional founda-
     tion models for hierarchical planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08587, 2023.
 [3] Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Suraj Nair, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
     and Dumitru Erhan. Fitvid: Overfitting in pixel-level video prediction. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2106.13195, 2020.
 [4] Chethan Bhateja, Derek Guo, Dibya Ghosh, Anika Singh, Manan Tomar, Quan Ho Vuong,
     Yevgen Chebotar, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. Robotic offline rl from internet videos
     via value-function pre-training. 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
     CorpusID:262217278.
 [5] Greg Brockman, Atty Eleti, Elie Georges, Joanne Jang, Logan Kilpatrick, Rachel
     Lim, Luke Miller, and Michelle Pokrass.       Introducing ChatGPT and Whis-
     per APIs.     OpenAI Blog, 2023.         URL https://openai.com/blog/
     introducing-chatgpt-and-whisper-apis.
 [6] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea
     Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1:
     Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
 [7] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof
     Choromanski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2:
     Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.


                                                  12
 [8] Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel
     Ho, Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding
     language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 287–318. PMLR, 2023.
 [9] Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow
     image editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
     and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18392–18402, 2023.
[10] Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin, Pieter
     Abbeel, Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning
     via sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01345, 2021.
[11] Zoey Chen, Sho Kiami, Abhishek Gupta, and Vikash Kumar. Genaug: Retargeting behaviors
     to unseen situations via generative augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06671, 2023.
[12] Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and
     Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2303.04137, 2023.
[13] Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li,
     Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned
     language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
[14] Open X-Embodiment Collaboration, Abhishek Padalkar, Acorn Pooley, Ajinkya Jain, Alex
     Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anikait Singh, Anthony
     Brohan, Antonin Raffin, Ayzaan Wahid, Ben Burgess-Limerick, Beomjoon Kim, Bernhard
     Schölkopf, Brian Ichter, Cewu Lu, Charles Xu, Chelsea Finn, Chenfeng Xu, Cheng Chi, Chen-
     guang Huang, Christine Chan, Chuer Pan, Chuyuan Fu, Coline Devin, Danny Driess, Deepak
     Pathak, Dhruv Shah, Dieter Büchler, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Dorsa Sadigh, Edward Johns, Fed-
     erico Ceola, Fei Xia, Freek Stulp, Gaoyue Zhou, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Gautam Salhotra,
     Ge Yan, Giulio Schiavi, Hao Su, Hao-Shu Fang, Haochen Shi, Heni Ben Amor, Henrik I
     Christensen, Hiroki Furuta, Homer Walke, Hongjie Fang, Igor Mordatch, Ilija Radosavovic,
     Isabel Leal, Jacky Liang, Jaehyung Kim, Jan Schneider, Jasmine Hsu, Jeannette Bohg, Jeffrey
     Bingham, Jiajun Wu, Jialin Wu, Jianlan Luo, Jiayuan Gu, Jie Tan, Jihoon Oh, Jitendra Ma-
     lik, Jonathan Tompson, Jonathan Yang, Joseph J. Lim, João Silvério, Junhyek Han, Kanishka
     Rao, Karl Pertsch, Karol Hausman, Keegan Go, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Ken Goldberg,
     Kendra Byrne, Kenneth Oslund, Kento Kawaharazuka, Kevin Zhang, Keyvan Majd, Krishan
     Rana, Krishnan Srinivasan, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Lerrel Pinto, Liam Tan, Lionel Ott, Lisa
     Lee, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Maximilian Du, Michael Ahn, Mingtong Zhang, Mingyu Ding,
     Mohan Kumar Srirama, Mohit Sharma, Moo Jin Kim, Naoaki Kanazawa, Nicklas Hansen,
     Nicolas Heess, Nikhil J Joshi, Niko Suenderhauf, Norman Di Palo, Nur Muhammad Mahi
     Shafiullah, Oier Mees, Oliver Kroemer, Pannag R Sanketi, Paul Wohlhart, Peng Xu, Pierre
     Sermanet, Priya Sundaresan, Quan Vuong, Rafael Rafailov, Ran Tian, Ria Doshi, Roberto
     Martı́n-Martı́n, Russell Mendonca, Rutav Shah, Ryan Hoque, Ryan Julian, Samuel Busta-
     mante, Sean Kirmani, Sergey Levine, Sherry Moore, Shikhar Bahl, Shivin Dass, Shuran Song,
     Sichun Xu, Siddhant Haldar, Simeon Adebola, Simon Guist, Soroush Nasiriany, Stefan Schaal,
     Stefan Welker, Stephen Tian, Sudeep Dasari, Suneel Belkhale, Takayuki Osa, Tatsuya Harada,
     Tatsuya Matsushima, Ted Xiao, Tianhe Yu, Tianli Ding, Todor Davchev, Tony Z. Zhao, Travis
     Armstrong, Trevor Darrell, Vidhi Jain, Vincent Vanhoucke, Wei Zhan, Wenxuan Zhou, Wol-
     fram Burgard, Xi Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Xinghao Zhu, Xuanlin Li, Yao Lu, Yevgen Chebotar,
     Yifan Zhou, Yifeng Zhu, Ying Xu, Yixuan Wang, Yonatan Bisk, Yoonyoung Cho, Youngwoon
     Lee, Yuchen Cui, Yueh hua Wu, Yujin Tang, Yuke Zhu, Yunzhu Li, Yusuke Iwasawa, Yutaka
     Matsuo, Zhuo Xu, and Zichen Jeff Cui. Open X-Embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and
     RT-X models. https://robotics-transformer-x.github.io, 2023.
[15] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
     Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied
     multimodal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
[16] Yilun Du, Mengjiao Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Dale
     Schuurmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00111, 2023.


                                                 13
[17] Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Sudeep Dasari, Annie Xie, Alex Lee, and Sergey Levine. Visual
     foresight: Model-based deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic control. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1812.00568, 2018.
[18] Yuying Ge, Annabella Macaluso, Li Erran Li, Ping Luo, and Xiaolong Wang. Policy adaptation
     from foundation model feedback. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
     Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19059–19069, 2023.
[19] Raghav Goyal, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Vincent Michalski, Joanna Materzynska, Susanne
     Westphal, Heuna Kim, Valentin Haenel, Ingo Fruend, Peter Yianilos, Moritz Mueller-Freitag,
     et al. The” something something” video database for learning and evaluating visual common
     sense. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 5842–
     5850, 2017.
[20] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit
     Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the
     world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
     Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995–19012, 2022.
[21] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control:
     Learning behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
[22] Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse do-
     mains through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
[23] Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Ilya Kostrikov, Michael Janner, Jakub Grudzien Kuba, and Sergey
     Levine. Idql: Implicit q-learning as an actor-critic method with diffusion policies. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2304.10573, 2023.
[24] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.          Classifier-free diffusion guidance.    arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
[25] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Ad-
     vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
[26] Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko,
     Diederik P. Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J. Fleet, and Tim Salimans. Ima-
     gen video: High definition video generation with diffusion models, 2022.
[27] Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and
     David J Fleet. Video diffusion models. arXiv:2204.03458, 2022.
[28] Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as
     zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2201.07207, 2022.
[29] Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng,
     Jonathan Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied
     reasoning through planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
[30] Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey
     Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning.
     In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 991–1002. PMLR, 2022.
[31] Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big
     sequence modeling problem. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
[32] Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for
     flexible behavior synthesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
[33] Aishwarya Kamath, Mannat Singh, Yann LeCun, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, and Nicolas
     Carion. Mdetr-modulated detection for end-to-end multi-modal understanding. In Proceedings
     of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1780–1790, 2021.
[34] Ivan Kapelyukh, Vitalis Vosylius, and Edward Johns. Dall-e-bot: Introducing web-scale diffu-
     sion models to robotics. 2023.
[35] Siddharth Karamcheti, Suraj Nair, Annie S Chen, Thomas Kollar, Chelsea Finn, Dorsa Sadigh,
     and Percy Liang. Language-driven representation learning for robotics. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2302.12766, 2023.

                                                14
[36] Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International
     Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
[37] Alex X Lee, Anusha Nagabandi, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Stochastic latent actor-
     critic: Deep reinforcement learning with a latent variable model. Advances in Neural Informa-
     tion Processing Systems, 33:741–752, 2020.
[38] Donghwan Lee and Niao He.            Stochastic primal-dual q-learning.      arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1810.08298, 2018.
[39] Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence,
     and Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023
     IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500. IEEE,
     2023.
[40] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
[41] Corey Lynch and Pierre Sermanet. Language conditioned imitation learning over unstructured
     data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.07648, 2020.
[42] Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Vaidehi Som, Vikash Kumar, Amy Zhang, Osbert Bastani,
     and Dinesh Jayaraman. Liv: Language-image representations and rewards for robotic control.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00958, 2023.
[43] Zhao Mandi, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Vincent Moens, Shuran Song, Aravind Rajeswaran, and
     Vikash Kumar. Cacti: A framework for scalable multi-task multi-scene visual imitation learn-
     ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05711, 2022.
[44] Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, and Wolfram Burgard. What matters in language conditioned
     robotic imitation learning over unstructured data. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7
     (4):11205–11212, 2022.
[45] Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, Erick Rosete-Beas, and Wolfram Burgard. Calvin: A benchmark
     for language-conditioned policy learning for long-horizon robot manipulation tasks. IEEE
     Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L), 7(3):7327–7334, 2022.
[46] Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, Austin Stone, Maxim Neumann, Dirk Weissenborn,
     Alexey Dosovitskiy, Aravindh Mahendran, Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Zhuoran Shen,
     et al. Simple open-vocabulary object detection. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
     pp. 728–755. Springer, 2022.
[47] Vivek Myers, Andre He, Kuan Fang, Homer Walke, Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Ching-An
     Cheng, Mihai Jalobeanu, Andrey Kolobov, Anca Dragan, and Sergey Levine. Goal repre-
     sentations for instruction following: A semi-supervised language interface to control. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2307.00117, 2023.
[48] Suraj Nair and Chelsea Finn. Hierarchical foresight: Self-supervised learning of long-horizon
     tasks via visual subgoal generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05829, 2019.
[49] Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhi Gupta. R3m: A
     universal visual representation for robot manipulation. ArXiv, abs/2203.12601, 2022.
[50] Alexander Pashevich, Robin Strudel, Igor Kalevatykh, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid.
     Learning to augment synthetic images for sim2real policy transfer. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
     tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 2651–2657. IEEE, 2019.
[51] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. FiLM:
     Visual Reasoning with a General Conditioning Layer, December 2017.
[52] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
     wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable
     visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine
     learning, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
[53] Rafael Rafailov, Tianhe Yu, A. Rajeswaran, and Chelsea Finn. Offline reinforcement learning
     from images with latent space models. Learning for Decision Making and Control (L4DC),
     2021.


                                               15
[54] Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Stephen L James, and Pieter Abbeel. Reinforcement learning with
     action-free pre-training from videos. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
     19561–19579. PMLR, 2022.
[55] Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for
     robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.
[56] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
[57] Austin Stone, Ted Xiao, Yao Lu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kuang-Huei Lee, Quan Vuong,
     Paul Wohlhart, Brianna Zitkovich, Fei Xia, Chelsea Finn, et al. Open-world object manipula-
     tion using pre-trained vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00905, 2023.
[58] Ruben Villegas, Arkanath Pathak, Harini Kannan, Dumitru Erhan, Quoc V Le, and Honglak
     Lee. High fidelity video prediction with large stochastic recurrent neural networks. Advances
     in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[59] Homer Walke, Kevin Black, Abraham Lee, Moo Jin Kim, Max Du, Chongyi Zheng, Tony
     Zhao, Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Quan Vuong, Andre He, Vivek Myers, Kuan Fang, Chelsea
     Finn, and Sergey Levine. Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot learning at scale. In Conference
     on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023.
[60] Philipp Wu, Alejandro Escontrela, Danijar Hafner, Pieter Abbeel, and Ken Goldberg. Day-
     dreamer: World models for physical robot learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp.
     2226–2240. PMLR, 2023.
[61] Yinfei Yang, Daniel Cer, Amin Ahmad, Mandy Guo, Jax Law, Noah Constant, Gustavo Her-
     nandez Abrego, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, Yun-Hsuan Sung, et al. Multilingual Universal Sentence
     Encoder for Semantic Retrieval, July 2019.
[62] Sihyun Yu, Kihyuk Sohn, Subin Kim, and Jinwoo Shin. Video probabilistic diffusion models
     in projected latent space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
     and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18456–18466, 2023.
[63] Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Rafael Rafailov, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea
     Finn. Combo: Conservative offline model-based policy optimization. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2102.08363, 2021.
[64] Tianhe Yu, Ted Xiao, Austin Stone, Jonathan Tompson, Anthony Brohan, Su Wang, Jaspiar
     Singh, Clayton Tan, Jodilyn Peralta, Brian Ichter, et al. Scaling robot learning with semanti-
     cally imagined experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11550, 2023.
[65] Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained biman-
     ual manipulation with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705, 2023.


                                                16
                                            CALVIN         Smthn-Smthn       Bridge
                           kmin (Eq. 1)         20              11             11
                           kmax (Eq. 1)         22              14             14
                             kδ (Eq. 2)          2             N/A             6

                                                     CALVIN      Real-world
                                  ktest (Alg. 1)       20             20

Table 5: (Goal sampling hyperparameters) The first two hyperparameters, kmin and kmax , are used for training
the image-editing model. kδ is used for training the low-level policy. All 3 of these correspond to a particular
dataset. ktest is a test-time hyperparameter that corresponds to an evaluation setup.



A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We provide implementation details for SuSIE and the baselines. Table 5 documents goal sampling
hyperparameters.


A.1     S U SIE IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

A.1.1    I MAGE - EDITING DIFFUSION MODEL

We finetune InstructPix2Pix [9] using similar hyperparameters to the initial InstructPix2Pix training.
We use the AdamW optimizer [40] with a learning rate of 1e-4, a linear warmup of 800 steps, and
weight decay of 0.01. We track an exponential moving average (EMA) of the model parameters
with a decay rate of 0.999 and use the EMA parameters at test time. We train for 40k steps with a
batch size of 1024 on a single v4-64 TPU pod, which takes 17 hours.
For simulation, we train the model exclusively on the CALVIN dataset. For real-world experiments,
we cotrain with a sampling mixture of 60% Something-Something and 40% BridgeData V2.
At test time, we use an image guidance weight of 2.5 and a text guidance weight of 7.5. We use the
DDIM sampler [56] with 50 sampling steps.


A.1.2    G OAL - REACHING POLICY

We use a diffusion model for our goal-reaching policy since recent work has shown that diffusion-
based policies can better capture multi-modality in robot data [12, 23], leading to improved per-
formance across a variety of tasks. In our implementation (which follows Walke et al. [59]), the
observation and goal image are stacked channel-wise before being passed into a ResNet-50 im-
age encoder. This image encoding is used to condition a diffusion process that models the action
distribution. The diffusion process uses an MLP with 3 256-unit layers and residual connections.
Following Chi et al. [12], rather than predicting a single action, we predict a sequence of 4 actions
to encourage temporal consistency. We use the Adam optimizer [36] with a learning rate of 3e-4
and a linear warmup of 2000 steps. We train with a batch size of 256 for 445k steps on a single v4-8
TPU VM, which takes 15 hours. We augment the observation and goal with random crops, random
resizing, and color jitter. For goal sampling, we use kδ = 6, meaning we sample goals uniformly
from the range [0, 20), since the corresponding kmax used with BridgeData V2 is 14 (see Table 5).
At test time, we have several options for how to predict and execute action sequences. Chi et al.
[12] use receding horizon control, sampling k-length action sequences and only executing some
of the actions before sampling a new sequence. This strategy can make the policy more reactive.
However, we found that the robot behavior was quite jerky as the policy switched between different
modes in the action distribution with each sample. Instead, we use a temporal ensembling strategy
similar to Zhao et al. [65]. We predict a new 4-action sequence at each timestep and execute the
dimension-wise mean of the last 4 predictions for that timestep.


                                                      17
A.2     BASELINE IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

A.2.1    MOO
MOO [57] utilizes a mask to represent the target objects and incorporates it as an additional channel
in the observation. Specifically, they train a language-conditioned policy that takes a 4-channel
image and a language command as inputs. To acquire the mask for target objects, the OWL-ViT [46]
object detector is employed. This detector is an open-vocabulary object detection model, pretrained
on Internet-scale datasets, and it is used to extract the bounding boxes of the objects of interest from
the image. For tasks like “move X to Y,” MOO extracts the bounding box for X, representing the
object of interest, and Y, indicating the target place. A mask is then created where the pixel at the
center of the predicted bounding box is assigned a value of 1.0 for X and 0.5 for Y.
Extracting object entities from BridgeData V2 language annotations. In order to obtain the
mask, it is necessary to extract the entities corresponding to the object of interest, denoted as X, and
the target place, Y, from the language command. In the MOO paper, the authors assume that the lan-
guage in their dataset is structured in a way that facilitates easy separation of X and Y. Specifically,
they employ a dataset that exclusively consists of language annotations such as “pick X,” “move X
near Y,” “knock X over,” “place X upright,” and “place X into Y.”
Given that the language annotations in BridgeData V2 are diverse and unstructured, it is challenging
to naively extract X and Y. We utilized OpenAI’s gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct model [5] to
extract the object of interest and the target place (if any) from the language annotation and input
them into OWL-ViT to create masks. It is worth noting that due to the unstructured nature of
BridgeData V2, the extracted bounding boxes in training data are sometimes incorrect as shown in
Figure 5. We then trained a mask-conditioned LCBC policy using the same architecture as described
in Appendix A.2.3. Following MOO, we removed X and Y from the prompt and replaced the entity
X with “object of interest” and the entity Y with “target place”. For example, given the language
prompt “put the eggplant in the pot”, we use a modified prompt “put object of interest in target
place” as the input to the policy during both train and test time.
Test time. During test time, we manually give ground-truth masks to the policy. To enable this, we
build a simple interface on the robot machine, allowing the evaluator to create the masks by clicking
on the initial camera image at the beginning of each trial.


Figure 5: (Examples of extracted bounding boxes for MOO). Despite our best attempts, the bounding boxes
extracted at train time are noisy due to the unstructured nature of BridgeData V2. This might have led to MOO’s
poor performance in our evaluations.


                                                      18
A.2.2    U NI P I
UniPi [16] trains a video diffusion model pθ (τ | s0 , l) to generate a sequence of frames given a
language command and an initial frame. The original paper employs the model architecture from
Imagen Video [26, 27]. To achieve higher resolution and longer videos for their real-world results,
the authors leverage a 1.7B 3D UNet and four pretrained super-resolution models from Imagen
Video, with 1.7B, 1.7B, 1.4B, and 1.2B parameters, respectively. Since the original models and
code are not publicly available, we tried to replicate their approach in two different ways.
UniPi (HiP, Ajay et al. [2]) For the second approach, we followed the UniPi replication in Ajay
et al. [2]. We trained a latent video diffusion model from PVDM [62], building upon the codebase
https://github.com/sihyun-yu/PVDM where we added first-frame conditioning. We first
trained the video autoencoder to project a video of size 16×128×128 into a latent space, followed by
training a PVDM-L model that uses a 2D UNet architecture. We used a Flan-T5-Base [13] encoder
to obtain the language embeddings.
UniPi (Ours). We implemented a 3D UNet video diffusion model, following Ho et al. [27, 26] and
adding UniPi’s first-frame conditioning. Due to limited compute, we did not train spatial/temporal
super-resolution models; instead, we trained a 3D UNet-based diffusion model to directly generate
images with a resolution of 128 × 128. The model includes 4 residual blocks, with (input channels,
output channels) as follows: (64, 64), (64, 128), (128, 256), and (256, 640). The model is trained
to produce the trajectory with a fixed horizon of 10 frames τt = {st , st+1 , . . . , st+9 } conditioned
on the current frame st and language command. We used a frozen pretrained CLIP [52] encoder to
obtain the language embeddings.
Data and training details. Following the UniPi baseline from HiP [2], we utilized Ego4D [20]
to instill the model with Internet-scale knowledge. For UniPi (Ours), we first pretrained the video
model on Ego4D for 270K steps, and finetuned it on the robotics dataset (CALVIN for simulation
and BridgeData V2 for the real world) for an additional 200K steps. We used a batch size of 4
during training. For UniPi (HiP), we jointly trained a single model on Ego4D, BridgeData V2, and
CALVIN at the same time. The autoencoder was trained for 85K steps, and the PVDM-L model was
trained for 200K steps. We used a batch size of 8 during training.
Inverse model and test time control. To extract actions from generated videos, we trained a Gaus-
sian inverse dynamics model πϕ (a | st , st+1 ) to predict the action from two adjacent frames. The
model consists of a ResNet-50 image encoder and 3 256-unit MLP layers. During test time, given
the current observation st and the language command l, we synthesize H image frames from the
video model and apply the inverse dynamics model to obtain the corresponding H − 1 actions. The
predicted actions are executed, and we generate a new video from st+H−1 and repeat the process.
Generated videos. While the quality of the video model trained on the simulation dataset is good
enough for solving the tasks on the CALVIN benchmark as shown in Table 1, we found that it
is nontrivial to obtain high-quality generations for the real-world scenes. We show examples of
generations in Appendix C.

A.2.3    L ANGUAGE - CONDITIONED BEHAVIOR CLONING (LCBC)
For the LCBC baseline, we use the same architecture and hyperparameters as the low-level policy in
SuSIE. We encode the language instruction using MUSE [61] and feed it into the ResNet-50 image
encoder using FiLM conditioning [51]. We found that this policy outperformed the LCBC policy
used in Walke et al. [59] and Myers et al. [47] (which was not a diffusion policy), as well as the RT-1
architecture [6] trained on BridgeData V2 (also appearing in Walke et al. [59]).

B    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
CALVIN. We follow the evaluation setup from Mees et al. [45]. During each trial, the policy gets
360 timesteps total to complete a chain of 5 instructions, only moving on to the next instruction once
the previous one is completed. Subsequent instructions in each language chain are chosen by the
simulator based on environment affordances after completing the previous language instruction. Re-
sults in Table 1 are averaged over 100 trajectories, enabling direct comparison with results from Ge
et al. [18], which are also averaged over 100 trajectories. Results for UniPi (HiP) and UniPi (Ours)


                                                  19
were averaged over 25 trajectories, due to the computational cost associated with querying the video
diffusion models, and the relatively short video generation horizon (10 timesteps) requiring frequent
regeneration.
To obtain comparisons with an oracle GCBC policy in Table 3, we sampled ground truth goal image
states from the simulator to feed to the oracle policy by manually resetting the environment internal
state to the state corresponding to the goal being achieved. This manual resetting process was only
amenable for certain tasks in CALVIN, namely the ones in Table 3. Results in the table correspond
to a total of 200 evaluation trajectories.
Real world. Figure 2 provides an exhaustive list of all 9 tasks we evaluate in the real world. We
conduct 10 trials per task and report the average success rates. We vary the positions and orientations
of various objects between trials, but use the same set of positions and orientations for evaluating
all methods. In Scene A, we change the positions and orientations of the plate, eggplant, and carrot
every trial; the pot always remains in the drying rack. For “put carrot on plate”, we start the carrot
in the pot for 4 out of 10 trials, and in the sink otherwise. The eggplant always starts in the sink.
In Scene B, we change the positions of the bell pepper, orange pot, and ceramic bowl every trial,
performing 5 trials where the target container is closer to the target object and 5 trials where it is
further away. In Scene C, for “put X in the wooden bowl,” we change the positions of the 3 objects
every trial while the wooden bowl remains on the left; we also randomize the rotations of the objects
up to 45 degrees from vertical. For “move the wooden bowl to the top of the table,” we change the
horizontal position of the bowl every trial, but it always starts at the bottom of the table.

C    Q UALTITATIVE E XAMPLES OF V IDEO G ENERATION
Figure 6 shows the video frames generated by the UniPi (HiP) model. The model fails to generate
the robot’s gripper accurately and consistently produces blurry results. For this reason, we did
not evaluate this model on the real robot. Instead, we evaluated UniPi (Ours) model for the real-
world tasks. Figure 7 shows examples of success and failure cases of the test trials. While the
robot succeeded in a few trials, we observed that in most cases the generated videos suffered from
hallucination and physical inconsistency, which led to UniPi’s poor performance.


Figure 6: (UniPi (HiP) example generations). Observe that the model is not able to generate a clear robot
gripper, and produces videos that are blurry and visually poor.


                                                   20
Figure 7: (UniPi (Ours) example generations and the resulting robot behaviors). While the robot suc-
ceeded in a few trials, we observed that in most cases the generated videos suffered from hallucination and
physical inconsistency, which confused the low-level policy.


                                                    21
D    Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES OF S U SIE ON CALVIN


Figure 8: (Example rollouts in CALVIN.) Visualization of SuSIE-generated subgoals and trajectory rollouts
on a successful 5-instruction language chain in CALVIN.


                                                   22
