Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P RIORITIZED S OFT Q-D ECOMPOSITION FOR
L EXICOGRAPHIC R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Finn Rietz∗              Erik Schaffernicht     Stefan Heinrich                  Johannes A. Stork
 Örebro University       Örebro University     IT University of Copenhagen      Örebro University
 Sweden                   Sweden                 Denmark                          Sweden



                                               A BSTRACT

            Reinforcement learning (RL) for complex tasks remains a challenge, primarily due
            to the difficulties of engineering scalar reward functions and the inherent ineffi-
            ciency of training models from scratch. Instead, it would be better to specify com-
            plex tasks in terms of elementary subtasks and to reuse subtask solutions whenever
            possible. In this work, we address continuous space lexicographic multi-objective
            RL problems, consisting of prioritized subtasks, which are notoriously difficult to
            solve. We show that these can be scalarized with a subtask transformation and
            then solved incrementally using value decomposition. Exploiting this insight, we
            propose prioritized soft Q-decomposition (PSQD), a novel algorithm for learn-
            ing and adapting subtask solutions under lexicographic priorities in continuous
            state-action spaces. PSQD offers the ability to reuse previously learned subtask
            solutions in a zero-shot composition, followed by an adaptation step. Its ability
            to use retained subtask training data for offline learning eliminates the need for
            new environment interaction during adaptation. We demonstrate the efficacy of
            our approach by presenting successful learning, reuse, and adaptation results for
            both low- and high-dimensional simulated robot control tasks, as well as offline
            learning results. In contrast to baseline approaches, PSQD does not trade off be-
            tween conflicting subtasks or priority constraints and satisfies subtask priorities
            during learning. PSQD provides an intuitive framework for tackling complex RL
            problems, offering insights into the inner workings of the subtask composition.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) for complex tasks is challenging because as practitioners we must
design a scalar-valued reward function that induces the desired behavior (Ha et al., 2021; Tessler
et al., 2019; Irpan, 2018) and we must expensively learn each task from scratch. Instead, it might
be more suitable to model complex tasks as several simpler subtasks (Gábor et al., 1998; Roijers
et al., 2013; Nguyen et al., 2020; Hayes et al., 2022), and more efficient to reuse or adapt subtask
solutions that were learned previously (Arnekvist et al., 2019; Hausman et al., 2018; Finn et al.,
2017). To prevent potentially conflicting subtasks from deteriorating the overall solution, we can
impose lexicographic priorities on the subtasks (Skalse et al., 2022; Gábor et al., 1998; Zhang et al.,
2022). This means ordering all subtasks by priority and forbidding lower-priority subtasks from
worsening the performance of higher-priority subtasks, which is similar to null-space projection
approaches for complex multi-task control problems (Dietrich et al., 2015). In RL, this setting is
referred to as a lexicographic multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) problem.
However, state-of-the-art RL algorithms for continuous state and action spaces like Soft Q-Learning
(SQL) (Haarnoja et al., 2017), Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018b), or Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) do not support lexicographic MORL problems out of
the box and obvious extensions still trade off conflicting subtasks, leading to suboptimal solutions,
as we demonstrate in our experiments. Current lexicographic MORL algorithms like (Li & Czar-
necki, 2019; Zhang et al., 2022) enumerate actions and are therefore limited to discrete problems
or rely on constrained optimization methods that trade-off between optimizing subtask and prior-
ity objectives (Skalse et al., 2022). All these lexicographic algorithms learn a monolithic policy,
    ∗
        Corresponding author: finn.rietz@oru.se


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


precluding any interpretation or reuse of previously learned subtask solutions. Furthermore, it is un-
known what overall reward function these approaches actually optimize, which hampers principled
understanding of lexicographic MORL algorithms.
In this paper, we are the first to show that such complex, lexicographic MORL problems can be
scalarized (Roijers et al., 2013) and we propose prioritized soft Q-decomposition (PSQD), a learn-
ing algorithm that solves lexicographic MORL tasks in a decomposed fashion (Russell & Zimdars,
2003). For this, we proposed a subtask transformation that recovers the Q-function of the lexico-
graphic MORL problem as the sum of Q-functions of the transformed subtasks and so provides the
overall scalar reward function. PSQD computes this sum incrementally by learning and transforming
subtask Q-functions, beginning at the highest-priority subtask and step-by-step learning and adding
Q-functions for lower-priority subtasks. In every step, an arbiter ensures that the lower-priority sub-
tasks do not worsen already solved higher-priority subtasks and restricts the lower-priority subtask to
solutions within the so-called action indifference space of the higher-priority subtasks. PSQD pro-
vides a safe learning and exploration framework, which is crucial for many real-world scenarios, and
allows reuse and adaptation of separately learned subtask solutions to more complex, lexicographic
MORL task, which saves data and computation costs. The decomposable Q-function benefits inter-
pretability of the learned behavior by allowing analysis and inspection of subtask solutions and their
action indifference spaces.
The contributions of this paper are: (1) We show that lexicographic MORL problems can be scalar-
ized using our proposed subtask transformation. (2) We show how to reuse and adapt separately
learned subtask solutions to more complex, lexicographic MORL problems, starting from a priority-
respecting zero-shot composition solution. (3) We provide PSQD, an algorithm for lexicographic
MORL problems with continuous state-action spaces, that reuses both subtask solutions and retained
offline data.

2     P ROBLEM DEFINITION AND PRELIMINARIES
We formalize the complex lexicographic MORL problem (Skalse et al., 2022; Gábor et al., 1998)
as a Markov decision process (MDP) M ≡ (S, A, r, ps , γ,  ) consisting of state space S, action
space A, reward function r : S × A → Rn , and discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1]. The subtasks are
numbered i = 1, 2, . . . n and ranked with the transitive priority relation 1   2   . . . n with task
1 having the highest and task n having the lowest priority. Each dimension of the vector-valued
reward corresponds to one scalar subtask reward function [r(s, a)]i = ri (s, a). The discrete-time
dynamics are given by a conditional distribution ps (st+1 | st , at ) with st , st+1 ∈ S and at ∈ A.
We use (st , at ) ∼ ρπ to denote the state-action marginal induced by a policy π(at | st ).
Lexicographic subtask priorities can be defined by constraining the policy in each subtask i to stay
close to optimal (i.e., ε-optimal) for the next higher-priority task i − 1 (Skalse et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2022). Formally, such an ε-lexicographic MORL problem implies a set of allowed policies Πi
for each subtask i,
                     Πi = {π ∈ Πi−1 | 0max Ji−1 (π 0 ) − Ji−1 (π) ≤ εi−1 },                        (1)
                                         π ∈Πi−1

where Ji are performance criteria like value-functions, and 0 ≤ εi ∈ R are thresholds for each
subtask. However, it is not practical to compute the sets Πi explicitly when solving ε-lexicographic
MORL problems.
Current approaches solve ε-lexicographic MORL problems with constrained RL or incremental ac-
tion selection in discrete domains (Skalse et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022) and it is unclear what
equivalent scalar reward function these methods actually optimize (Skalse et al., 2022; Gábor et al.,
1998; Vamplew et al., 2022). In contrast, we transform the individual subtasks and their Q-functions
to implement the priority constraints in equation 1. This leads to an equivalent scalar reward func-
tion for the complex ε-lexicographic MORL problem. Our definition of the performance criteria Ji
in Sec. 3.1 is key to our incremental and decomposed learning approach with this reward function.

2.1   Q- DECOMPOSITION

Our goal is to reuse and adapt subtask solutions that were learned previously to new and more
complex ε-lexicographic MORL problems. For this, we require a decomposed learning algorithm


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that models individual subtask solutions and combines them to the solution of the complex ε-
lexicographic MORL problem.
Q-decomposition (Russell & Zimdars, 2003) is such an algorithm for MORLPproblems where the
                                                                                   n
complex task’s reward function is the sum of subtask rewards, rΣ (st , at ) = i=1 [r(st , at )]i . In-
stead of learning the sum Q-function, QΣ , the algorithm learns one Q-function Qi for each sub-
Pn and submits them to a central arbiter. The arbiter combines the Q-functions, QΣ (s, a) =
task
   i=1 Qi (s, a), and selects the maximizing action for its policy πΣ . Q-decomposition uses on-policy
SARSA-style (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Rummery & Niranjan, 1994) updates with the arbiter policy
πΣ to avoid illusion of control (Russell & Zimdars, 2003) or the attractor phenomenon Laroche et al.
(2017); van Seijen et al. (2017) in subtask learning.
Summing and scaling subtask rewards alone does not result in lexicographic priorities because
low-priority subtasks with sufficiently large reward scales can still dictate over high-priority sub-
tasks. Therefore, we cannot directly use the Q-decomposition algorithm for lexicographic MORL.
Our algorithm builds on Q-decomposition but we transform subtasks to ensure that reward- and
Q-functions can be summed up whilst implementing lexicographic priorities. To emphasize this
difference, we denote transformed subtask Q-functions by Q i , which estimate the long-term value
of transformed subtask rewards r i , suchPnthat the Q-function of the lexicographic MORL prob-
lem corresponds to Q1 2 ...n (s, a) =       i=1 Q i (s, a), or Q  for short. Qi and ri refer to the
untransformed subtask Q-functions and rewards in the lexicographic MORL problem.

2.2   M AXIMUM ENTROPY REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

We aim to solve ε-lexicographic MORL problems with continuous states and actions, but instead of
explicitly computing equation 1, we focus on identifying as many near optimal actions as possible,
such that lower-priority subtasks have more alternative actions to choose from. For this reason, we
use maximum entropy reinforcement learning (MaxEnt RL) (Ziebart et al., 2008; Haarnoja et al.,
2018b; 2017) for learning subtask policies πi and subtask Q-functions Qi . MaxEnt RL maximizes
the reward signal augmented by the Shannon entropy of the policy’s action distribution, H(at |
st ) = Eat ∼π(at |st ) [− log π(at | st )], i.e.,
                                      ∞
                                      X
                 ∗
                                            E(st ,at )∼ρπ γ t−1 r(st , at ) + αH(at | st ) ,

                πMaxEnt = arg max                                                                        (2)
                                  π
                                      t=1
where the scaler α can be used to determine the relative importance of the entropy term. This
improves exploration in multimodal problems but also prevents overly deterministic policies, which
is key for identifying many near-optimal actions. Following Haarnoja et al. (2017), we drop α
because it can be replaced with reward scaling. Importantly, the entropy term in the objective leads
to the following energy-based Boltzmann distribution as the optimal MaxEnt policy,
                            ∗
                           πMaxEnt (at | st ) = exp (Q∗soft (st , at ) − Vsoft
                                                                           ∗
                                                                               (st )),                   (3)
where Q∗soft (st , at ) acts as the negative energy and Vsoft∗
                                                                (st ) is the log-partition function. The soft
               ∗                                  ∗
Q-function Qsoft and soft value function Vsoft in equation 3 are given by
                                                           ∞
                                                           X
       Q∗soft (st , at ) = r(st , at ) + E(st+1 ,... )∼ρπ    γ l r(st+l , at+l ) + H(at+l | st+l ) ,

                                                                                                          (4)
                                                             l=1
                                                    Z
                                  ∗
                                Vsoft (st ) = log       exp(Q∗soft (st , a0 )) da0 ,                     (5)
                                                    A
                                                                                 ∗
where the entropy in equation 4 is based on the optimal MaxEnt policy πMaxEnt         . For sampling
actions, we can disregard the log-partition function in equation 3 and directly exploit the proportion-
ality relationship,
                                 ∗
                                πMaxEnt (at | st ) ∝ exp (Q∗soft (st , at )),                       (6)
between the policy and the soft Q-function, e.g., with Monte Carlo methods (Metropolis et al., 1953;
Hastings, 1970; Duane et al., 1987). We drop the MaxEnt and soft subscripts for the remainder of the
paper to avoid visual clutter. The soft Q-learning (Haarnoja et al., 2017) algorithm implements a soft
Bellman contraction operator and in practice learns a model for sampling the complex Boltzmann
distribution in equation 6. Our algorithm, PSQD, builds on soft Q-learning and combines it with
ε-lexicographic priorities as well as Q-decomposition from above.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     P RIORITIZED SOFT Q- DECOMPOSITION
In this section, we explain our approach for solving ε-lexicographic MORL problems. In Sec. 3.1,
we explain our subtask transformation for modeling ε-lexicographic priorities and show how it
scalarizes ε-lexicographic MORL problems. In Sec. 3.2, we derive our decomposed learning algo-
rithm, PSQD, for ε-lexicographic MORL problems and describe a practical version of this algorithm
for continuous spaces in Sec. 3.3.

3.1   S UBTASK TRANSFORMATION FOR LEXICOGRAPHIC PRIORITIES IN M AX E NT RL

Our goal is to learn a MaxEnt (arbiter) policy π  (a | s) ∝ exp(Q  (s, a)) for the ε-lexicographic
MORL problem that fulfills the constraint in equation 1. However, instead of explicitly represent-
ing the sets Πi , we focus on the action space and define a state-based version of the ε-optimality
constraint on the policy π  using the on-arbiter subtask Q-functions Qi
              max Qi (s, a0 ) − Qi (s, a) ≤ εi , ∀a ∼ π  , ∀s ∈ S, ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1}.          (7)
              a0 ∈A

This restricts π  in each state to actions that are close to the optimal for each subtask i < n. As
discussed in Sec. 2.1, summing up subtask Q-functions and using the proportionality relationship in
equation 6 to directly define an arbiter policy πΣ will in general not satisfy the ε-lexicographic
priority constraints in equation 7. Therefore, we propose a transformation of the subtasks and
their Q-functions which provides that the constraints are satisfied when the transformed subtask
Q-functions are summed up to Q  . Our transformation relies on a constraint indicator function
ci : S × A → {0, 1} that shows whether an action a in state s is permitted by the priority constraint
for subtasks i,
                                      1, maxa0 ∈A Qi (s, a0 ) − Qi (s, a) ≤ εi

                        ci (s, a) =                                            .                  (8)
                                      0, otherwise

We refer to the set of permitted actions by subtask i in state s, A i (s) = {a ∈ A | ci (s, a) = 1}, as
the action indifference space of subtask i. The intuition is that subtask i is indifferent as to which ε-
optimal action in A i (s) is selected because they are all close enough to optimal. Analogously, the
intersection A  (s) = ∩n−1
                         i=1 A i (s) is the global action indifference space and Ā  (s) = A \ A  (s)
is the set of forbidden actions. As mentioned above, keeping A i (s) large is crucial because it
provides more actions for optimizing the arbiter policy.
Using Qi and ci as defined above, we can now write down the Q-function of the ε-lexicographic
MORL problem, which shows that constraint-violating actions are forbidden by their Q-values,
                                            n−1
                                            X
                              Q  (s, a) =         ln(ci (s, a)) + Qn (s, a),                         (9)
                                            i=1

where we use ln(1) = 0 and limx→0+ ln(x) = −∞. Here, the ln(ci ) terms are the transformed Q-
functions for subtasks i < n in the view of Q-decomposition. Moreover, Q  is equal to Qn for all
a ∈ A  (s) and Q  (s, a) = −∞ otherwise. Our MaxEnt arbiter policy π  (a | s) ∝ exp(Q  (s, a))
has a product structure,
                           n−1
                                                         !   n−1
                                                                          !
                            X                                Y
         π  (a | s) ∝ exp       ln(ci (s, a)) + Qn (s, a) =      ci (s, a) exp Qn (s, a),  (10)
                             i=1                                    i=1

confirming that π  has likelihood 0 for actions outside the global indifference space whilst selecting
actions inside the global indifference spaces proportional to exp Qn .
A close inspection of equation 9 shows that the corresponding transformedPsubtask    reward functions
                                                                            n
are r i (s, a) = ln(ci (s, a)) and r n = rn , further revealing r  =        i=1 r i as the scalar re-
ward function of the ε-lexicographic MORL problem. For a detailed derivation, see supplementary
material in Sec. A. The Q-decomposition view suggests a decomposed learning algorithm with the
transformed rewards r i . However, because the transformed rewards r i are defined as the trans-
formed Q-functions Q i , our decomposed algorithm learns Qi and obtains Q i by first computing
ci for equation 9. Furthermore, Qi are learned on-policy for the arbiter, to avoid illusion of control
in the subtasks (Russell & Zimdars, 2003; Laroche et al., 2017; van Seijen et al., 2017).


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   I NCREMENTAL AND DECOMPOSED LEARNING WITH LEXICOGRAPHIC PRIORITIES

We want to exploit the structure of the Q-function Q  and policy π  of the ε-lexicographic MORL
problem as described in Sec. 3.1 to define an incremental and decomposed learning approach that
can reuse and adapt subtask solutions. Our algorithm incrementally includes more subtasks ordered
by their priority: In the first step, we learn subtask 1 (with highest priority) without any restrictions.
In the following steps, we learn subtask 1 < i ≤ n restricted to the action indifference spaces of
subtasks with higher priority than i and reuse the results of higher-priority subtasks, i.e. Q1 to Qi−1
for the components of Q  . Subtasks with priority lower than i do not affect the learning of subtask
i. In this and the following sections, we describe the process generically for the last subtask i = n
because it aligns with the notation in equation 9.
In the Q-decomposition view, we are optimizing the arbiter policy π  with Q-function Q  for the
MORL problem with (transformed) rewards r 1 , . . . , r n−1 and we are given on-arbiter-policy es-
timates Qπi   for subtasks 1 ≤ i < n. As seen in equation 9, our means for improving the arbiter
policy π  is maximizing the term Qn for subtask n. For this, we perform a policy evaluation step
under the arbiter policy to get a new estimate of the subtask Q-function Qπn  , which also changes our
estimate of the global arbiter Q-function Q  —we call this arbiter policy evaluation. Next, we per-
form a policy improvement step by softly maximizing Qπn  , which again also changes Q  —we call
this arbiter policy improvement. This algorithm closely resembles the Q-decomposition algorithm
in Sec. 2.1 because Qn is updated on-policy with the global arbiter policy π  . We theoretically
analyze a subtask view of this algorithm below and provide an additional arbiter view analysis and
interpretation of this algorithm in supplementary material Sec. B.

Subtask view theory. In the subtask view, the algorithm optimizes subtask n with soft Q-learning
in an MDP M n that is like M in Sec. 2 but uses scalar reward rn and has the action space restricted
to the global action indifference space, A  (s), in every state. Therefore, the action space of M n
satisfies the lexicographic priority constraints by construction. This allows us to perform off-policy
soft Q-learning in M n to directly obtain Q∗ n , while still respecting all priority constraints. We do
this with an off-policy, soft Bellman backup operator T
                                                       Z
                                                                         0   0
                                                                                 0
                   T Q(s, a) , r(s, a) + γEs0 ∼p log           exp Q(s , a ) da ,                  (11)
                                                         A  (s0 )
                                                    |                {z            }
                                                                    V (s0 )

which is the update step from soft Q-learning (Haarnoja et al., 2017) and where a ∈ A  (s).
Theorem 3.1 (Prioritized Soft Q-learning). Consider the soft Bellman backup operator T , and an
initial mapping Q0 : S × A  → R with |A  | < ∞ and define Ql+1 = T Ql , then the sequence of
                                                                      ∗
Ql converges to Q∗  , the soft Q-value of the optimal arbiter policy π  , as l → ∞.

Proof. Proof and detailed derivation in supplementary material Sec. F.4.

While the described backup operator T yields the optimal global solution in tabular settings, it is
intractable in large and continuous state and action spaces. In the next section, we convert T and
Theorem 3.1 into a stochastic optimization problem that can be solved approximately via parametric
function approximation.

3.3   P RACTICAL LEARNING AND ADAPTATION ALGORITHM FOR CONTINUOUS SPACES

For PSQD, we implement the subtask view described in Sec. 3.2, building on the soft Q-learning
(SQL) algorithm (Haarnoja et al., 2017). Learning subtask n in the MDP M n requires an effi-
cient way for sampling in the global action indifference space A  (s), which becomes increasingly
difficult in higher dimensions due to the curse of dimensionality. However, we can exploit the incre-
mentally learned subtask policies πi (a | s) ∝ exp Qi (a, s) to efficiently sample in subtask action
indifference spaces because the high-probability regions of subtask policies are the subtask indif-
ference spaces. For rejecting action samples that are outside of the global action indifference space,
a∈ / A  (s), we evaluate the constraint indicator functions ci in equation 8. The remaining action
samples are used in importance sampling proportionally to exp Qn (a, s).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Technically, we learn πn and Qn for the subtask n by integrating the sampling process from above in
SQL, which corresponds to performing soft Q-learning in M n . We model the subtask Q-function
by a DNN Qn with parameters θ and minimizes the temporal-difference loss
                               "                                                            #
                                 1  θ                                         θ̄          2
           JQ (θ) = Est ,at ∼D     Qn (st , at ) − rn (st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼p Vn (st+1 )       , (12)
                                 2

where θ̄ is a target parameter obtained as exponentially moving average of θ and Vnθ̄ is the empirical
approximation of equation 5. The subtask policy is represented by a state-conditioned, stochastic
DNN fn with parameters φ, such that at = fnφ (ζt , st ), where ζt represents noise from an arbi-
trary distribution. The parameter φ is updated by minimizing the (empirical approximation of the)
Kullback-Leibler divergence between fnφ and the optimal MaxEnt arbiter policy in equation 3:

                       Jπ (φ) = DKL fnφ (·|st , ζt ) exp Qθ  (st , ·) − V θ (st ) .              (13)

The objectives Jπ (φ) and JQ (θ) can be computed offline, given a replay buffer of saved transitions.
Thus, PSQD can optimize the n-th subtask offline, for example reusing the transitions collected dur-
ing independent and isolated training for subtask n in the subsequent adaptation step for subtask n as
part of the ε-lexicographic MORL problem, as detailed in supplementary material C. A pictographic
overview of our method as well as pseudocode can be found in supplementary material D.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate PSQD in an instructive 2D navigation environment and a high-dimensional control
problem (details in Sec. G in the supplementary material). In Sec. 4.1 and Sec. 4.2, we qualitatively
analyze zero-shot and offline adaptation results, respectively. In Sec. 4.3, we empirically compare
our method with a number of baseline methods. Finally, in Sec. 4.4, we demonstrate PSQD’s effi-
cacy in a high-dimensional, continuous control environment. For all experiments, we first learn the
(untransformed) subtasks individually such that we have access to DNN approximations of Q∗i and
πi∗ for reuse and adaptation. We use the hat symbol, e.g., π̂, to denote DNN approximations.

4.1   Z ERO - SHOT REUSE OF PREVIOUSLY LEARNED SUBTASKS SOLUTIONS

In this experiment, we demonstrate that our approach provides solutions that satisfy lexicographic
priorities even in the zero-shot setting without interacting with the new environment. We design a
2D navigation environment (see Fig. 1a), where the agent is initialized at random positions and has
to reach the goal area at the top while avoiding a ∩-shaped obstacle. For the zero-shot solution,
we simply apply our transformation (Sec. 3.1) to the already learned subtask Q-functions Q̂∗1 , Q̂∗2 to
obtain the Q-function Q1 2 = ln(c1 ) + Q̂∗2 . The modular structure of Q1 2 allows us to inspect
the components of the zero-shot solution: Fig. 1b reveals that Q̂∗1 learns the obstacle avoidance
subtask with large negative values inside the obstacle and inspecting the ln(c1 ) component shows our
transformation and how it implements the priority constraint. In Fig. 1c, we plot ln(c1 ((s, a)), ∀a ∈
A, with the agent placed at the red dot in Fig. 1a to show the action indifference space at that state.
Our transformation excludes actions that would lead to collisions, allowing us to visually infer the
agent’s behavior. This is in stark contrast to prior zero-shot methods, e.g. (Haarnoja et al., 2018a),
where the behavior of the zero-shot solution is unpredictable and potentially arbitrary sub-optimal,
as noted by Hunt et al. (2019). In Fig. 1d, we visualize the policy π1 2 ∝ Q1 2 with sample
trajectories and project ln(c1 ) onto the image to illustrate the global action indifference space. Our
zero-shot solution never collides with the obstacle due to the priority constraint without any training
on the lexicographic MORL problem. However, our zero-shot is suboptimal for the lexicographic
MORL problem, because it sometimes gets trapped and fails to reach the goal for starting positions
in the middle. In Sec. G (supplementary material), we show more detailed zero-shot results.

4.2   O FFLINE ADAPTATION AND DATA REUSE

In this experiment, we demonstrate that PSQD can adapt previously learned subtask solutions to
the lexicographic MORL problem using only the training data from the previous, isolated learning
process without environment interaction. After adapting Q̂∗2 with the offline data, Q̂π2   no longer


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         Forbidden
                                                                                            actions
                                                                                                                Ā 1
                                                                          up
                                                                                                 Ā 1
                                                                          l
                                                                          down
                                                                                    A 1
                                                                               Permitted actions
                                                                                  left ↔ right

                                                 Q̂∗1 (s, a)da.
                                           R
  (a) 2D environment.                (b)       a
                                                                         (c) ln(c1 ) in action space. (d) Zero-shot trajectories.

Figure 1: Zero-shot experiment in the 2D navigation environment. Q̂∗1 in 1b (brighter hues indicate
higher value) and its transformed version in 1c (evaluated at red dot) forbid actions that lead to
obstacle collisions. Sample traces in 1d (larger version in Fig. 6) show navigation towards the goal
at the top, sometimes getting stuck but without colliding with the obstacle. The background in 1d is
colored according to discretized angles of the policy                                              .



                                                                                    Ā 1


                                                     π
                    Q̂∗2 (s, a)da.
            R                              R
      (a)       a
                                     (b)       a
                                                   Q̂2   (s, a)da.       (c) Adapted trajectories.      (d) Return comparison.

Figure 2: Offline adaptation experiment in 2D navigation environment. Our learning algorithm
adapts the pre-trained Q̂∗2 in 2a to Q̂π2   in 2b (brighter hues indicate higher value), reflecting the
long-term value of r2 under the arbiter policy. The adapted agent has learned to drive out of and
around the obstacle, as shown in 2c (larger version in Fig. 6). The background in 2c is colored in the
same way as 1d. Both online and offline adaptation improve upon the zero-shot agent considerably,
as shown in 2d.

reflects the greedy policy π2∗ that gets the zero-shot solution stuck, but instead reflects the arbiter
agent π  ∗
           and accounts for the long-term outcome. Comparing Q̂∗2 in Fig. 2a with Q̂π2   in Fig. 2b
shows that the adaptation process leads to lower values inside the ∩-shape such that our solution
escapes and avoids that region. This optimal behavior is illustrated with sample traces in Fig. 2c.
In Fig. 2d we compare the mean return of the zero-shot, offline, and online adapted agents and an
RRT (LaValle & Kuffner Jr, 2001; Karaman & Frazzoli, 2010) oracle. This shows that the zero-shot
agent, which gets stuck, performs considerably worse than the adapted agents, which instead are on
par with the RRT oracle. We continue this analysis for the more complex tasks r1 2 3 and r1 3 2
in supplementary material Sec. G.

4.3         E MPIRICAL COMPARISON AGAINST BASELINES

In this experiment, we compare PSQD to a set of five baseline methods which all try to imple-
ment lexicographic priorities in MORL problems. As, to the best of our knowledge, PSQD is the
first method for solving lexicographic MORL problems with continuous action spaces, we compare
against obvious extensions of established RL algorithms and ablations of PSQD: Naive subtask-
priority implementation for SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018b) and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), a mod-
ified version of Q-Decomposition (Russell & Zimdars, 2003) for continuous action spaces that we
call soft Q-decomposition (SQD), as well as the SQL composition method proposed by Haarnoja
et al. (2018a). For the ablation of PSQD, instead of transforming subtasks, we introduce additional
negative reward for priority constraint violations based on the constraint indicator functions ci . For
SAC and PPO we naively implement subtask-priorities by augmenting the learning objective to ad-
ditionally include the KL-divergence between the current and the previously learned higher-priority
policy. SQD concurrently learns the on-arbiter-policy Q-functions for all subtasks. The SQL compo-


                                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Baseline comparison in the 2D navigation environment. Left: Cost of the high-priority
obstacle avoidance subtask during learning of the lower priority task. Right: Lower-priority navi-
gation cost. For SAC and PPO, the scalar in the legend refers to the weight β of the convex policy
objective, where β = 1 places all weight on the KL term.

sition (Haarnoja et al., 2018a) also learns solutions for all subtasks concurrently, however off-policy
and thereby with illusion of control. See Sec. G.3 for more details on the baseline methods.
For SAC, PPO, and PSQD (incl. ablation), we first train all algorithms on the obstacle avoidance
subtask 1, where all methods converge to an approximately optimal solution. Subsequently, we
reuse the obtained Q1 and train each method on subtask 2, recording the returns for both subtasks
separately in Fig. 3. PSQD is the only method that maintains zero return for subtask 1 (i.e. zero
collisions) while learning for subtask 2, outperforming all other baselines. As seen in the right panel
of Fig. 3, PSQD obtains less reward for subtask 2 than other baselines. However, this is because
the priority constraint prevents PSQD from navigating through the obstacle, while some baselines
accept obstacle collisions to reach the goal quicker. In contrast to PSQD, none of the baseline
methods converge to a solution that satisfies the lexicographic priorities and maintains the optimal
performance in the top-priority collision avoidance subtask that they initially achieved.

4.4   H IGH - DIMENSIONAL CONTROL

In this experiment, we demonstrate that PSQD scales well to high-dimensional action spaces while
maintaining subtask priorities, unlike traditionally composed multi-objective agents. We simulated
an Franka Emika Panda joint-control task with a 9-dimensional action space (Fig 4, left), where the
high-priority subtasks wants to avoid the red cube while the low-priority subtask want to reach the
green sphere with the end-effector. We start with the zero-shot Q-function Q1 2 = ln(c1 ) + Q̂∗2 and
sample from π  as described in Sec. 3.3. We subsequently adapt the zero-shot solution to obtain
Q∗1 2 = ln(c1 ) + Q̂π2   . We also include the SQL-Comp. method (Haarnoja et al., 2018a) as a
baseline, by composing Q1+2 = Q̂∗1 + Q̂∗2 . Representative trajectories from our adapted solution
and the baseline are shown in Fig. 4 (left). Starting from t = 0 in the leftmost panel, our adapted
agent moves around the obstacle. In contrast, the baseline violates the priority and moves through
the forbidden part of the workspace. More quantitatively, we show mean returns for the different
agents in Fig. 4 (right). Our solution avoids the volume even in the zero-shot setting and is improved
considerably through the adaptation process, while the baseline induces high costs in r1 because it
moves through the forbidden part of the workspace. We note that Haarnoja et al. (2018a) do not
claim that their method solves lexicographic MORL problems, we use it to illustrate that priorities
are generally difficult to express in traditional multi-objective tasks.

5     R ELATED WORK
Task priorities for continuous action-spaces. To the best of our knowledge, PSQD is the first
method to solve general lexicographic MORL tasks with continuous action-spaces. The following
prior works consider task priorities in RL: Yang et al. (2021) combine null-space control and RL
by constraining policy search to the null-space of higher priority constraints. However, Yang et al.
(2021)’s method is a special case of PSQD since it requires access to the task-space Jacobian, while
PSQD exploits given Q-functions. Skalse et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2022); Li & Czarnecki (2019)
also model lexicographic task priorities, however only in discrete settings and without revealing the
reward function of the lexicographic task. PSQD generalizes these methods to continuous action-


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: High-dimensional joint control using a simulated Franka Emika Panda robot. Top left:
Our prioritized agent respects constraints even in the zero-shot setting and is improved by our learn-
ing algorithm. Bottom left: A multi-objective baseline Haarnoja et al. (2018a) does not respect
lexicographic priorities and generates high costs in r1 (collision) in favor of fewer costs in r2 (tra-
jectory length), moving through the forbidden part of the workspace.


spaces and maximizes a known reward function. Furthermore, none of these works emphasize
composition and reuse of subtask solutions, which is central to our method.

Composition for knowledge transfer. Composition for transfer between tasks in the MaxEnt
framework has initially been demonstrated by Haarnoja et al. (2018a), however, only in a zero-shot
setting without providing a learning algorithm to improve the composed agent and without priorities.
Hunt et al. (2019) build upon Haarnoja et al. (2018a) and propose a learning algorithm that learns
the divergence between the subtask Q-functions and obtains the optimal solution to convex task
compositions. Thus, similar to our method, these works facilitate knowledge transfer between tasks
via composition, however, they offer no way for modeling strict task priorities.

Task priorities for safety. Task priorities can be used to implement safety. Prior works mostly
implement (safety-) constrained RL via constrained MDPs (CMDPs) (Altman, 1999), where policy
search is constrained by an unordered set of cost functions. CMDPs can be solved by optimizing
Lagrangian objectives and dual gradient descent techniques Boyd et al. (2004). This way, (Ha et al.,
2021; Tessler et al., 2019; Chow et al., 2017) focus on CMDPs with one handcrafted cost function,
while (Achiam et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2018) provide methods for solving CMPDs with multiple
constraints. While these methods yield constraint-satisfying agents, unlike our method, they do not
facilitate reuse and adaptation via composition, since they optimize monolithic policies from scratch.
An exception w.r.t reuse is safety critic (Srinivasan et al., 2020), which pre-trains a transferable
estimator of expected future safety incidents. However, safety-critic can only incorporate one such
critic and thus only transfer knowledge from one pre-training task, while our method can exploit any
number of pre-trained Q-functions.


6   L IMITATIONS

Our method depends on the manual selection of ε1 , . . . , εn−1 thresholds. These scalars are on the
scale of subtask Q-functions Qi , which might be hard to estimate when function approximators are
employed and depend on domain-specific reward functions, user preferences, and task semantics.
There are, however, a number of informed ways for finding adequate εi scalars. In practice, one can
analyze the Q-function in key-states and select εi such that undesired actions are excluded. This
works even when the action space is of high dimensionality, since approximate Q-function mean,
min, max, and percentiles can be computed via sampling.


7   C ONCLUSION

The main contribution of this paper is a principled framework for solving lexicographic MORL
problems with continuous action spaces in a decomposed fashion. In this framework, we can zero-
shot interpretable agents that respect task priority constraints in low- and high-dimensional settings.
Our learning algorithm, PSQD, facilitates reuse of subtask solutions by adapting them to solve the
lexicographic MORL problem optimally.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially supported by the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Pro-
gram (WASP) funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.

R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 22–31. PMLR, 2017.
Eitan Altman. Constrained Markov decision processes, volume 7. CRC press, 1999.
Isac Arnekvist, Danica Kragic, and Johannes A Stork. Vpe: Variational policy embedding for
   transfer reinforcement learning. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation
   (ICRA), pp. 36–42. IEEE, 2019.
Stephen Boyd, Stephen P Boyd, and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge uni-
  versity press, 2004.
Yinlam Chow, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Lucas Janson, and Marco Pavone. Risk-constrained re-
  inforcement learning with percentile risk criteria. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18
  (1):6070–6120, 2017.
Rodrigo de Lazcano, Kallinteris Andreas, Jun Jet Tai, Seungjae Ryan Lee, and Jordan
  Terry. Gymnasium robotics, 2023. URL http://github.com/Farama-Foundation/
  Gymnasium-Robotics.
Alexander Dietrich, Christian Ott, and Alin Albu-Schäffer. An overview of null space projections
  for redundant, torque-controlled robots. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 34(11):
  1385–1400, 2015.
Simon Duane, A.D. Kennedy, Brian J. Pendleton, and Duncan Roweth.      Hybrid monte
  carlo. Physics Letters B, 195(2):216–222, 1987. ISSN 0370-2693. doi: https://doi.org/
  10.1016/0370-2693(87)91197-X. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/037026938791197X.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017,
  volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/finn17a.html.
Zoltán Gábor, Zsolt Kalmár, and Csaba Szepesvári. Multi-criteria reinforcement learning. In Jude W.
  Shavlik (ed.), Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML
  1998), Madison, Wisconsin, USA, July 24-27, 1998, pp. 197–205. Morgan Kaufmann, 1998.
Sehoon Ha, Peng Xu, Zhenyu Tan, Sergey Levine, and Jie Tan. Learning to walk in the real world
  with minimal human effort. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1110–1120. PMLR, 2021.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1352–1361.
  PMLR, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Vitchyr Pong, Aurick Zhou, Murtaza Dalal, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine.
  Composable deep reinforcement learning for robotic manipulation. In 2018 IEEE international
  conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 6244–6251. IEEE, 2018a.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018b.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and appli-
  cations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018c.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W. K. Hastings. Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their applications.
  Biometrika, 57(1):97–109, 04 1970. ISSN 0006-3444. doi: 10.1093/biomet/57.1.97. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1093/biomet/57.1.97.
Karol Hausman, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Ziyu Wang, Nicolas Heess, and Martin A. Riedmiller.
  Learning an embedding space for transferable robot skills. In 6th International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018,
  Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=rk07ZXZRb.
Conor F Hayes, Roxana Rădulescu, Eugenio Bargiacchi, Johan Källström, Matthew Macfarlane,
  Mathieu Reymond, Timothy Verstraeten, Luisa M Zintgraf, Richard Dazeley, Fredrik Heintz,
  et al. A practical guide to multi-objective reinforcement learning and planning. Autonomous
  Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 36(1):26, 2022.
Jonathan Hunt, Andre Barreto, Timothy Lillicrap, and Nicolas Heess. Composing entropic policies
  using divergence correction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2911–2920.
  PMLR, 2019.
Alex Irpan. Deep reinforcement learning doesn’t work yet. https://www.alexirpan.com/
  2018/02/14/rl-hard.html, 2018.
Sertac Karaman and Emilio Frazzoli. Incremental sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion
  planning. Robotics Science and Systems VI, 104(2), 2010.
Romain Laroche, Mehdi Fatemi, Joshua Romoff, and Harm van Seijen. Multi-advisor reinforcement
  learning. CoRR, abs/1704.00756, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.00756.
Steven M LaValle and James J Kuffner Jr. Randomized kinodynamic planning. The international
  journal of robotics research, 20(5):378–400, 2001.
Changjian Li and Krzysztof Czarnecki. Urban driving with multi-objective deep reinforcement
  learning. In Edith Elkind, Manuela Veloso, Noa Agmon, and Matthew E. Taylor (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems,
  AAMAS ’19, Montreal, QC, Canada, May 13-17, 2019, pp. 359–367. International Founda-
  tion for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2019. URL http://dl.acm.org/
  citation.cfm?id=3331714.
Qingkai Liang, Fanyu Que, and Eytan Modiano. Accelerated primal-dual policy optimization for
  safe reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06480, 2018.
Nicholas Metropolis, Arianna W Rosenbluth, Marshall N Rosenbluth, Augusta H Teller, and Edward
  Teller. Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines. The journal of chemical
  physics, 21(6):1087–1092, 1953.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Thanh Thi Nguyen, Ngoc Duy Nguyen, Peter Vamplew, Saeid Nahavandi, Richard Dazeley, and
  Chee Peng Lim. A multi-objective deep reinforcement learning framework. Engineering Appli-
  cations of Artificial Intelligence, 96:103915, 2020.
Diederik M Roijers, Peter Vamplew, Shimon Whiteson, and Richard Dazeley. A survey of multi-
  objective sequential decision-making. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 48:67–113,
  2013.
Gavin A Rummery and Mahesan Niranjan. On-line Q-learning using connectionist systems, vol-
  ume 37. University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering Cambridge, UK, 1994.
Stuart J Russell and Andrew Zimdars. Q-decomposition for reinforcement learning agents. In
  Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-03), pp. 656–663,
  2003.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1707.06347.
Joar Skalse, Lewis Hammond, Charlie Griffin, and Alessandro Abate. Lexicographic multi-objective
  reinforcement learning. In Luc De Raedt (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2022, Vienna, Austria, 23-29 July 2022, pp. 3430–
  3436. ijcai.org, 2022. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2022/476. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/
  ijcai.2022/476.
Krishnan Srinivasan, Benjamin Eysenbach, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, and Chelsea Finn. Learning to be
  safe: Deep rl with a safety critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14603, 2020.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Chen Tessler, Daniel J. Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. Reward constrained policy optimization. In
  7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA,
  May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  SkfrvsA9FX.
Peter Vamplew, Benjamin J Smith, Johan Källström, Gabriel Ramos, Roxana Rădulescu, Diederik M
  Roijers, Conor F Hayes, Fredrik Heintz, Patrick Mannion, Pieter JK Libin, et al. Scalar reward
  is not enough: A response to silver, singh, precup and sutton (2021). Autonomous Agents and
  Multi-Agent Systems, 36(2):41, 2022.
Harm van Seijen, Mehdi Fatemi, Romain Laroche, Joshua Romoff, Tavian Barnes, and Jeffrey
  Tsang. Hybrid reward architecture for reinforcement learning. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
  Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
  Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp.
  5392–5402, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
  1264a061d82a2edae1574b07249800d6-Abstract.html.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8:279–292, 1992.
Quantao Yang, Johannes A Stork, and Todor Stoyanov. Null space based efficient reinforcement
  learning with hierarchical safety constraints. In 2021 European Conference on Mobile Robots
  (ECMR), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2021.
Hengrui Zhang, Youfang Lin, Sheng Han, and Kai Lv. Lexicographic actor-critic deep reinforcement
  learning for urban autonomous driving. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2022.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL

A    L EXICOGRAPHIC MULTI - OBJECTIVE TASKS
Here, we describe in detail how we model lexicographic task-priority constraints as scalarizable
multi-objective RL tasks. To recap, we have multiple reward functions r1 , . . . , rn , and we want to
find a global arbiter policy π  that maximizes rn , while behaving almost optimal w.r.t. all higher
priority tasks r1 , . . . , rn−1 . This is expressed with the constraint

               max Qi (s, a0 ) − Qi (s, a) ≤ εi , ∀a ∼ π, ∀s ∈ S, ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1}            (14)
               a0 ∈A

on the performance measure J(π), which in this case is the Q-value. We note again the indicator
functions
                                        1, maxa0 ∈A Qi (s, a0 ) − Qi (s, a) ≤ εi

                         ci (s, a) =                                               ,             (15)
                                        0, otherwise
          Qn−1
and that i=1 ci (s, a) = 1 when an action a is allowed in state s according to each of the higher
priority constraints (and thus in the global action indifference space A  (s)). The key idea now is to
transform the higher-priority Q-functions Qi into new reward functions r i by applying the natural
logarithm to the constraint indicator functions, such that r i (s, a) = ln(ci (s, a)). Based on these
transformed Q-functions and new rewards, we now define a multi-objective, vector-valued reward
function that reflects strict task priorities
                                            r 1 (s, a)         ln(c1 (s, a))
                                                                            
                                          r 2 (s, a)   ln(c2 (s, a)) 
                            r  (s, a) = 
                                                ..        
                                                          =        ..        
                                                                                .               (16)
                                                 .                 .        
                                         r         (s, a) ln(c       (s, a))
                                             n−1                  n−1
                                             rn (s, a)           rn (s, a)

We define the global reward function that the arbiter maximizes as sum of transformed rewards
                                      n
                                      X                    n−1
                                                           X
                        r  (s, a) =         [r(s, a)]i =         ln ci (s, a) +rn (s, a),            (17)
                                      i=1                  i=1
                                                           |       {z         }
                                                           constraint indication

such that we are in the Q-decomposition setting Russell & Zimdars (2003). This allows us to decom-
pose the learning problem into n subtask Q-functions Q1 , . . . , Qn and one global policy π  . The
global Q-function Q  for the prioritized task r  corresponds to the sum of subtask Q-functions,
       Pn−1
Q  = i=1 Q i + Qn , where the first n − 1 higher-priority Q-functions are for the transformed
rewards, while the n-th Q-function is for the ordinary reward function rn . Because of MaxEnt RL
the global arbiter policy π  satisfies the proportional relationship π  (a|s) ∝ exp(Q  (s, a)), as
described in Sec. 2.2.
The global reward function in equation 17 allows us to infer certain properties of Q  and π  . Firstly,
by noting that ln(1) = 0 we see that the constraint indication summation in equation 17 is zero when
action a is allowed according to all higher priority tasks and in the global action indifference space
A  (s). This means that r  (s, a) = rn (s, a), ∀s ∈ S, ∀a ∈ A  (s), i.e. maximizing the global
task corresponds to maximizing the lowest priority tasks in the global indifference space, which is a
property we exploit extensively.
Next, by defining limx→0+ ln(x) = −∞, we see that r  (s, a) = −∞ when any number of higher
priority constraints are violated by a in s. Furthermore, by noting that −∞ ± R = −∞ and
−∞ · R≥0 = −∞, we see that Q  (s, a) = −∞, ∀s ∈ S, ∀a ∈ A¯  (s), i.e. the value of any
constraint-violating action is −∞ under the global task r  . Importantly, due to the proportional
relationship π  (a|s) ∝ exp(Q  (s, a)), it follows that such constraint-violating actions have zero
probability under our arbiter policies. This also means that the expected future constraint-violation
value of arbiter policies is zero, since the arbiter policy can not select constraint-violating actions in
the future. With this in mind, for the global Q-function of arbiter policies, we see that


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               n
               X
 Q  (s, a) =         Q i (s, a)
               i=1
               n−1
               X
           =         Q i (s, a) + Qn (s, a)
               i=1
                                                                           0 due to π
               n−1
               X                                                  z      }|       {
           =         r i (s, a) + rn (s, a) + γEst+1 ∼p,at+1 ∼ρπ  Q i (st+1 , at+1 ) +Qn (st+1 , at+1 )]
               i=1
               n−1
               X
           =         r i (s, a) + rn (s, a) + γEst+1 ∼p,at+1 ∼ρπ  Qn (st+1 , at+1 )]
               i=1
               n−1
               X                                n−1
                                                X
           =         r i (s, a) + Qn (s, a) =         ln ci (s, a) + Qn (s, a).
               i=1                              i=1
                                                                                                     (18)

This shows that we only have to learn the n-th subtask Q-function for r  (s, a) during the adaptation
step, because the transformed Q-values of all n − 1 higher-priority subtask Q-functions are know by
construction.
Lastly, since we are using the MaxEnt framework we have the proportional relationship

                          π  (a | s) ∝ exp Q  (s, a)
                                           n−1
                                                                         !
                                           X
                                     = exp     ln(ci (s, a)) + Qn (s, a)
                                                    i=1                                              (19)
                                              n−1
                                                               !
                                              Y
                                        =           ci (s, a) exp Qn (s, a)
                                              i=1

and can see that                       (                Qn−1
                                        exp Qn (s, a) if i=1 ci (s, a) = 1,
                          π  (a | s) ∝                                                               (20)
                                        0             otherwise.
This shows that π  softly maximizes rn (s, a) in the global action indifference space A  (s), as the
policy is proportional to exp(Qn (s, a)) and has zero probability for constraint-violating actions.

B      A RBITER VIEW THEORY
Here we provide an analysis of our algorithm from the perspective of the arbiter agent for the lexico-
graphic MORL task. In this view, the algorithm optimizes the arbiter policy with policy evaluation
and policy improvement steps in a transformed MORL problem using on-policy updates for subtask
n, like Q-decomposition. Now we show that this learning scheme converges by considering a fixed
arbiter policy π  with the on-policy soft Bellman backup operator T π  defined as
                         T π  Qn (st , at ) , rn (st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼p [Vnπ  (st+1 )],              (21)
with
                          Vnπ  (st ) = Eat ∼π  [Qn (st , at ) − log(π  (at | st ))],                 (22)
                                                                |     {z         }
                                                                  H
       π
where Vn (st ) is the soft, on-policy value function (Haarnoja et al., 2018b).
Theorem B.1 (Arbiter policy evaluation). Consider the soft Bellman backup operator T π  and an
initial mapping Q0n : S × A → R with |A| < ∞ and define Ql+1n   = T π  Qln . The sequence of Qln
               π
converges to Qn , the soft Q-value of π  , as → ∞.

Proof. See supplementary material Sec. F.1.


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem B.2 (Arbiter policy improvement). Given an arbiter policy π  , define a new arbiter policy
                                              π0
    0
as π  (·|s) ∝ exp(Qπ   (s, ·)), ∀s ∈ S. Then Q   (·, s) ≥ Qπ   (·, s), ∀s, a.

Proof. See supplementary material Sec. F.2.
                                               0                                           l+1
Corollary B.3 (Arbiter policy iteration). Let π  be the initial arbiter policy and define π    (· |
            πl                                                           πl
s) ∝ exp(Q   (s, ·)). Assume |A| < ∞ and that rn is bounded. Then Q   improves monotonically
     l                ∗
and π  converges to π   .

Proof. See supplementary material Sec. F.3.

C    O FFLINE ADAPTATION
Our algorithm, PSQD, relies on the off-policy soft Bellman backup operator T in Eq. equation 11
and the objectives JQ (θ) in Eq. equation 12 and Jπ (φ) in Eq. equation 13 which can be computed
without online policy rollouts. We can therefore adapt previously learned subtask solutions Qi , πi
offline with retained training data for subtask i, (st , at , rt , st+1 ) ∈ Di . However, since πi was
unconstrained during pre-training, Di likely contains constraint-violating transitions that are im-
possible in M i . To account for this, when sampling a transition (st , at , rt , st+1 ) ∼ Di during
adaptation of the pre-trained Qi , πi , we can check whether at ∈ A  (st ) and discard all constraint
violating transitions. This is like sampling from a new dataset D i that contains only transitions
from M i . Depending on how well D i covers M i , we can learn the optimal solution for the
global task entirely offline, without requiring additional environment interaction. This makes our
approach maximally sample-efficient for learning complex, lexicographic tasks by re-using data
retained from subtask pre-training.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Sub-task             Sub-task                                          Arbiter agent
      environments         agents
                                                                                                                                                 Multi-objective
        Environment 1       𝜋1    𝑄1                𝑄≻1                 ෍                           𝑄≻                                          environment with
           Retained                                                                                                                               transformed
           training data
                                                                                                                                                     rewards

                                                                                              Policy sampling                                    1≻2≻⋯≻𝑘
       Environment 𝑘 − 1   𝜋𝑘−1   𝑄𝑘−1              𝑄≻𝑘−1
           Retained                                                                                                                                 Environment 1
           training data
                                                                         ෑ                                                                          Environment 2


     Environment 𝑘           𝜋𝑘    𝑄𝑘               𝑄≻𝑘
                                                                                                    𝜋≻
       Retained                                                                                                                                   Environment 𝑘 − 1
       training data                                         Task transformation
                                                                                                                                                    Environment 𝑘



                                            𝒂                                   𝒂                                      𝒂
         Environment 𝑛      𝜋𝑛    𝑄𝑛                 Sub-task pre-learning               Arbiter adaptation loop                  Sub-task adaptation loop
           Retained                                  Concurrent, online                  Transfer, offline                        Transfer, offline, k-th agent
           training data                 𝑟𝑛 , 𝐬′,                             𝒓≻ , 𝐬′,                             [𝒓≻ ]𝑛 , 𝐬′,



Figure 5: A high-level overview of our method. Starting on the left, n agents individually learn
to solve each subtask, we refer to this     as the subtask pre-training step. In the middle box, the
subtask agents are combined into the lexicographic arbiter agent. The subtask adaptation loop that
we implement in practice, as described in Sec. 3.2 and 3.3, is denoted by , while the arbiter
learning perspective, described in App. B, is denoted by .


D     PSQD ALGORITHM DETAILS
Here, we provide additional details on our method. A high-level overview of our framework and
learning algorithm is given in Fig. 5. As can be seen, we begin by pre-training agents on the un-
transformed, original subtasks r1 , . . . , rn . During the pre-training step, the agents are learning in
isolation and greedily optimize their respective reward signals. Different learning algorithms could
be used for pre-training the subtask agents, but in our case, the pre-training step corresponds to
running n instance of Soft Q-Learning Haarnoja et al. (2017). The pseudo-code for pre-training is
given in Alg. 1.

Algorithm 1 Subtask pre-training with SQL
Require: Subtask reward functions r1 , . . . , rn
  Samplers ← {}
  Q-functions← {}
  Buffers ← {}
  for i ∈ {1, . . . , n} do                                . Iterate (concurrently) over subtasks {1, . . . , n}
      Initialize φi , θi , θ¯i , Di              . Initialize subtask network parameters and empty buffer
      for t ∈ {1, . . . , T } do                                                               . T total steps
            Online interaction
            ζt ∼ P                                          . Random noise for ASVGD sampling network
                     φi
            at ∼ fi (ζt , st )                  . Unconstrained action selection using sampling network
            st+1 ∼ p(st+1 | st , at )
            D ∪ D ← {st , at , ri (st , at ), st+1 }                   . Store transition and subtask reward
            Update networks
            Update θi                                                               . SQL Q-function update
            Update φi                                                       . SQL sampling network update
            θ¯i ← τ θi + (1 − τ )θ¯i                                         . Polyak target network update
      end for
      Samplers ← Samplers ∪{φi }
      Q-functions ← Q-functions ∪{θi }
      Buffers ← Buffers ∪{Di }
  end for
  return Subtask sampling networks {φ1 , . . . , φn }, Q-functions {θ1 . . . θn }, and Buffers
  {D1 , . . . , Dn }


                                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


After the SQL pre-training step in Alg 1, we have access to converged subtask Q-functions, sam-
pling networks for those Q-functions, and populated replay buffers for each subtask ri . Next, we
perform our adaption step where we finetune the pre-trained Q-functions and sampling networks un-
der the consideration of the lexicographic constraint on higher-priority subtask performance. This
corresponds to the subtask adaptation loop in Figure 5. Importantly, adapting the i-th subtask Q-
function and sampling network requires that all higher-priority subtasks components have already
been adapted to the lexicographic setting because otherwise, their indifference spaces might not
overlap (see also App. E). We therefore employ an iterative adaptation procedure where we start
with the second highest task (the highest-priority task is unconstrained) and adapt it under consid-
eration of the lexicographic constraint for the highest-priority task. Then, the third-highest-priority
task can be adapted under consideration of the lexicographic constraint for the highest- and second-
highest-priority tasks, and so on.

Algorithm 2 Incremental PSQD subtask adaptation
Require: Subtask reward functions r1 , . . . , rn
Require: Threshold scalars ε1 , . . . , εn−1
Require: Pre-trained subtask sampling network parameters φ1 , . . . , φn
Require: Pre-trained subtask Q-function parameters θ1 , . . . , θn
Require: Populated subtask replay buffers D1 , . . . , Dn

  for i ∈ {2, . . . , n} do             . Iterate over subtasks, starting with second-highest priority task
      D = D − {st , at , ri (st , at ), st+1 }∀at ∈/ A         . Discard constraint-violating transitions
      for t ∈ {1, . . . , T } do                                                           . T total steps

          Optional online interaction
          // As described in Sec. 3.3, we perform importance sampling to sample from π i , the
          // lexicographically constrained policy for the current subtask. The already adapted
          // φ1 , . . . , φi−1 and the current φi sampling networks are used as proposal distributions,
          // with the unnormalized target density being given by Eq. 10.
          at ∼ π i
          st+1 ∼ p(st+1 | st , at )
          D ∪ D ← {st , at , ri (st , at ), st+1 }                . Store transition and subtask reward

         Update networks
         Update θi using Eq. 12
         Update φi using Eq. 13
         θ̄i ← τ θi + (1 − τ )θ̄i                              . Polyak target network update
      end for
  end for
  return Adapted sampling network parameters φi and Q-function parameters θi

Notice that the online adaptation step in Alg. 2 is optional, it is also possible to compute the network
updates entirely offline, using the filtered versions of the subtask replay buffers from pre-training.
The filtered versions of the replay buffer are obtained as described in App. C, where we ensure that
no constrain-violating transitions are used during offline adaptation. If additional online interaction
data should be collected from the environment, this can be done by sampling actions from the
constrained policy for the current subtask.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    D ISCUSSION ON SEMANTICALLY INCOMPATIBLE SUBTASKS


Here, we discuss an interesting edge case, namely, situations where subtasks are semantically in-
compatible. Let us consider an example where we wish to jointly optimize three subtasks: Subtask
r1 rewards moving to the left, r2 = −r1 rewards moving to the right, and r3 rewards moving to
the top. Clearly, r1 and r2 are semantically incompatible, since r2 is the inverse of r1 . We should
first notice that such MORL tasks with semantically incompatible subtasks are inherently ill-posed,
since no agent can, at the same time, behave optimally for both r1 and r2 . Intuitively, an agent can
either move to the left, or to the right, but it can not tend to both directions at the same time. We
emphasize the semantic incompatibility, since, from the MORL algorithm’s perspective, tasks can
not be “incompatible”. Even when r2 = −r1 , maximizing the summed reward r1 + r2 is still valid,
even though the optimal behavior for this task might not be aligned with the RL practitioner hoped
to obtain.
In the general case, given semantically incompatible subtasks, a non-lexicographic MORL agent that
maximizes r1 + r2 + r3 will likely fail to progress on either of the incompatible subtasks, as shown
by (Russell & Zimdars, 2003). The behavior depends on subtask reward scale, the discount factor,
and function approximation errors, which can be considerable since deep regression for Bellman
optimality tends to overestimate state-action values Mnih et al. (2015). Therefore, MORL algorithms
without subtask priorities are likely to produce unexpected and undesired behavior when subtasks
are semantically incompatible.
Importantly, if we instead optimize the lexicographic task r1   r2   r3 , most of the above issues are
alleviated: The lexicographic problem definition states clearly how the agent ought to behave, since,
no matter how different the subtasks might be, near-optimal performance of high-priority tasks is
required by definition. For the same reason, lexicographic tasks are also insensitive with respect to
subtask reward scale and discount factors, since they are not optimizing a weighted combination of
subtask rewards. In fact, lexicographic RL was introduced and motivated by (Gábor et al., 1998) to
precisely resolve situations with semantically incompatible subtasks, e.g. “Buridan’s Ass” dilemma,
which is a philosophical paradox that translates directly to conflicting subtasks in MORL.
While lexicographic RL inherently resolves subtask incompatibility via its problem definition, we
now clarify how our learning algorithm resolves these situations in practice. First, we notice that
greedy subtask solutions obtained through SQL pre-training in Alg. 1 can indeed be “incompatible”.
Pre-training independently on our exemplary tasks r1 and r2 = −r1 would result in Q-functions Q∗1
and Q∗2 that assign high-value to inverse parts of the action space (moving left and moving right).
Thus, the intersection of the indifference spaces given by Q∗1 and Q∗2 can be empty, which would
imply an empty action space for lower-priority subtasks and an ill-posed learning problem.
Our definition of the lexicographic constraint in Eq. 7, however, formulates the lexicographic con-
straints on the on-policy Q-functions for the constraint-respecting arbiter agent. Our learning and
adaption procedure in Alg. 2 accounts for this since it sequentially adapts subtask solutions, starting
with higher-priority subtasks. This means that in the first iteration, we adapt the solution of the sub-
task with second-highest priority to the lexicographic optimality constraint on the highest-priority
subtasks. This changes the greedy subtask agent (i.e. its Q-function) Q∗2        Q∗ 2 to an agent that is
no longer greedy with respect to its original subtask – the adapted agent instead solves r2 as well as
possible, while respecting the lexicographic constraint. As described in App. A, Q∗ 2 assigns −∞ to
all actions that violate the lexicographic constraint, therefore, the high-value region and indifference
space of Q∗ 2 has to be inside the high-value region in Q∗1 , i.e. inside the indifference space of the
higher-priority task r1 . Thus, although Q∗1 and Q∗2 might be “incompatible”, the adapted Q∗ 2 is
indeed compatible with Q∗1 , even when r2 = −r1 . Since in our adaption procedure, lower-priority
subtasks always use the already adapted subtask solutions for higher-priority tasks, the intersection
of all higher-priority indifference spaces can never be empty.
In summary, lexicographic MORL tasks resolve incompatible subtasks by definition, since lower-
priority subtasks are constrained to solutions that are also near-optimal for all higher-priority sub-
tasks. Our adaption procedure accounts for this by adapting subtasks sequentially, which ensures
that the intersection of all higher-priority subtasks is never empty.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     P ROOFS
In Sec. F.1 to Sec. F.3 we prove the “on-arbiter-policy” view of our algorithm. We prove the subtask
view of our algorithm in Sec. F.4. These proofs are based on and make use of the following obser-
vation. Due to the incremental nature of our learning algorithm, the n − 1 higher-priority tasks have
already been learned in an on-arbiter-policy fashion and are fixed during learning of the n subtask
Q-function. Thus we have access to the transformed subtask Q-functions Q i for all higher prior-
ity tasks 1, . . . , n − 1, which are stationary during learning of the n-th subtask Q-function. As a
consequence, the arbiter policy π  , which we want to improve and for which we want to learn n-th
subtask Q-function in an on-policy fashion, is already constrained to the global indifference space
and can never select constraint-violating actions. Thus, we can rely on existing proofs for MaxEnt
RL, since our arbiter policy is just a particular MaxEnt policy.

F.1   A RBITER POLICY EVALUATION

Lemma F.1. Arbiter policy evaluation. Consider the soft Bellman backup operator T π and an
initial mapping Q0n : S × A → R with |A| < ∞ and define Ql+1
                                                          n   = T π Qln . The sequence of Qln
                  π
will converge to Qn , the soft Q-value of π, as l → ∞.

The proof is straightforward based on the observation that the n-th subtask Q-function is simply a
soft Q-function for the task rn , learned under the expectation of the global arbiter policy (Russell
& Zimdars, 2003), which has zero-probability for constraint-violating actions. Thus, the proof is
analogous to the one by Haarnoja et al. (2018b) except in our case π is a constraint-respecting
arbiter policy. We repeat the proof here only for completeness:

Proof. We define the on-policy, entropy augmented reward signal for soft Q-functions as
rnπ (st , at ) , rn (st , at ) + Est+1 ∼p [H(π  (·|st+1 ))] and rewrite T π as
                     Qπn (st , at ) ← rnπ (st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼p,at+1 ∼π [Qπn (st+1 , at+1 )].                 (23)
The standard convergence result for policy evaluation (Sutton & Barto, 2018) thus holds. The as-
sumption |A| < ∞ is required to guarantee that the entropy augmented reward is bounded.

F.2   A RBITER POLICY IMPROVEMENT

We want to show that we can obtain an arbiter policy π  that is better or as least as good as any other
arbiter policy by softly maximizing the soft global Q-function. Since the arbiter policy maximizes
                                                                        Pn−1
the sum of all (transformed) subtask Q-functions we set r = r  = j=1 r j + rn and Qπsoft =
        Pn−1
Qπ  = j=1 Q j + Qn for the remainder of this section.
Since we are concerned with finding an improved arbiter policy and since all arbiter policies have
zero probability for selecting constraint-violating actions, the r j and Q j terms evaluate to zero
and we can only improve Qπsoft by increasing rn . Qπsoft still correctly assigns a value of −∞ to ac-
tions that violate constraints, however, this value is known through the constraint on already optimal
higher-priority Q-functions and not backed up while learning task rn . In practice, since arbiter poli-
cies can never select constraint-violating actions, the soft policy improvement theorem by Haarnoja
et al. (2017) also holds for us since we are softly maximizing the ordinary task rn with a particular
soft policy. Arbiter policy improvement for the global tasks thus degrades to maximizing the n-th
task while respecting priority constraints. In the following, we use the short-hand rt = r(st , at ) for
a reward at time t for more compact notation.
Theorem F.2. Arbiter policy improvement. Given an arbiter policy π, define a new arbiter policy
as π 0 (·|s) ∝ exp(Qπ  (s, ·)), ∀s ∈ S. Then π 0 (·|s) ≥ π(·|s), ∀s, a.

Proof. The soft policy maximization objective
                              X
                       J(π) ,      E(st ,at )∼ρπ [Qπsoft (st , at ) + H(π(·|st ))]                             (24)
                                        t

can be improved either by increasing the soft Q-value or the entropy term:
      E(st ,at )∼ρπ [Qπsoft (st , at )] + H(π(·|st )) ≤ E(st ,at )∼ρπ0 [Qπsoft (st , at )] + H(π 0 (·|st )).   (25)


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Recalling the definition of the soft Q-function
                                                                    ∞
                                                                    X
   Qπsoft (st , at ) , r0 (st , at ) + E(st+1 ,at+1 ,... )∼ρπ             γ l (r(st+l , at+l ) + H(at+l | st+l )) ,        (26)
                                                                    l=1


the proof for the (soft) policy improvement theorem now simply expands the right side of equation 25
                                                       0
with one-step look-aheads until one obtains Qπsoft :
                             h                                             i
 Qπsoft (s0 , a0 ) = r0 + Es1 γ H(π(·|s1 )) + Ea1 ∼π [Qπsoft (s1 , a1 )]
                             h                                               i
                   ≤ r0 + Es1 γ H(π 0 (·|s1 )) + Ea1 ∼π0 [Qπsoft (s1 , a1 )]
                             h                         i            h                                      i
                   = r0 + Es1 γ H(π 0 (·|s1 )) + r1 + γ 2 Es2 H(π(·|s2 )) + Ea2 ∼π [Qπsoft (s2 , a2 )]
                             h                         i            h                                         i
                   ≤ r0 + Es1 γ H(π 0 (·|s1 )) + r1 + γ 2 Es2 H(π 0 (·|s2 )) + Ea2 ∼π0 [Qπsoft (s2 , a2 )]
                                                   h                      i
                   = r0 + E(s1 ,s2 )∼p,(a1 ,a2 )∼π0 γ H(π 0 (·|s1 )) + r1 + γ 2 H(π 0 (·|s2 )) + Qπsoft (s2 , a2 )
               ..
                .
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                                               l                 0
                    ≤ r0 + E(st+1 ,at+1 ,... )∼ρπ0          γ (rt+l + H(π (· | st+l ))
                                                      l=1
                           0
                    = Qπsoft (s0 , a0 )
                                                                                                                           (27)



F.3    A RBITER POLICY ITERATION

                                               0                                           l+1
Corollary F.3 (Arbiter policy iteration). Let π  be the initial arbiter policy and define π    (· | s) ∝
       πl                                                                              πl
exp(Q   (s, ·)). Assume |A| < ∞ and that rn is bounded. Then Q   improves monotonically and
 l                ∗
π  converges to π   .

                                                                                                                      πl
Proof. Let πl be the arbiter policy at iteration l. According to Theorem B.2, the sequence Q   im-
proves monotonically. Since arbiter policies only select actions inside the global action indifference
space, the ln(ci ) components of Q  evaluate to zero and since rn is assumed to be bounded and
since the entropy term is bounded by the |A| < ∞ assumption, the sequences converges to some
                                                                      π∗
π ∗    ∗
    . π  is optimal, since according to Theorem B.2 we must have Q   > Qπ   , ∀π  6= π      ∗
                                                                                              .

F.4    P RIORITIZED SOFT Q- LEARNING

We now prove the local view on our algorithm, by showing that we can define an off-policy backup
operator that accurately reflects the global arbiter policy, thus connecting the global on-policy and
local off-policy views on our algorithm. For this, we first note the soft Bellman optimality equations
that have already been proven by Haarnoja et al. (2017)
                                 Q∗soft (st , at ) = r(st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼p [Vsoft
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                    (st+1 )],                              (28)
with                                                   Z
                                       ∗                      1 ∗
                                                                Qsoft (st , a0 ) da0 ,

                                     Vsoft (st ) = log    exp                                                              (29)
                                                        A     α
                                                   | {z     }
                                                     softmax
where the softmax operator represents a policy πsoftmax that softly maximizes Q∗ . Thus, we can also
write
               Q∗soft (st , at ) = r(st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼p,at+1 ∼πsoftmax [Q∗soft (st+1 , at+1 )], (30)


                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which shows that soft Q-learning is equivalent to Q-learning with softmax instead of greedy max
action selection.
We now show that we can learn the optimal n-th subtask Q-function under the arbiter policy in an
off-policy, soft Q-learning fashion. In principal, this simply replaces the softmax policy πsoftmax with
the the arbiter policy π  in equation 30. However, the arbiter policy does not softly maximize the
n-th subtask Q-function like the locally greedy softmax policy in equation 29 would do. Instead,
                                                                     Pn−1
it softly maximizes the sum of subtask Q-functions Q  (s, a) = j=1 Q j (s, a) + Qn (s, a). To
show that we can approximate the global arbiter oplicy in an off-policy fashion, we split the action
space of the MDP into two disjoints sub-spaces A = A  (s)∪˙ Ā  (s). The first sub-space is the
action indifference space A  (s) that contains all constraint respecting actions in each state, while
the second sub-space Ā  (s) contains all constraint violating actions. Thus, we can split the integral
in equation 29
                         Z                                     Z
         ∗
                               exp Q∗soft (st , a  ) da  + log          exp Q∗soft (st , ā) dā.

       Vsoft (st ) = log                                                                            (31)
                         A  (st )                                     Ā  (st )

We now insert our optimal global Q-function and obtain
                         Z                                 Z
         V ∗ (st ) = log      exp Q∗  (st , a  ) da  + log                        exp Q∗  (st , ā) dā,

                                                                                                           (32)
                             A  (s)                                     Ā  (s)

which immediately simplifies to
                                                 Z
                               V ∗ (st ) = log            exp Q∗  (st , a  ) da

                                                 A (s)
                                                 Z                                                         (33)
                                                          exp Q∗n (st , a  ) da  ,

                                       = log
                                                 A  (s)

where the second integral over Ā disappears because actions in Ā have zero probability under the
arbiter policy while Q∗  becomes Q∗n because the n−1 subtask Q-function all evaluate to zero. Thus,
the optimal value of a state under the arbiter policy corresponds to the softmax of the untransformed,
n-th subtask Q-function, in the global indifference space. Thus for the optimal state-action value
function of the arbiter policy we have
                             Q∗  (st , at ) = r(st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼p [V ∗ (st+1 )],                       (34)
which is equivalent to
                   Q∗  (st , at ) = r(st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼p,at+1 ∼π  [Q∗  (st+1 , at+1 )].                 (35)
We can learn Q∗  with the off-policy, soft Bellman backup operator
                                                     Z

                T Q(s, a) , r(s, a) + γEs ∼p log
                                            0            exp Q(st , a  ) da  .                             (36)
                                                      A
                                                |             {z            }
                                                                       V  (s0 )

Theorem F.4 (Prioritized soft Q-learning). Consider the soft Bellman backup operator T , and an
initial mapping Q0 : S × A  → R with |A  | < ∞ and define Ql+1 = T Ql , then the sequence of
Ql converges to Q∗  , the soft Q-value of the optimal arbiter policy π
                                                                      ∗
                                                                        , as l → ∞.

As we have shown, V ∗ is the value function of the global arbiter policy, while Q∗  = Q∗n is an
ordinary soft Q-function (because we are in the indifference space). Thus, the original convergence
proof by Haarnoja et al. (2017) directly applies to T , we repeat it here for completeness with some
annotations:

Proof. We want to show that T is a contraction, thus we note that the definition of a contraction on
some metric space M with norm d is
                                         d(f (x), f (y)) < kd(x, y),                                       (37)


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with 0 ≤ k ≤ 1. Next we define the supremum norm for soft Q-functions as ||Q1 − Q2 || ,
maxs,a |Q1 (s, a) − Q2 (s, a)| and set   = ||Q1 − Q2 ||. It follows that
                    Z                             Z
                 log exp(Q1 (s0 , a0 ))da0 ≤ log exp(Q2 (s0 , a0 ) +  )da0
                                                             Z
                                             = log exp( ) exp(Q2 (s0 , a0 ))da0     (38)
                                                      Z
                                             =   + log exp(Q2 (s0 , a0 ))da0 .

From the last row and using the subtraction property of inequalities, we get
                       Z                             Z
                    log exp(Q1 (s0 , a0 ))da0 − log exp(Q2 (s0 , a0 ))da0 ≤                       (39)

and immediately see that the soft multi-objective Bellman operator is indeed a contraction:
               Z                              Z
                  exp Q1 (s0 , a0 ) da0 − log    exp Q2 (s0 , a0 ) da0 || ≤ γ  = γ||Q1 − Q2 || (40)

 ||γEs0 ∼p log
                 A                              A

Here, in the left side of the inequality, ||TΣ Q1 − TΣ Q2 ||Σ , the r(s, a) terms cancel out and we can
collapse the two expectations Es0 ∼p into one. The same is true on the right side of the inequality.
Thus T is a contraction with optimal Q-function as fixed point.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a) Zero-shot agent for r1 2 . The agent does not collide with the obstacle but
               is not globally optimal, since it greedily navigates to the top and gets stuck in
               front of the obstacle.


               (b) Adapted agent for r1 2 . The agent has adapted to the task priority con-
               straint and navigates around and out of the obstacle (yellow area in the mid-
               dle).



Figure 6: Larger copies of Fig. 1d and 2c. The background is colored according to discretized angles
of the policy, using the colormap above.         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     E XPERIMENT DETAILS
G.1   2D NAVIGATION ENVIRONMENT

The action space for this environment is in R2 and corresponds to positional changes in the x, y
plane, while the observation space is the current (x, y) coordinate. The agent’s position is clipped
to the range [−10, 10] for both dimensions. We normalize actions to unit length to bound the action
space and penalize non-straight actions. The high-priority task r1 corresponds to obstacle avoidance
and yields negative rewards in close proximity to the ∩-shaped obstacle (see Fig. 1a)
                                    (
                                                    d2
                                      −σ 2 · exp(− 2·l 2 ),    if d > 0
                           r1 (s) =           2             d2
                                                                                                 (41)
                                      −β − σ · exp(− 2·l2 ) otherwise,
where d is obstacle distance (inferred from s), σ = 1 and l = 1 parameterize a squared exponential
kernel, and β = 10 is a an additional punishment for colliding with the obstacle. The auxiliary
rewards r2 and r3 respectively yield negative rewards everywhere except in small areas at the top
and at the right side of the environment

                                                0    if s.y > 7
                                     r2 (s) =                                                (42)
                                                −δ otherwise,

                                                0   if s.x > 7
                                     r3 (s) =                   ,                            (43)
                                                −δ otherwise,
where we use δ = 5 in all our experiments. Thus, the lexicographically prioritized task r1 2
corresponds to reaching the top without colliding with the obstacle. Due to the low dimensionality
of the environment we directly exploit the proportionality relationship in equation 10 and rely on
importance sampling instead of learning a policy network for the 2D navigation experiments.

G.2   F RANKA EMIKA PANDA ENVIRONMENT

This environment features a simulated Franka Emika Panda arm, shown in Fig. 4, and based on the
Gymnasium Robotics package (de Lazcano et al., 2023). The action space A ∈ R9 corresponds
to joint positions while the state space S ∈ R18 contains all joint positions and velocities. In this
environment, the high-priority task r1 corresponds to avoiding a fixed volume (red block) in the
robots workspace and returns −10 when any number of robot joints are inside the volume. The
low-priority task r2 corresponds to reaching a fixed end-effector position (green sphere) and yields
rewards proportional to the negative distance between the end-effector and the target plus a bonus
of 100 for reaching the target. The prioritized task r1 2 thus corresponds to reaching the target
end-effector location while keeping all joints outside of the avoidance volume.

G.3   BASELINE ALGORITHMS

Here we provide additional details on the algorithms used in the baseline comparison in Sec. 4.3.
Since, to the best of our knowledge, PSQD is the first method that solves lexicographic MORL
problems with continuous action spaces, we can not rely on existing lexicographic RL algorithms
for discrete problems as baselines. Instead, we implement lexicographic task priority constraints by
simplistic means in the following, state-of-the-art DRL algorithms that support continuous action
spaces.

Prioritized Soft Actor-Critic Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018b;c) learns a uni-
variate Gaussian actor by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the policy and the
normalized, soft Q-function. This policy improvement step is given by
                                                    exp α1 Qπold (st , ·)

                                             0
                      πnew = arg minDKL π (·, st )                          ,              (44)
                               π 0 ∈Π                     Z πold (st )
where Π is a set of tractable policies (e.g. parameterized Gaussians), and Z πold (st ) is the normal-
izing constant for the unnormalized density given by Qπold (st , ·). To make for a lexicographic, i.e.
a task priority-constrained version of SAC, a simple approach is to add a regularization term to


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


equation 44 to penalize lower-priority subtask policies from diverging from higher-priority subtask
policies. Based on this intuition, for our prioritized SAC baseline, we augment the objective in equa-
tion 44 by adding another KL term that measures the divergence between the current subtask policy
and the higher-priority subtask policy
                                            exp α1 Qπold (st , ·)

  πnew = arg min(1 − β)DKL π 0 (·, st )                                        0

                                                    π
                                                                     + βD KL π   (·, st )   π pre (·, st )  , (45)
           π 0 ∈Π                                 Z old (st )
where β is a weight for the convex combination of the two KL terms and πpre is the pre-trained,
higher-priority policy. In practice, the parameters of the univariate Gaussian actor for our prioritized
SAC are given by a DNN parameterized by φ, that uses the reparametrization trick to minimize the
loss

                  Jπ (φ) = Est ∼D Eat ∼πφ [(1 − β)(α log(πφ (at | st )) − Q(st , at ))
                                                                                                              (46)
                                            +β(log πφ (at | st ) − log πpre (at | st ))] ,
which is the original SAC objective with the additional KL regularization.

Prioritized Proximal Policy Optimization To implement a prioritized version of Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) Schulman et al. (2017), we apply the same intuition as for the prioritized SAC
version, i.e. we regularize the policy to be similar to the pre-trained, higher-priority policy. PPO
maximizes a clipped version of the surrogate objective
                                                 πφ (at | st )
                                  Jπ (φ) = Et                    Ât ,                           (47)
                                                πφold (at | st )
where Ât is an estimator of the advantage function for task return at timestep t and φold is the
parameter vector of the policy before doing an update. To encourage learning a policy that respects
task priority constraints, we change the maximization to

                              πφ (at | st )                        0

              Jπ (φ) = Et                       (1 − β)Ât − βDKL π (·, st ) πpre (·, st )     ,  (48)
                             πφold (at | st )
such that the update now increases the probability of actions that have positive advantage and similar
probability under the current and pre-trained, higher-priority policy.

PSQD Ablation For the ablation to PSQD, we also pre-train the higher-priority Q-function for the
obstacle avoidance task and rely on a the c1 (s, a) priority constraint indicator functions. However,
instead of using them to project the policy into the indifference space, as PSQD does, we use them as
an indicator for a punishment of -100 that is subtracted from the lower-priority task reward whenever
the agent selects a constraint-violating action.

Soft Q-Decomposition With “Soft Q-Decomposition” we refer to a continuous version of Russell
& Zimdars (2003)’s discrete Q-Decomposition algorithm that we describe in Sec. 2.1. This algo-
rithm concurrently learns the subtask Q-functions Qi for a MORL task with vectorized reward func-
tion, such that the overall Q-function, QΣ , can be recovered from the sum of subtask Q-functions. A
key property of this algorithm is that the constituent Q-functions are learned on-policy for a central
arbiter agent that maximizes the sum of rewards. To adapt the discrete Q-Decomposition algorithm
to continuous action spaces, we combine it with the Soft Q-Learning (SQL) (Haarnoja et al., 2017)
algorithm. However, SQL is a soft version of Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) and thereby
off-policy, thus we can not directly use SQL to learn the constituent Q-functions. This is because
the SQL update to the Q-function
                                 "                                                            #
                                   1  θ                                           θ̄        2
             JQ (θ) = Est ,at ∼D      Qn (st , at ) − rn (st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼p Vn (st+1 )       (49)
                                   2
                                                Z
                                   θ̄
                                 Vn (st ) = log      exp(Qθ̄n (st , a0 )) da0 ,                  (50)
                                                    A
calculates the value of the next state by integrating over the entire action space, thereby finding
the softmax of the next state value. In practice, this integral is not computed exactly, but instead
approximated with actions sampled from some proposal distribution qa0
                                                    exp α1 Qθ̄ (st , at )

                                θ̄
                              Vn (st ) = log Eqa0                           ,                   (51)
                                                         qa0 (a0 )

                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which typically is the current policy. Thus, to fix the illusion of control in SQL update to the subtask
Q-functions, it suffices to use the arbiter policy instead of the greedy subtask policy for qa0 . This
way, the approximate soft value function in equation 51 assigns state values that correspond to the
real softmax (“LogSumExp” expression) of Q-values for actions sampled from the arbiter policy.

H     A DDITIONAL RESULTS
Here we provide additional qualitative results from the 2D navigation environment that aim to make
for additional intuition on our method and how it solves lexicographic MORL problems.

H.1    O BSTACLE INDIFFERENCE SPACE

To provide further intuition for how our composed agent implements constraints, we provide addi-
tional examples for Q  . In Fig. 7, we plot Q  = ln(c1 ) + Q̂π2   at multiple locations in the environ-
ment. The black areas indicate Ā  , the areas forbidden by the higher-priority obstacle avoidance
task, which remain fixed during subsequent adaptation steps. The non-black areas correspond to
Q̂π2   in A  , where the lower-priority tasks can learn and express its preferences.

H.2    M ULTIPLE CONSTRAINTS

We illustrate tasks with multiple lexicographic priority constraints in the 2D environment. For this,
we consider the prioritized tasks r1 2 3 and r1 3 2 . Both of these lexicographic MORL tasks
assign the highest priority to the obstacle avoidance subtask r1 , but prioritize r2 (moving to the
top) and r3 (moving to the right) differently. The prioritized task r1 2 3 assigns higher priority
to reaching the top than reaching the side, while r1 3 2 assigns higher priority to reaching the
side than reaching the top. This is a concrete example of how task priorities can be used to model
different, complex tasks. The composed, adapted agents corresponding to these lexicographic tasks
are visualized in Fig. 8a and 8b. Each white arrow corresponds to one action taken by the agent.
As can be seen, the behavior of the agents for the different prioritized tasks differs noticeably, which
is expected for different task prioritizations. The learned agent for r1 2 3 first drives to the top, then
to the side, while the agent for r1 3 2 first drives to the side, then to the top. We can again explain
this behavior by inspecting the components of these agents in Fig. 8c and 8b. For this, we place
the agent at marker 5 in Fig. 7e and plot the constraint indicator functions for the higher priority
tasks as well as the Q-function for the low priority task, for the entire action space. Both agents
are constrained by ln(c1 ) which induces Ā 1 and forbids actions that bring the agent into close
proximity of the obstacle. ln(c2 ) in Fig. 8c induces Ā 2 , which constraints π  to actions that move
up. ln(c3 ) in Fig. 8d, on the other hand, restricts the π  to actions that move to the side.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a) Marker 0.                     (b) Marker 1.                     (c) Marker 2.


           (d) Marker 3.           (e) Environment marked positions.           (f) Marker 4.


           (g) Marker 5.                     (h) Marker 6.                     (i) Marker 7.

Figure 7: Analysis of the global Q-function in action space: Q  = ln(c1 ) + Q̂π2   at different posi-
tions in the 2D environment. The x and y axes of the images correspond to the x and y components
of the action space. Brighter colored (yellow) hues indicate high probability, while darker colored
(blue) hues indicate low probability under π  . The black mask shows Ā  . As can be seen, the task
priority constraint forbids actions that lead to obstacle collisions, since those actions are not within
the ε1 value range of the optimal action for the high-priority task 1.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a) Trajectories and policy for r1 2 3 .               (b) Trajectories and policy for r1 3 2 .


                             Ā 1                                               Ā 1 ∩ Ā 3
        Qπ3

                                                                                                    Ā 1
                                     Ā 1 ∩ Ā 2
                                                                    Ā 3



                 Ā 2

                                                                                                Qπ2


 (c) Indifference space and global policy for r1 2 3 .   (d) Indifference space and global policy for r1 3 2 .

Figure 8: Trajectories, policy, action indifference space, and value function for global agents. For
the bottom row images, the agent was placed at marker 5 in Fig. 7e (i.e., in the bottom left, close to
the starting points of the trajectories). While both tasks are constrained by A¯ 1 , which prevents the
agent from getting too close to the obstacle, the differing prioritization of r2 and r3 induces different
global indifference spaces through A¯ 2 and A¯ 3 . The respective lower-priority task expresses
its preference in the global indifference space (colored area). As can be seen, the policy in (c)
is constrained to actions that move up, due to the optimality constraint on Q2 , while in (d), the
optimality constraint on Q3 constraints the policy to actions that move right.


                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: ε Ablation in the 2D navigation environment. Left: Episode return of the high-priority
obstacle-avoidance task during learning of the low-priority goal-reach task. Right: Episode returns
of the low-priority task. High-priority subtask performance decreases and low-priority subtask per-
formance increases with larger ε values.
H.3   ε A BLATION

To illustrate how ε thresholds affect the learned behavior and performance, we perform an ablation
study using different values for ε1 . We again use the 2D navigation environment from App. G and
assign high priority to the obstacle avoidance tasks and low priority to reaching the top goal. We
generate values for ε1 that are roughly log-spaced between 0 and 100. For this experiment, we
pre-train only the high-priority obstacle avoidance task and learn the low-priority goal-navigation
agent from scratch. We report the same metrics as for our baseline comparison in Sec. 4.3, meaning
during learning of the low-priority tasks r2 , we log the episode return of both subtasks, to show the
trade-off between the two objectives, depending on the threshold value.
The average results from five different random seeds are shown in Fig. 9, with high-priority task
returns shown on the left, and low-priority task returns shown on the right. Performance on the
low-priority subtask roughly falls into three groups, depending on ε1 -threshold. With very small
values for ε1 , i.e. ε1 = 0.0, 0.1, or 0.25, the algorithm can not improve the low-priority subtasks.
This is expected because the small thresholds induce such small indifference spaces that none of
the available actions allow the agent to improve the performance of the low-priority subtask. At the
same time, these small ε1 thresholds result in optimal performance for the high-priority task, since
they allow almost no divergence from the optimal behavior. Independently of the value for ε1 , as
can be seen in the left panel of Fig. 9, the episode returns for r1 are roughly constant, since Q∗1 does
not change during learning of r2 .
On the other end of the range, i.e. with large ε1 values of 3.98, 10, or 100, the algorithm achieves
optimal performance for the low-priority task. This is because the large ε1 values induce indiffer-
ences space that are not restrictive enough to prevent the agent from hitting and moving through the
obstacle, which is reflected by the high costs that these agents obtain under the high-priority task.
Most interesting are the remaining ε1 values, namely ε1 = 0.63 and ε1 = 1.58. With these values,
the agent achieves the same near-optimal performance with respect to the high-priority obstacle
avoidance task while also managing to improve low-priority subtask performance considerably. This
is because the resulting indifference spaces prevent obstacle collisions (as can be seen in Fig. 7 with
ε1 = 1) but still allow for many actions that can be used to optimize the low-priority task.
In summary, the εi scalars have a strong effect on the behavior and lower-priority subtask perfor-
mance. Too large thresholds are ineffective at forbidding undesired actions, while too small thresh-
olds are too restrictive and prevent the agent from improving subtask performance at all. However,
as described in Sec. 6, it is straightforward to infer these adequate threshold values by analysis of
the higher-priority Q-function, even when the action space is of high dimensionality.


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I   R EPRODUCIBILITY
A GitHub repository with the implementation of the algorithm, experiment setup with hyperparam-
eters, and documentation is available here: https://github.com/frietz58/psqd/. The
repository provides the complete PSQD implementation and can be used to reproduce the results in
this paper.


                                               30
