Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ENOISING D IFFUSION S TEP - AWARE M ODELS
                   Shuai Yang 1,3    Yukang Chen 2       Luozhou Wang 1,3
                           4∗
                   Shu Liu       Yingcong Chen 1,5∗
               1                   2          3
                   HKUST(GZ)          CUHK        HKUST(GZ) - SmartMore Joint Lab
                   4              5
                    SmartMore         HKUST



                                              A BSTRACT

            Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) have garnered popularity for
            data generation across various domains. However, a significant bottleneck is
            the necessity for whole-network computation during every step of the genera-
            tive process, leading to high computational overheads. This paper presents a
            novel framework, Denoising Diffusion Step-aware Models (DDSM), to address
            this challenge. Unlike conventional approaches, DDSM employs a spectrum of
            neural networks whose sizes are adapted according to the importance of each
            generative step, as determined through evolutionary search. This step-wise net-
            work variation effectively circumvents redundant computational efforts, partic-
            ularly in less critical steps, thereby enhancing the efficiency of the diffusion
            model. Furthermore, the step-aware design can be seamlessly integrated with
            other efficiency-geared diffusion models such as DDIMs and latent diffusion, thus
            broadening the scope of computational savings. Empirical evaluations demon-
            strate that DDSM achieves computational savings of 49% for CIFAR-10, 61% for
            CelebA-HQ, 59% for LSUN-bedroom, 71% for AFHQ, and 76% for ImageNet,
            all without compromising the generation quality. Our code and models are avail-
            able at https://github.com/EnVision-Research/DDSM.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) have emerged as a powerful tool in the genera-
tion of high-quality samples across a range of media. The core idea hinges on a predefined diffusion
process that gradually corrupts the original information by injecting Gaussian noise into the data.
Subsequently, a neural network learns a denoising procedure to systematically recover the original
data step by step.
However, a notable drawback of DDPMs lies in their ef-
ficiency. The generative phase requires hundreds to thou-                DDPM, 49.88GFLOPs
sands of iterations to reverse the noise and retrieve sam-
ples, significantly lagging behind the efficiency of other
generative models like Generative Adversarial Networks
                                                                          Proper, 40.54GFLOPs
(GANs) that only necessitate a single pass through the
network. Moreover, the iterative nature of diffusion mod-                             t=250
els requires a full pass through the neural network at every
denoising step to yield a single sample, raising questions
                                                                         Improper, 40.54GFLOPs
regarding its efficiency and practicality.
Given these challenges, a natural question arises: do all                  t=750
diffusion steps require equal computational resources?                             Small model   Large model
We hypothesize that different diffusion steps have vary-       Figure 1: Combinations of different
ing levels of importance. In certain less critical steps, a    models along steps. The proper combi-
smaller model might suffice. It is, therefore, imprudent       nation leads to high-quality samples and
to allocate equal computational resources across all steps.    computational saving.
To substantiate this hypothesis, we crafted a fusion of a
    ∗
        Corresponding Author


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


large and a small model into four distinct model combinations for various steps. Our findings reveal
a notable variance in performance across different combinations, even under identical computa-
tional budgets. As illustrated in Figure 1, a good model combination produces favorable outcomes,
whereas an inappropriate one leads to a less pleasing generation. This insight underscores the fact
that the significance varies across different steps, pinpointing redundancy in contemporary DDPMs.
Thus, the quest for an astute step-aware model combination can help pare down redundancies and
expedite the diffusion model’s operations.
Based on these observations, we propose using different networks for different steps. We delve into
the formulation of diffusion models and extend it to a more general one. We show the feasibility
of this approach and present the Denoising Diffusion Step-aware Models (DDSM). In DDSM, the
neural network is variable and slimmable at different steps to avoid redundant computation at unim-
portant steps. We determine the capacity of the neural network at each step via evolutionary search
and prune the network to various scales accordingly. The pruned network requires no re-training
and shares weights with the intact one.
In our comprehensive empirical evaluation, we showcase the benefits of DDSM by conducting ex-
tensive experiments on five distinct datasets: CIFAR-10, CelebA-HQ, LSUN-bedroom, AFHQ, and
ImageNet. We successfully achieved FLOPs acceleration rates of 49% for CIFAR-10, 61% for
CelebA-HQ, 59% for LSUN-bedroom, 71% for AFHQ, and 76% for ImageNet. The search result
varies according to the attributes of different datasets, further indicating the significance of step-
aware search.
In addition, our findings indicate that DDSM, a unique method focusing on pruning network
steps, is orthogonal and easily compatible with established diffusion acceleration techniques like
DDIM (Song et al., 2020a) and latent diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). Our experiments show that
integrating DDSM can further boost their efficiency.”


2   R ELATED WORK

Diffusion Models        Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Song
et al., 2020b; Ho et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Vahdat et al., 2021) are generative models
that transform a simple Gaussian distribution into a more complex data distribution. This is done
progressively, enabling the generation of high-quality samples from the target distribution. However,
a major concern with the diffusion model is the high computational cost resulting from the repeated
use of a large U-net model, which typically consists of more than 35.75M parameters and requires
12.14T FLOPs to produce a sample for CIFAR-10.
Diffusion Acceleration Several existing works have sought to mitigate the computational costs
associated with the extended step. For instance, DDIM (Song et al., 2020a), PNDM (Liu et al.,
2022), and DPM solver (Lu et al., 2022a;b) have introduced first-order and high-order solvers. These
solvers drastically cut down the number of steps required during inference. Additionally, knowledge
distillation techniques have been employed by researchers (Salimans & Ho, 2022; Luhman & Luh-
man, 2021) to train a student model from a teacher model, effectively reducing the step. Another
innovative approach involves compressing the data prior to training the denoising model (Rombach
et al., 2022). By working with a reduced dimension of input data, this method diminishes the com-
putational demands of inference. AutoDiffusion (Li et al., 2023), a concurrent study, suggests a
non-uniform skipping of steps and blocks within the generation sequence, offering further accel-
eration to DDPMs. In our study, we tackle the challenge from a unique angle. We aim to curtail
the overall computation of the diffusion generation process by adaptively pruning the U-net at each
step. It’s important to highlight that our strategy is orthogonal to the aforementioned methods and
can seamlessly integrate with them. Several notable works share a close relationship with ours.
OMS-DPM (Liu et al., 2023) firstly proposes an effective predictor-based algorithm to optimize the
model-schedule. Compared to OMS-DPM, our work advances this field by implementing a super-
net, efficiently scaling up the model zoo to a considerably larger size. Spectral Diffusion (Yang et al.,
2022), endeavors to expedite diffusion models by harnessing denoising loss to train a dynamic gate
for acceleration. Our method, however, adopts a more straightforward metric: the FID. While Spec-
tral Diffusion incorporates channel filtering, leading to sparse feature maps, we utilize slimmable
networks and channel slicing. This results in continuously pruned channels, optimizing GPU ef-
ficiency. While eDiff-I Balaji et al. (2023) adopts multiple expert models at each step to improve


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Combination A                                          Combination B
 1000                             250          0        1000                   500     250        0

                    Combination C                                          Combination D
 1000         750       500                    0        1000         750                          0

                                 Tiny model                    Large model


Figure 2: The diagrams of different model combinations. Combinations A, B, C, and D have the
same computation cost. The only difference between them is the steps of using tiny models.
image quality, it does not enhance efficiency, as all these expert models are uniformly sized. Our
method distinguishes itself by utilizing models of varying sizes for acceleration purposes.
Network Pruning Model pruning has a rich history in the literature of neural networks. In the
early period, model pruning (Han et al., 2016) is limited to sparsify connections in the network
architecture, while the actual speedup from these methods might be constrained by hardware. Latter
methods (Ye et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017) extend the pruning scope to channels,
filters, or layers. Slimmable network (Yu & Huang, 2019b) further includes knowledge distillation
into pruning. It trains a supernet network that is executable at various widths, which enables adaptive
accuracy-efficiency trade-offs during inference. Network pruning focuses on the architecture in a
single inference time while ours makes it to be step-aware in various denoising steps.


3       D ISCUSSION OF S TEP - AWARE N ETWORKS

3.1     P ILOT S TUDY

Conventional diffusion models use a heavy network for all denoising steps, ignoring the differences
between the steps. However, we hypothesize that some steps in the generation process may be easier
to process, and that even a lightweight network can handle these steps. Treating all steps equally
leads to redundancies.
To verify our hypothesis, we conducted experiments on CIFAR-10, with two pre-trained networks
of different model sizes. We first tried replacing all steps with smaller models. As shown in line
1 and line 2 of Table 1, the large model obviously outperformed the tiny one. Generally, the large
model demonstrates its stronger ability to denoising. Uniform pruning to the tiny model leads to
drops in image quality.
However, when we only prune some specific steps of the process, the results seem to vary. We
manually composed four model combinations with both the large and tiny models and evaluated
their performance. To ensure the same computation cost, all combinations used the large model for
750 steps and the tiny model for 250 steps, but the range of steps using tiny models varied across
the combinations. Combinations A, B, C, and D employed tiny models for the step ranges [0, 250),
[250, 500), [500, 750), and [750, 1000), respectively. The diagrams of these combinations are shown
in Figure 2.
Table 1: Evaluation of the model combinations on         The surprising evaluation results showed that
CIFAR-10.                                                different combinations led to different out-
      Method              FID    GFLOPs                  comes, as shown in Table 1. Proper model com-
      DDPM-tiny          18.64       0.38                binations achieved comparable, or even slightly
      DDPM-large          3.71       12.1                better, image quality than the baseline large
      Combination A 10.61            9.20                model, while taking less computation cost. Im-
      Combination B       4.38       9.20                proper model combinations led to significant
      Combination C       3.30       9.20                drops in performance, even though they had the
      Combination D 3.62             9.20                same FLOPs as the proper ones.
These experiments validated our hypothesis and gave us three conclusions:

         • It is not necessary to use large models for every step.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • The importance of different diffusion steps varies.
       • If we fully utilize the tiny model for its suitable steps, we can achieve excellent results with
         less computational cost.

These exciting conclusions have led us to a way to improve the diffusion model efficiency. We are
eagerly seeking an excellent step-aware strategy to remove redundancies and accelerate the model.

3.2   F ORMULATION A NALYSIS

In this section, we show that it is possible to combine different networks in a diffusion process. We
first review the mathematical model of the diffusion process, and then expand it to a generalized
version that supports step-aware diffusion.
Diffusion models are generative models that use latent variables. They define a Markov chain of
diffusion steps that gradually add noise to data, and then train a neural network to approximate the
reverse diffusion distribution to construct desired data samples from the noise (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020).
Suppose the data distribution is q(x0 ) where x0 denotes the original data. Given a training data
sample x0 ∼ q(x0 ), the forward diffusion process aims to produce a series of noisy latents
x1 , x2 , · · · , xT by the following Markovian process,
                                                     p
                              q(xt | xt−1 ) = N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I), ∀t ∈ T,            (1)
where t is the step number of the diffusion process, T denotes the set of the steps, βt ∈ (0, 1)
represents the variance in the diffusion process, I is the identity matrix with the same dimensions as
the input x0 , and N (x; µ, σ) means the normal distribution with mean µ and covariance σ.
To generate a new data sample, diffusion models sample xT from a standard normal distribution
and then gradually remove noise using the intractable reverse distribution q(xt−1 | xt ). Tradition-
ally, diffusion models learn a general neural network pθ for all steps to approximate the reverse
distribution, as shown in Eq. 2.
                            pθ (xt−1 | xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), Σθ (xt , t)),                   (2)
where µ and Σ are the trainable mean and covariance functions, respectively.
It is natural to expand this to use a different network θ for different steps. The reverse distribution
does not necessarily require the same network for the entire process, as long as the network can ap-
proximate the reverse distribution p. To release this constraint, we only need to change the network
θ in Eq. 2 to a functional F (t), as shown in Eq. 3. The F (t) returns different networks θ for different
steps t. In this formulation, the traditional method can be viewed as a special case of ours, where
F (t) is a constant functional that returns the same function θ for all steps.
                       pF (t) (xt−1 | xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µF (t) (xt , t), ΣF (t) (xt , t)),            (3)

Therefore, with the expanded version of the diffusion model in Eq. 3, it is theoretically possible to
combine different networks in a diffusion generation process.

4     S TEP - AWARE N ETWORK FOR D IFFUSION M ODELS

4.1   S TEP - AWARE N ETWORK T RAINING

In Section 3.1, we show that a human-designed model combination of two different sub-networks
with various model sizes can improve efficiency. However, this design still has two constraints.
First, the design’s flexibility is limited by the number of sub-networks. Fewer sub-networks may not
provide enough flexibility to adjust network size for different steps, while more sub-networks would
require training each of them, significantly increasing training costs. Second, a human-designed
ensemble strategy may result in sub-optimal results.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Sub-networks                                              Candidate Strategies

                  training
                 ↺ loss                    Strategy 1   𝜃#$            $
                                                                      𝜃#%$ …         𝜃&$    Images
       𝜃"


                  training                                                                                         Best
                                     Θ                                 '
                                                                      𝜃#%$ …
       𝜃"        ↺ loss                    Strategy 2   𝜃#'                          𝜃&'    Images   Evolution
                                                                                                                 Strategy
                                                                                                      Search
                                                                                                                 𝐹(Θ, 𝑡)
                  training
       𝜃!        ↺ loss                                                (
                                           Strategy n   𝜃#(           𝜃#%$ …         𝜃&(    Images
                                 Forward
                                  Update

        Slimmable Network Training                             Step-aware Strategy Search


Figure 3: The overall procedure of DDSM, including training and searching. In this figure, the
color green represents the activated weights within the network, whereas blue represents the inactive
weights. The varying proportions of blue and green in different networks indicate networks of
various sizes. The supernet, which has all of its weights activated, is depicted entirely in green. In
the training stage, we update the slimmable network via its sub-networks optimization. When the
slimmable network converges, it can be executed at any arbitrary size. In the searching stage, we
aim to find a step-aware strategy that assigns different models to their suitable steps. We employ the
evolution algorithm to search for the optimal strategy.

Algorithm 1 DDSM Training
 1: q(x0 ) is the data distribution, S is the the step set, ᾱt is the noise schedule parameter.
 2: Θ is the slimmable network, θl and θs is the largest and the smallest sub-network of Θ.
 3: repeat
 4:    x0 ∼ q(x0 ), t ∈ S, ϵ ∼ N (0, I)
 5:    θr ∼ Θ // Sample a random sub-network
 6:    for θ = θl , θs , θr do
 7:         Take gradient descent step on
                               √           √              2
 8:               ∇ϕ ϵ − ϵθ ( ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ, t)
 9:    end for
10: until Θ converged



To address these constraints, we introduce the slimmable network and the step-aware evolutionary
search. A slimmable network (Yu et al., 2018; Yu & Huang, 2019b;a) is a neural network that can be
executed at arbitrary model sizes. When training the slimmable network, we simultaneously push
up the lower and upper bounds of its sub-networks, which can implicitly boost the performance of
all sub-networks.
Specifically, for each training iteration, we sample a random sub-network θr from the slimmable
network Θ. Then, we take the DDPM training step on the largest sub-network θl , the smallest
sub-network θs , and the sampled sub-network θr . By optimizing these sub-networks, we can get a
slimmable network that contains a large number of networks with fine-grained model size options,
without the need for multiple training runs. The training procedure for DDSM slimmable network
is shown in Algorithm 1.
Our method applies the slimmable network to diffusion denoising tasks instead of image recognition.
Through empirical testing, we have found that the in-place distillation and switchable batch normal-
ization, which were proposed by the slimmable network, do not improve network performance on
the diffusion task. Therefore, we have removed these techniques for simplicity.

4.2    S TEP - AWARE E VOLUTIONARY S EARCH

After training the slimmable network, we perform a multi-objective evolutionary search within the
slimmable network to minimize the model size and maximize performance under different compu-
tational constraints. NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002) is the most commonly used method for this type
of search (Jozefowicz et al., 2015; Pietroń et al., 2021; Elsken et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2020) due


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 DDSM Evolutionary Searching
 1: Input: the slimmable network Θ, number of generation G, population size P , mutation
    probability m, FLOPs objective weight wM , source dataset X
 2: Generate the initial population p of strategies
 3: for g in range(G) do
 4:     for each individual i in p do
 5:         score(i) = FID(i, Θ, X) + wM × FLOPs(i)
 6:         assign a rank to the individual i
 7:     end for
 8:     selection(p, P) # select new population
 9:     crossover(p) # crossover among individuals
10:     mutation(p, m) # mutate individuals according to m
11: end for
12: find the best individual F with the highest score
13: Output: the best step-aware strategy F



to its non-dominated sorting method, which helps balance conflicting objectives. This objective-
oriented method eliminates the need for extensive human efforts in step-aware strategy designing
and demonstrates a strong ability in finding solutions.
To conduct the search, we use NSGA-II as the search agent. We initialize the NSGA-II with some
uniform non-step-aware strategies and some random strategies in the first generation. Our search
algorithm adopts single-point crossover on a random position and random choice mutation to en-
hance generation diversity. When a mutation occurs, a selected step model size changes to another
available choice randomly. The searching algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 2.
Once we obtain an optimal step-aware strategy F , we can use it to speed up the sampling process.
For each sampling, we employ our step-aware strategy F to select the most suitable sub-network
θ from the slimmable network Θ, and we use θ to denoise a single diffusion step. The overall
procedure of DDSM is presented in Figure 3, including training and searching.

4.3   C OMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER ACCELERATION

Our method accelerates diffusion models by using different-sized models to process different steps.
It is compatible with existing methods, making it a plug-and-play module that is easy to use. When
combined with latent diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022), we only need to train the slimmable
network on the latent space. When combined with step-skipping methods (Song et al., 2020a; Liu
et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022a;b), we only need to reduce the evolutionary search space to the skipped
one.
Our experiments in Section 5.4 show that our method works well with DDIM and Latent Diffusion,
producing a much more efficient diffusion model compared to the baselines. This makes our ap-
proach effective and practical. It provides a new angle to accelerate diffusion while keeping quality
high and computational costs low.

5     E XPERIMENT
We conduct experiments on five image datasets on different domains, ranging from small scale to
large scale. They are CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), CelebA-HQ (64x64, 128x128) (Liu et al.,
2015), LSUN-bedroom (Yu et al., 2016), AFHQ (Choi et al., 2020), and ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009). Due to the length limitation, we present the LSUN-bedroom, AFHQ, CelebA-HQ-128, and
conditional CIFAR-10 results in the appendix.

5.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAIL

Data settings For the CIFAR-10 dataset, we utilized the standard split of 50,000 images desig-
nated for training. These images were normalized and resized to a resolution of 32x32 pixels. For
the CelebA-HQ-64, AFHQ, and LSUN-bedroom datasets, we adhered to the typical training data


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


splits, normalizing and resizing the images to 64x64 pixels. As for ImageNet, we aligned our pro-
cessing with the unconditional ImageNet-64 settings as described in Nichol & Dhariwal (2021).
During training for all these datasets, we incorporated random horizontal flipping as a data augmen-
tation technique.

Training settings Our network architecture followed the setting in ADM (Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021), without the classifier guidance. We used a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) with an attention
mechanism to down-sample input images and then up-sample them back. For more training details,
we present them in the Section D of the appendix.

Search and evaluation For our search algorithm, we utilized NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002), and
implemented it leveraging the open-source tools pymoo (Blank & Deb, 2020) and pytorch (Paszke
et al., 2017). For assessing image quality, we adopted the FID metric (Heusel et al., 2017). To evalu-
ate speed, we calculated the average Floating Point Operations (FLOPs) across all steps throughout
the image generation process. Additionally, we assessed real GPU latency to demonstrate the gen-
uine acceleration capabilities of our method. The GPU latency is the time cost of generating one
image with a single NVIDIA RTX 3090. For more details about search and evaluation, we present
them in the Section D of the appendix.


Table 2: A comparative analysis of ADM and DDSM models on CIFAR-10, CelebA-HQ, and Im-
ageNet datasets. GLOPs are measured as the average over 1,000 generation steps, and latency
represents the GPU processing time (in seconds) for generating a single image on an NVIDIA RTX-
3090.
                    CIFAR-10                      CelebA-HQ                        ImageNet
  method      FID   GFLOPs latency         FID     GFLOPs latency          FID     GFLOPs latency
  ADM        3.713   12.14       0.93     6.755      49.88       2.25     27.000     82.06   4.75
  DDSM 3.552          6.20       0.59     6.039      19.58       1.13     24.714     19.40   3.22


5.2   R ESULT

Table 2 shows the quantitative results of our DDSM compared to ADM, on CIFAR-10, CelebA-HQ,
and ImageNet. Our DDSM shows its superiority on speed while maintaining high generative quality.
It is also noteworthy that our method not only reduce the FLOPs of diffusion inference, but it also
achieve actual acceleration. When pruning the networks with the step-aware strategy, we slice the
channel contiguously. This is a GPU friendly operation and could provide actual acceleration.
On CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, DDSM has only 51% and 24% FLOPs of the ADM but still achieves
better image quality. On CelebA-HQ, DDSM only takes about 39% FLOPs of the original ADM,
yet it produces images with comparable quality.

5.3   A BLATION S TUDY ON THE S TEP - AWARE S TRATEGIES

                                                      In this section, we compared DDSM to dif-
                                                      ferent strategies. The ADM-large denotes the
Table 3: Comparison of different step strategies.     most common baseline ADM, which takes the
The experiments are conducted on CIFAR-10.            whole network to sample an image. The
The result of the random strategy is calculated by    ADM-mid, ADM-small and ADM-tiny uni-
averaging three different random strategies.          formly prune the network for each of the steps
     Strategy          FID    avg. GFLOPs             with different pruning densities. They still take
     ADM-large        3.713       12.14               the same network to denoise and treat all steps
     ADM-mid          4.697        8.84               equally. The random strategy means we com-
     ADM-small 5.936               3.04               pletely choose a random model size for each
     ADM-tiny        18.638        0.38               step. DDSM denotes the strategy searched by
     Random          7.727         5.64               our proposed method.
     DDSM            3.552         6.20               The result is shown in Table 3 The ADM-large
                                                      takes heavy average FLOPs of 12.14 to pro-
                                                      duce an image. The ADM-mid, ADM-small


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and ADM-tiny manage to reduce their computational cost, but they scarify image quality. The ran-
dom strategy even achieves worse results than the ADM-mid strategies, indicating that an aimless
combination of networks without step awareness could even decrease the performance. Compared
to all of these baselines, our DDSM strategy demonstrates its superiority in both image quality and
speed.

5.4   C OMBINING WITH OTHER ACCELERATION

In this section, we present our work’s compatibility with the step-skipping acceleration methods and
latent diffusion. We choose the most commonly used scheduler, DDIM and a recent sampler EDM
to conduct experiments. More details can be found in our appendix.
DDIM models the denoising diffusion process in a non-Markovian process and proposes to respace
the sampling procedure. It skips the steps of the diffusion generation process while generating high-
quality images. Our method is theoretically compatible with DDIM since we only focus on model
width rather than steps. To integrate DDIM, we searched the step-aware strategy on the respaced
time steps. We employed DDSM in different step-skipping degrees of DDIM, as shown in Table 4. It
shows that our method achieves further acceleration compared to separately using DDIM, no matter
what step-skipping degree DDIM adopts.


Table 4: Combining DDSM with DDIM. The upper part of the table presents the FID score. The
lower part of the table presents the total FLOPs of the generation process. Our DDSM can further
accelerate DDIM in all step-skipping conditions without quality compromise. The result is reported
on CelebA.
                                              T=10 T=50 T= 100 T=1000
                                   DDIM       28.72 9.385 7.912           6.755
                 FID
                                   +DDSM 28.33 8.826 7.132                6.039
                                   DDIM       0.498 2.494 4.988           49.88
                 Total TFLOPs
                                   +DDSM 0.260 1.376 2.384                19.58

We also present our DDSM can be combining with the famous Latent Diffusion Model (LDM), and
further accomplish an excellent acceleration. For simplicity, we directly employ Stable Diffusion’s
encoder to obtain the latent vectors. The result is shown in Table 5. It shows that our DDSM combine
well with the LDM on the CelebA dataset.

5.5   A NALYSIS OF THE S EARCHED R ESULTS

                                                       In this section, we present the DDSM searched
                                                       strategies using smoothed color bars and line
Table 5: Combining DDSM with Latent Diffu-             graphs. The result is shown in Figure 4 (a)
sion Model(LDM). The experiment is conducted           and (b). In the color bars, yellow denotes the
on the CelebA dataset.                                 smallest model, while green denotes the largest
    Method             FID  avg. GFLOPs                model. Middle-sized models between these two
    LDM               10.91      5.52                  are presented with an interpolation of yellow
    LDM + DDSM 10.76             2.22                  and green.
For CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, DDSM generally tends to use larger models when the step number
goes to zero. However, for CelebA, DDSM has a completely different tendency. It employs larger
models at the beginning steps and leans towards smaller models as the step number decreases.
We attribute this phenomenon to the difference in the dataset attributes. In the beginning steps of
generation, diffusion models are responsible for coarse structure generation (Choi et al., 2022).
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet are multi-classes datasets of natural images with large variety. Due to
the image diversity, various structures are included in the dataset, so the restriction of generating
coarse structures of these images is very loose. In this case, the early-stage diffusion model can
give any type of coarse structure, just as it is in Figure 4 (b). No matter what structure it generates,
it can always find a proper object suitable for this structure. All it needs to do is to produce some
inspiration for the latter generation. Therefore, the coarse structure generation task is easy in CIFAR-
10 and ImageNet, resulting in small model usage in the DDSM’s search result. On the other hand,


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         (a) Search result (smoothed color bind)       (b) Search result (line graph)     (c) Generation sequence


     ImageNet CIFAR-10
     CelebA


                   T                                               0
                    small                                  large



Figure 4: (a) The search results are presented in color bars. The yellow color denotes small models.
The green color denotes large models. (b) The search results are presented in line graphs. (c) The
generation sequences of CIFAR-10 and CelebA

in CelebA, the coarse structure of images is relatively uniform. Every image of CelebA should have
an oval-like contour in the center, and the basic position of organs like eyes, nose, ears, and mouth
should be fixed at some particular points, as shown in Figure 4 (b). Once the coarse structure goes
wrong, the latter steps of the diffusion model can rarely fix this mistake. This restriction forces the
diffusion model to possess a stronger structure-caption ability in the early stage, resulting in large
model usage in the DDSM’s search result.
In the latter steps of generation, diffusion models take charge of detail generation. For CIFAR-10
and ImageNet, every detail matters when considering image quality. When generating cars, wheels
must be in the right shape and color. When generating birds, the beak and wings must have a correct
pattern. However, in CelebA, these pixel-level details on faces do not largely affect the general
image quality. Under the large resolution generation, the organs and structures have already been
generated in the previous steps. Detail generation can be viewed as a simple interpolation of colors
in CelebA generation.
In appendix, the search outcomes of LSUN-bedroom and AFHQ further prove our hypothesis. The
LSUN-bedroom results paralleled those of CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, due to their shared high variety,
while AFHQ echoed the patterns seen in CelebA-HQ, as both centrally feature face contours.
                                                                                     We also conduct a strategy swap on these two
                                                                                     datasets. The result is in Table 6. Applying
Table 6: FID scores of swapping the searched                                         CIFAR-10’s strategy to CelebA leads to a great
strategy in CIFAR10 and CelebA. Different rows                                       drop in performance, and vice versa, indicat-
denote different strategies. Different columns de-                                   ing the significance of searching for an optimal
note
  XX  different datasets.                                                            strategy for each dataset.
       XX Dataset
             X            CelebA CIFAR-10            Overall, the step’s importance distribution is
   Strategy XXXX
   CelebA                 6.039      8.140           highly dependent on the dataset. We must con-
   CIFAR-10               7.431      3.552           sider the influence of the dataset when trying to
                                                     design a step-aware strategy. For concrete anal-
                                                     ysis of the behaviors of different steps, more
theoretical proof and empirical efforts are required. We leave them for future work. We believe
our method can be used as a good tool to find the importance of different steps. It may assist us in
analyzing the in-depth theory of the responsibility of each step in the future.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we re-examine the data generation steps in DDPMs and observe that the whole-network
computation in all steps might be unnecessary and inefficient. For acceleration, we propose the step-
aware network, DDSMs, as the solution. In DDSMs, we adopt the neural network in various sizes at
different steps, according to generation difficulties. We conduct extensive experiments and show its
effectiveness on CelebA, CIFAR-10, LSUN-bedroom, AFHQ, and ImageNet. DDSMs can present
high-quality samples, with at most 76% computational cost saving.


                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Qinsheng Zhang, Karsten
  Kreis, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, Tero Karras, and Ming-Yu Liu.
  ediff-i: Text-to-image diffusion models with an ensemble of expert denoisers, 2023.
J. Blank and K. Deb. pymoo: Multi-objective optimization in python. IEEE Access, 8:89497–89509,
   2020.
Jooyoung Choi, Jungbeom Lee, Chaehun Shin, Sungwon Kim, Hyunwoo Kim, and Sungroh Yoon.
  Perception prioritized training of diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11472–11481, 2022.
Yunjey Choi, Youngjung Uh, Jaejun Yoo, and Jung-Woo Ha. Stargan v2: Diverse image synthesis
  for multiple domains. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2020.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. A fast and elitist mul-
  tiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 6(2):
  182–197, 2002.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: A survey. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(1):1997–2017, 2019.
Gongfan Fang, Xinyin Ma, Mingli Song, Michael Bi Mi, and Xinchao Wang. Depgraph: Towards
  any structural pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 16091–16101, 2023a.
Gongfan Fang, Xinyin Ma, and Xinchao Wang. Structural pruning for diffusion models. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b.
Ronghao Guo, Chen Lin, Chuming Li, Keyu Tian, Ming Sun, Lu Sheng, and Junjie Yan. Powering
  one-shot topological nas with stabilized share-parameter proxy. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020:
  16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XIV, pp. 625–
  641. Springer, 2020.
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J. Dally. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural network
  with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2016.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. NeurIPS,
 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. NeurIPS,
  2020.
Rafal Jozefowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Ilya Sutskever. An empirical exploration of recurrent
  network architectures. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2342–2350. PMLR,
  2015.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2022.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lijiang Li, Huixia Li, Xiawu Zheng, Jie Wu, Xuefeng Xiao, Rui Wang, Min Zheng, Xin Pan, Fei
  Chao, and Rongrong Ji. Autodiffusion: Training-free optimization of time steps and architectures
  for automated diffusion model acceleration, 2023.

Enshu Liu, Xuefei Ning, Zinan Lin, Huazhong Yang, and Yu Wang. OMS-DPM: Optimizing the
  model schedule for diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 21915–21936. PMLR, 2023.

Luping Liu, Yi Ren, Zhijie Lin, and Zhou Zhao. Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion models on
  manifolds. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Zhuang Liu, Jianguo Li, Zhiqiang Shen, Gao Huang, Shoumeng Yan, and Changshui Zhang. Learn-
  ing efficient convolutional networks through network slimming. In International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 2755–2763, 2017.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.

Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A
  fast ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.00927, 2022a.

Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver++: Fast
  solver for guided sampling of diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01095,
  2022b.

Eric Luhman and Troy Luhman. Knowledge distillation in iterative generative models for improved
  sampling speed. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.02388, 2021.

Jian-Hao Luo, Jianxin Wu, and Weiyao Lin. Thinet: A filter level pruning method for deep neural
   network compression. In International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5068–5076, 2017.

Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. In NIPS-W, 2017.

M Pietroń, D Żurek, and Kamil Faber. Fast and scalable neuroevolution deep learning architecture
 search for multivariate anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05640, 2021.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.

Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. 2015.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.

Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based generative modeling in latent space.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11287–11302, 2021.
Xingyi Yang, Daquan Zhou, Jiashi Feng, and Xinchao Wang. Diffusion probabilistic model made
  slim, 2022.
Jianbo Ye, Xin Lu, Zhe Lin, and James Z. Wang. Rethinking the smaller-norm-less-informative
   assumption in channel pruning of convolution layers. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2018.
Fisher Yu, Ari Seff, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Thomas Funkhouser, and Jianxiong Xiao. Lsun:
  Construction of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with humans in the loop, 2016.
Jiahui Yu and Thomas Huang. Autoslim: Towards one-shot architecture search for channel numbers.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11728, 2019a.
Jiahui Yu and Thomas S Huang. Universally slimmable networks and improved training techniques.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 1803–1811,
   2019b.
Jiahui Yu, Linjie Yang, Ning Xu, Jianchao Yang, and Thomas Huang. Slimmable neural networks.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08928, 2018.
Wenliang Zhao, Lujia Bai, Yongming Rao, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Unipc: A unified predictor-
 corrector framework for fast sampling of diffusion models. NeurIPS, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A     E XPERIMENT ON LSUN- BEDROOM AND AFHQ
We’ve validated DDSM’s effectiveness and scalability on two extra datasets, LSUN-bedroom
(64x64) and AFHQ (64x64). LSUN-bedroom is entirely non-object-centric. While AFHQ is object-
centric but from a domain different from CelebA. SaDiffusion achieves 59% and 71% acceleration
on the respective datasets without compromising image quality, as detailed in Table 7.
The search results in Figure 5 of LSUN-bedroom and AFHQ further validate our analysis of the
dataset’s attributes. The LSUN-bedroom results parallels those of CIFAR-10, due to their shared
high variety, while AFHQ echoed the patterns seen in CelebA-HQ, as both centrally feature face
contours.

                       Table 7: Evaluation on LSUN-bedroom and AFHQ

                                    LSUN-bedroom            AFHQ
                        Method      FID   GFLOPs        FID   GFLOPs
                        ADM        5.027   49.88       7.244   49.88
                        DDSM       5.289   20.48       6.249   14.72


             LSUN-bedroom                                           AFHQ

     T                                     0         T                                      0
    small                                                                                large

                     Figure 5: search results on LSUN-bedroom and AFHQ

B     C OMPARISON WITH C ONCURRENT W ORK D IFF -P RUNING
We elucidate the differences and provide an empirical comparison with the recent Diff-pruning Fang
et al. (2023a;b). Diff-pruning employs a Taylor expansion over pruned timesteps to effectively
reduce computational overhead. This approach primarily focuses on pruning the entire network.
Our method, in contrast, adopts a strategy of adaptively pruning the network at various timesteps.
This approach allows for a more nuanced and efficient solution. For a clearer understanding of
these differences, we conducted an empirical comparison with Diff-pruning. Table 8 showcases our
experiment on CelebA 64x64 using 100 steps. Our DDSM not only achieves a FID comparable to
Diff-pruning but also demonstrates superior efficiency.


       Table 8: Experimental comparison with Diff-Pruning, on CelebA 64x64, 100 steps.
                Metric                     Baseline Diff-pruning DDSM
                FID (Lower is better)        6.48          6.24        6.04
                GFLOPS (Lower is better)     49.9          26.6        19.6


C     C OMBINING WITH THE EDM SAMPLER
Our DDSM is compatible with recent sampling schedulers, such as DPM Lu et al. (2022a),
DPM++ Lu et al. (2022b), uniPC Zhao et al. (2023), and EDM Karras et al. (2022). These samplers
are primarily focused on devising novel noise schedules to enhance the performance of diffusion
models. Our method, which adaptively prunes at different steps, is theoretically compatible with
these approaches. Among these samplers, we have chosen EDM for our experiments, as we believe


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


this selection could demonstrate our method’s suitability for similar methods. In the experiment, we
kept the pretrained weights of DDSM. We then replaced the original DDPM scheduler with EDM’s
Heun Discrete 2nd order method and initiated a new search process. The results, as illustrated in
Table 9, show that DDSM effectively integrates with EDM on the unconditional CIFAR-10 dataset,
achieving 45% and 56% total TFLOPs saving for 50 steps and 100 steps. Note that, the quality can
be further improved when retraining the network with EDM’s setting.


            Table 9: Experiment result of combining DDSM with EDM, on CIFAR-10.
          Metric           EDM50 EDM50+DDSM EDM100 EDM100+DDSM
          FID               3.65            3.61        3.41           3.49
          Total TFLOPs      0.61            0.34        1.22           0.54


D    E XPERIMENT ON C ELEBA-HQ 128 X 128
We conduct experiments on CelebA-HQ-128x128 to prove that our DDSM is applicable with higher
resolution data. In this experiment, we train a new slimmable supernet from scratch, and directly
employ the search result on CelebA-HQ-64x64 to super network. Table 10 shows the result.


                        Table 10: Experiment result on CelebA-HQ 128x128.
                           Metric                       ADM DDSM
                           FID (Lower is better)         7.53    7.71
                           GFLOPS (Lower is better) 194.00      76.18


E    E XPERIMENT ON C ONDITIONAL CIFAR-10
We also conduct experiments on conditional CIFAR-10 to prove that our DDSM is applicable with
guided diffusion. In this experiment, we train a guided diffusion slimmable supernet from scratch,
and directly employ the search result on unconditional CIFAR-10 to super network. Table 11 shows
the result.

                       Table 11: Experiment result on conditional CIFAR-10.
                           Metric                       ADM DDSM
                           FID (Lower is better)        2.48      2.52
                           GFLOPS (Lower is better) 12.14         6.20


F    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Architecture Our implementation of slimmable networks draws inspiration from the US-Net.
These networks are characterized by their ability to operate at various widths, providing a flexi-
ble and universal solution for network scalability. During the training of slimmable networks, we
focus on optimizing the smallest, largest, and a selection of randomly sampled middle-sized sub-
networks. This approach implicitly enhances the performance of all potential networks within the
supernet.
In practical terms, our slimmable UNet adheres to the structure of ADM, but with a significant
modification: all convolution layers are replaced by slimmable convolutions. These specialized
convolutions are capable of adaptively processing tensors with a varying number of input channels.
To accommodate a broader range of sub-networks, we adjusted the group number in the group
normalization layer from 32 to 16. Additionally, we chose to omit the Batch Normalization (BN)
calibration stage, as proposed in [11], since our diffusion UNet exclusively utilizes GroupNorm.
Regarding the sizes of the sub-networks, we offer seven different options, corresponding to 28 , 38 , 48 ,
5 6 7           8
8 , 8 , 8 , and 8 of the original ADM’s width. To find more efficient strategies, we manually exclude


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


some large width options. For example, in CIFAR-10, we exclude the 78 and 88 options. In most
cases, the total strategy space is of 7num timesteps .

Search and Evaluation In the searching phase, the FID was computed by comparing the entire
training dataset with the generated images. Empirical findings indicate that the FID score offers
more consistent performance measurement compared to the loss; therefore, we aimed to search for
a strategy yielding a lower FID. For the search parameters, the process encompasses a total of 10
iterations, with each iteration involving a population of 50, and maintaining a mutation rate of 0.001.
The initial generation crucially includes a mix of uniform non-step-aware strategies and some ran-
dom strategies. This specific approach to initialization and mutation has been empirically found to
facilitate easier convergence of the search algorithm. Furthermore, a weight parameter is incorpo-
rated, which multiplies the GFLOPs to strike a balance between image quality and computational
efficiency. For CIFAR-10, we set the weight parameter to 0.1 to favor higher image quality, while for
CelebA, the FLOPs weight parameter is adjusted to 0.25. These parameters were manually selected
to ensure that there are no compromises in generation quality.

Compatibility Experiments For the DDIM experiment, we adopted the weights from the 1000-
step ADM model and applied the DDIM sampling schedule. As indicated in Table 4, our method
significantly boosts DDIM’s speed by 48%, 45%, 53%, and 62% for 10, 50, 100, and 1000 steps,
respectively. This suggests that while additional steps enhance generation quality, they also intro-
duce excess computational load. Our approach proves increasingly beneficial as the number of steps
increases. In our latent diffusion experiment, we employed the AutoEncoderKL of SD1.4 to trans-
form images into latent vectors, upon which our DDSM was trained. To adapt to the reduced spatial
size, we modified the U-Net downsampling from 4 to 2. Our DDSM achieved a 60% acceleration in
latent diffusion methods.


G    D ISCUSSION ON THE EXTRA COST

In this section, we discuss the extra cost introduced by our DDSM in the training and searching
stage. Although we introduce extra training and search cost, DDSM still shows its advantages in
inference. In deep learning algorithms, a common manner is we train a model once and repeatedly
use this model to infer results. Nowadays, well-known Diffusion models all conform to this manner,
like StableDiffusion and Imagen. They require a large amount of time to train. But once they are
trained, they could repeatedly generate billions of images. Therefore, in terms of efficiency, we
usually care more about the inference speed due to its repetitiveness.
Our method aims to reduce the inference cost of diffusion models. We prune the diffusion inference
process with its step-aware strategy, accomplishing at most 76% acceleration. These cost savings
could be counted repeatedly. The more samples we produce, the more benefits our framework
demonstrates. In DDSM, we indeed introduce extra training and search cost, but these costs only
take once. Concretely, the training cost of the slimmable network is about 2 times to 3 times of the
normal diffusion model’s training. The search cost depends on the search hyper-parameters. In our
setting, it is approximately the same time as training a normal diffusion model. In Table 12, we
present the time cost of our DDSM on NVIDIA RTX 3090’s GPU hours.


                             Table 12: Total GPU hours of our DDSM.
                                                 CIFAR-10      CelebA
                               DDPM-train           278          435
                               DDSM-train           502         1036
                               DDSM-search          320          524



H    S EPARATED L INE G RAPHS OF S EARCH R ESULTS

We plot the search result separately for better visualization, as shown in Figure 6


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Figure 6: Line graphs of the search results across all 5 datasets.


I   Q UALITATIVE R ESULT
We present the generation result of DDSM in Figure 7. It shows that the efficient DDSM could
produce high-quality images.


      (a) CIFAR-10                 (b) CelebA                           (c) ImageNet


              (d) LSUN-bedroom                                     (e) AFHQ


Figure 7: Generated images of DDSM on CIFAR-10, CelebA, ImageNet, LSUN-bedroom, and
AFHQ.


                                                16
