Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J UMANJI : A D IVERSE S UITE OF S CALABLE
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING E NVIRONMENTS IN JAX
    Clément Bonnet1∗                Daniel Luo1                 Donal Byrne1                Shikha Surana1

 Sasha Abramowitz1               Paul Duckworth1             Vincent Coyette1          Laurence I. Midgley2

 Elshadai Tegegn1            Tristan Kalloniatis1        Omayma Mahjoub1              Matthew Macfarlane3

 Andries P. Smit1              Nathan Grinsztajn1             Raphael Boige1            Cemlyn N. Waters1

 Mohamed A. Mimouni1                 Ulrich A. Mbou Sob1           Ruan de Kock1            Siddarth Singh1

 Daniel Furelos-Blanco4                Victor Le1            Arnu Pretorius1            Alexandre Laterre1


 1                2                             3                               4
     InstaDeep        University of Cambridge       University of Amsterdam         Imperial College London



                                                A BSTRACT

             Open-source reinforcement learning (RL) environments have played a crucial role
             in driving progress in the development of AI algorithms. In modern RL research,
             there is a need for simulated environments that are performant, scalable, and modu-
             lar to enable their utilization in a wider range of potential real-world applications.
             Therefore, we present Jumanji, a suite of diverse RL environments specifically
             designed to be fast, flexible, and scalable. Jumanji provides a suite of environ-
             ments focusing on combinatorial problems frequently encountered in industry, as
             well as challenging general decision-making tasks. By leveraging the efficiency
             of JAX and hardware accelerators like GPUs and TPUs, Jumanji enables rapid
             iteration of research ideas and large-scale experimentation, ultimately empowering
             more capable agents. Unlike existing RL environment suites, Jumanji is highly
             customizable, allowing users to tailor the initial state distribution and problem
             complexity to their needs. Furthermore, we provide actor-critic baselines for each
             environment, accompanied by preliminary findings on scaling and generalization
             scenarios. Jumanji aims to set a new standard for speed, adaptability, and scalability
             of RL environments.


1        I NTRODUCTION

High-quality datasets and benchmarks are crucial to the development of AI research (Deng et al.,
2009; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Bellemare et al., 2013). They allow for coordinated research on
problems that serve as a measure of progress toward shared goals. However, most currently open-
sourced reinforcement learning (RL) environment libraries are not closely tied to practical problems.
Furthermore, in industrial settings operating at scale, these libraries do not provide sufficient flexibility
and scalability to facilitate long-term AI research suitably close to real-world applications.
For RL to be useful in the real world, further research progress is needed. This will require benchmarks
that are: (1) fast, i.e. hardware-accelerated to overcome sequential bottlenecks and allow for faster
experiment iteration; (2) flexible, by allowing easy customization to capture realistic problem settings
     ∗
         Correspondence to: <clement.bonnet16@gmail.com>


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      BinPack           Cleaner         Connector           CVRP             FlatPack         Game2048


   GraphColoring        JobShop          Knapsack           Maze          Minesweeper          MMST


    MultiCVRP           PacMan       RobotWarehouse       RubiksCube      SlidingTilePuzzle    Snake


                        Sokoban           Sudoku            Tetris             TSP

Figure 1: All 22 environments implemented in Jumanji (in alphabetic order) are divided into three
categories. Routing problems: Cleaner, Connector CVRP (Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem),
Maze, MMST (Multiple Minimum Spanning Tree), MultiCVRP (Multiple-vehicle CVRP), PacMan,
RobotWarehouse, Snake, Sokoban, and TSP (Travelling Salesman Problem). Packing problems:
BinPack, FlatPack, JobShop, Knapsack, and Tetris. Logic games: Game2048, GraphColoring,
Minesweeper, RubiksCube, SlidingTilePuzzle, and Sudoku.



of interest (e.g. intrinsic stochasticity and distribution shift); and (3) scalable, to be able to arbitrarily
set the level of difficulty of an environment, ensuring a more faithful representation of the challenges
that arise in real-world problems.
Although many other popular benchmarks exist such as the Arcade Learning Environment
(ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013), OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016), and Gymnax (Lange, 2022),
which satisfy a subset of the above criteria, none of them have managed to cover all three. We believe
it is crucial to fill this gap to help push RL research closer to industrial applications.
In this paper, we introduce Jumanji: a diverse suite of fast, flexible, and scalable RL environments.
Jumanji is organized into three problem categories: routing, packing, and logic. At its core is a set of
NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) that closely resemble problems encountered
in the real world. The environment dynamics of these problems seamlessly scale with complexity
allowing for long-term research suitable for real-world industrial applications. Jumanji is written in
JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018), to leverage composable transformations with automatic differentiation
and the XLA compiler for highly efficient RL systems that run directly on GPU or TPU accelerators.
Furthermore, Jumanji promotes flexibility by allowing arbitrary initial state distributions via easily
modifiable reset functions and bespoke generators. We empirically demonstrate the capabilities of
Jumanji through a set of initial experiments. Specifically, we present results on training an actor-critic
agent across all environments, establishing a benchmark useful for future comparisons. We show that
Jumanji environments are highly scalable, demonstrating high throughput in both a single-device and


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


multi-device setting. Finally, we illustrate the flexibility of environments by customizing initial state
distributions to study generalization in a real-world problem setting.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

      1. We introduce Jumanji: an open-source and diverse suite of industry-inspired RL environ-
         ments, that are fast, flexible, and scalable.
      2. We provide baseline actor-critic agents for all environments.
      3. We present initial experiments demonstrating that, unlike existing RL benchmarks, Jumanji
         environments offer a high degree of scalability and flexibility.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Benchmark environments have been pivotal in the development and evaluation of RL algorithms.
OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016), with its diverse task suite and user-friendly API, has become a
benchmarking standard in the field. Other libraries, such as DMLab (Beattie et al., 2016) for complex
3D environments, and Mujoco (Todorov et al., 2012) for high-fidelity physics simulations, have
enabled researchers to push the boundaries of agent capabilities. However, despite the significant
contributions, these libraries have limitations in computational efficiency and scalability.

Hardware-accelerated Environments A common approach to increasing environment throughput
is through parallelization of the environment itself. Prior work such as EnvPool (Weng et al., 2022)
utilizes multiple CPU cores and C++ based threading of multiple instances of an environment in order
to expedite the bottleneck of sequential simulation steps. GPU-accelerated environments like Nvidia’s
CuLE (Dalton et al., 2019; Dalton & frosio, 2020) and Isaac Gym (Makoviychuk et al., 2021) take a
different approach, leveraging the parallel processing capabilities of GPUs. CuLE provides a CUDA
port of ALE (Bellemare et al., 2013), rendering frames directly on GPU, whilst Isaac Gym provides
an accelerated alternative to Mujoco. Although these environments offer significant efficiency gains,
they are strictly limited to GPUs and cannot be readily extended to other hardware accelerators
(e.g. TPUs). JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018) is a numerical computing library that leverages automatic
differentiation, vectorization, parallelization, and an XLA compiler for device-agnostic optimization.
JAX is utilized in RL environments such as Brax (Freeman et al., 2021), a differentiable physics
engine, Pgx (Koyamada et al., 2023), a collection of board game simulators, Gymnax (Lange, 2022),
a library of popular RL environments re-implemented in JAX, JaxMARL (Rutherford et al., 2023), a
collection of commonly used MARL environments, and Craftax-Classic (Matthews et al., 2024) a
re-implementation in JAX of the open-ended environment Crafter. These environments represent a
significant advance in efficiency but are limited in scope and flexibility.

Combinatorial Optimization Problems (COPs) COPs present a significant area of research in
RL, with many real-world and industrial applications. Examples include the Traveling Salesman
Problem, Bin Packing, the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem, and the Knapsack Problem (Bengio
et al., 2021). While there have been substantial advances in related software, such as Google OR
Tools (Google, 2023), there is a noticeable gap in support for RL-based COP solutions. Libraries
such as OR RL Benchmarks (Balaji et al., 2019) and OR-Gym (Hubbs et al., 2020) provide COP
environments that adhere to the standard Gym API, however, they are restricted to run on CPU,
making it difficult to parallelize and scale.

Benchmark Diversity Multiple RL benchmarks have been proposed to facilitate agent general-
ization, such as Procgen (Cobbe et al., 2019), OpenSpiel (Lanctot et al., 2020), BSuite (Osband
et al., 2020), and XLand (Team et al., 2021). Whilst providing challenging scenarios for training,
Procgen and OpenSpiel do not inherently support scaling of the environment dynamics, and unlike
Jumanji, none are designed to utilize hardware accelerators. Lastly, whilst no single benchmark
suite can handle all situations, the ability to extend and create environments is crucial. Unity ML
Agents (Juliani et al., 2020) is extendable and parallelizable via the Unity game engine, but not
optimized for accelerators. Gymnasium aims to standardize Gym (Brockman et al., 2016) but does
not directly provide a base for new environments. Most libraries rely on hard-coded components
that require users to develop new extensions. Jumanji, however, follows a composition-based design,


                                                   3
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     allowing for easy modifications of initial state distributions, reset behaviors, level generators, and
     rendering.

     3     J UMANJI
     We introduce Jumanji (v1.0.0), a suite of 22 JAX-based environments, visualized in Figure 1.
     These diverse problems rely on a variety of geometries, including grids, graphs, and sets. The
     environments are organized into three problem categories: routing, packing, and logic. Many of these
     are NP-hard COPs inspired by real-world industry settings. Jumanji leverages JAX to significantly
     accelerate and parallelize simulation steps while remaining flexible and allowing for scalable problem
     complexity.
     This section provides an overview of the library, first introducing the RL setting and then Jumanji’s
     application programming interface (API).

     3.1   RL P RELIMINARIES

     Each Jumanji environment is structured as a Markov decision process (MDP) (Puterman, 1994),
     M = (S, A, µ, P, R, γ), where S is the state space, A is the action space, µ is the initial state
     distribution, P defines the environment transition dynamics, R is the reward function, and γ is the
     discount factor. We can generate trajectories from an MDP by rolling out the environment dynamics.
     That is, at time step t, an action at transitions the environment from the current state st to the next
     state st+1 as defined by the environment dynamics P , resulting in a reward rt . The objective of an
                                                                                        PT
     agent is often to maximize the discounted expected return, given by Eat ∼π(·|st ) [ t=0 γ t r(st , at )],
     where γ is the discount factor and π is the agent’s policy.

     3.2   API

     Jumanji’s interface is lightweight, flexible, and capable of representing a diverse set of RL problems.
     It draws inspiration from OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016), dm_env (Muldal et al., 2019), and
     Brax (Freeman et al., 2021). It is flexible in three ways: (1) allowing customization of the initial state
     distribution via generators, (2) custom visualization via environment viewers, and (3) custom reward
     functions. Below, we introduce the key components of the Jumanji API, including the environment
     interface, state, observation, generators, specs, and registry.

     Environment Interface The Environment interface defines the blueprint for Jumanji
     environments. Each environment must contain the following methods: reset, step,
     observation_spec, and action_spec. The API allows for optional render and animate
     methods to visualize a state or a sequence of states. For a code snippet demonstrating how to create a
     new environment by extending the environment interface, see Appendix A.4. Here, we provide code
     to instantiate an environment from the Jumanji registry, reset, step, and (optionally) render it:

 1   import jax
 2   import jumanji
 3
 4   # Instantiate a Jumanji environment from the registry
 5   env = jumanji.make('Snake-v1')
 6
 7   # Reset the environment
 8   key = jax.random.PRNGKey(0)
 9   state, timestep = jax.jit(env.reset)(key)
10
11   # Sample an action and take an environment step
12   action = env.action_spec().generate_value()
13   state, timestep = jax.jit(env.step)(state, action)
14
15   # (Optional) Render the environment state
16   env.render(state)


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


State The State is a pytree (e.g. dataclass or namedtuple) that contains all the required information
to transition the environment’s dynamics for a given action. This is a design choice, and as such,
Jumanji environments are stateless i.e. the reset and step methods are functionally pure. This
allows Jumanji to leverage JAX’s transformations (jit, grad, vmap, and pmap) to make the
environments highly scalable. Every state includes a pseudorandom number generator (PRNG) key,
which is used during a potential auto-reset and in the case of stochastic transitions.

TimeStep and Observation The TimeStep contains all the information available to an agent
about the state of the environment at a time step, namely; the step_type (first, mid, or last),
reward, discount, observation, and extras. As such, it is based on the dm_env
TimeStep but with an additional extras field, where environment metrics can be logged that are
neither available to the agent nor part of the state. For Jumanji environments, the Observation is
a JAX pytree, making it amenable to multiple data types.

Generators For a given environment, a generator is used to define the initial state distribution.
Jumanji provides flexibility by allowing the use of custom generators, enabling users to define an
initial state distribution specific to their problem. In most environments, the reset method calls a
generator that returns the initial state. The generator can be specified upon environment instantiation.
The user can choose from a set of pre-existing generators or implement their own generator. If not
specified, a default generator is used.

Specs Inspired by dm_env, Jumanji specifications define the tree structure, shape, data type, and
optionally the bounds of the observations, actions, rewards, and discounts. Jumanji’s Spec class
is more general than its dm_env counterpart, allowing for nested structures. This is achieved by
implementing each spec as a nested JAX pytree composed of a set of primitive specs (Array,
BoundedArray, DiscreteArray, or MultiDiscreteArray) which form the leaves of the
tree while each non-leaf node is itself another nested Spec object. Environments in Jumanji have
their action space described as a spec, which means although current environments have discrete
actions, Jumanji supports both discrete and continuous action spaces.

Registry Jumanji keeps a strict versioning of its environments for the purpose of reproducibility.
This is achieved through a registry of standard environments with their respective configurations. For
each environment, a version suffix is appended, e.g. "Snake-v1". When significant changes are made
to environments, the version number is incremented.

4     J UMANJI B ENCHMARK

In this section, we first describe a highly efficient method for training RL agents in Jumanji envi-
ronments. Secondly, we provide details of standard actor-critic baseline agents. Finally, we present
experiments demonstrating the speed and parallelization of Jumanji environments.

4.1   E FFICIENT T RAINING

As described in Section 3.2, Jumanji environments are designed to be stateless, allowing Jumanji to
take full advantage of JAX’s transformations. JAX-based stateless environments provide multiple
benefits. Firstly, we can JIT-compile the full training loop of an agent. This often includes rolling
out the environment to generate trajectories, and then separately updating the parameters of the
agent based on that experience. We provide a throughput ablation in appendix D.2 to demonstrate
the speed-up that arises when removing data transfer between host and device. Secondly, JAX’s
grad allows for efficient computation of gradients using automatic differentiation. Thirdly, JAX’s
vectorization (vmap) can be used to generate rollouts and compute parameter updates in parallel
on a single device. Finally, JAX’s process parallelism (pmap) can be leveraged to parallelize the
computations across multiple devices, where gradients are aggregated across devices using pmean.
Hessel et al. (2021) propose the Anakin architecture for exactly this setting, with an emphasis on
maximizing the utilization of TPU pods, although their approach is general and also applies to
multi-GPU RL training. All the experiments in this paper are implemented using this efficient Anakin
framework.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Random         Actor-Critic    Optimal Performance

Figure 2: Learning curves from training an actor-critic agent (A2C) in blue compared to a masked
random policy in red on all 22 Jumanji environments. When possible to determine, the optimal
expected return is shown with a dashed line. Experiments were run with three different seeds, with
the median represented as a blue curve and the min/max as the shaded region.


4.2   ACTOR -C RITIC BASELINE

Jumanji provides an implementation of an A2C (Mnih et al., 2016) agent, built using the DeepMind
JAX ecosystem (Babuschkin et al., 2020). Since Jumanji environments use different geometries (e.g.
images, sets, etc.), the agent relies on environment-specific neural networks, e.g. image inputs may be
fed to a convolution neural network while permutation-equivariant problems may use a transformer
architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). To promote research using Jumanji, we open-source the algorithm,
the training pipeline, checkpoints, and the aforementioned actor-critic networks which are compatible
with any algorithms relying on a policy or state-value function. Appendix B provides further details
on these environment-specific networks.
To benchmark Jumanji environments, we provide learning curves of our A2C implementation on
all 22 environments. We compare our algorithm to the optimal performance (where possible to
determine) and a random policy that uniformly samples actions from the set of valid actions. Note,
that the optimal performances for TSP, CVRP, and Knapsack are taken from (Kwon et al., 2020).
The experiments were performed on a TPUv3-8 using the Anakin framework. We refer the reader to
Appendix C.1 for more details on the training. In Figure 2, we show the learning curves of the A2C
agent on each of the registered environments (i.e. the default configurations), along with the random
baseline and optimal performance. The experiments were run three times for each of the 22 registered
environments, with the median represented as a blue curve and the min/max as the shaded region.
Although our standard A2C agent improves upon the random baseline, optimality gaps remain in
most environments (i.e., the differences between the A2C and optimal performance) highlighting
challenges in solving combinatorial problems.

4.3   E NVIRONMENT PARALLELIZATION E XPERIMENTS

We present an initial experiment demonstrating the speed of Jumanji environments as we parallelize
the step function. Figure 3a shows how the throughput of the environment step function increases


                                                     6
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        8
                   10                                                   Maze


                                                                                               Epoch Duration (sec)
                                                                        Knapsack
                                                                        Minesweeper                               104
                        7
                                                                        TSP
                   10                                                   CVRP
                                                                                                                  103
                                                                        Sliding Tile Puzzle
                                                                        Sudoku
Steps per Second

                                                                        Connector                                 102
                        6                                               Sokoban
                   10                                                   Cleaner
                                                                        Snake                                     101
                                                                        MultiCVRP                                             8     4     2     6 -8   U   U
                                                                        Pacman                                           PU-12 TPU-6 TPU-3 TPU-1 TPU GP CP
                   10
                        5
                                                                        RobotWharehouse                        1.00 T
                                                                        RubiksCube
                                                                        MMST                                   0.95


                                                                                              Performance
                                                                        JobShop
                        4                                               GraphColoring                          0.90
                   10
                                                                        Game2048
                                                                        Tetris                                 0.85
                                                                        FlatPack                                                  TPU-128       TPU-16     GPU
                        3                                               BinPack                                0.80               TPU-64        TPU-8      CPU
                   10                                                                                                             TPU-32
                                   28        210         212                                                   0.75 0        2    4         6   8    10   12
                              Number of Parallel Environments                                                                         Time (hr)
                                (a) Effective environment steps per second                                              (b) A2C training on Connector

 Figure 3: Analysis of environment parallelization. (a): Scaling of the effective environment steps
 per second (throughput) for each registered environment as the number of parallel environments
 increases, on an 8-core TPU-v4. The legend is ordered by the throughput of the rightmost data
 point. The results on GPU and CPU are presented in Appendix C.2. (b): Training of an A2C agent
 on the Connector environment on a CPU, GPU (RTX 2080 super), and TPU-v4 with a number of
 cores varying from 8 to 128. Each training is run for 255M steps. Full training takes weeks on a
 CPU, which is why it is not visible on the bottom plot. Performance denotes the proportion of wires
 connected (an optimal policy would reach 1.0). See Appendix C.2 for further details.


 with the number of environments run in parallel, on a TPUv4-8. To study parallelization on different
 hardware, we run a similar experiment on a GPU (V100) and a CPU in Appendix C.2. We compute
 the number of steps per second by averaging 50 consecutive actions each taken on 500 environments
 in parallel. The cost of the reset function is environment-dependent and in some cases expensive,
 therefore, we focus on the scaling properties of the step function and do not reset the environments.
 Refer to Appendix E for a discussion on parallelizing environments.
 To quantify the benefits of device parallelization, we train an A2C agent on the combinatorial
 Connector environment varying the hardware, specifically, CPU, GPU (RTX 2080 super), and TPU
 with 8 to 128 cores. Figure 3b shows the approximately linear scaling of convergence speed when
 increasing TPU cores, demonstrating efficient parallelization across devices. For example, we can
 reach 92% of the optimal performance on Connector-v2 in roughly 1.5h with a TPU-128, compared
 to 11.5h with a TPU-8.

  5                 F LEXIBILITY AND S CALABILITY IN J UMANJI
 Jumanji is designed with flexibility and scalability at its core. In this section, we present initial
 experiments demonstrating these two key properties. In Section 5.1, we demonstrate the flexibility
 of Jumanji environments, by implementing specific initial state distributions via custom generators.
 We first discuss why flexibility is required for building robust RL agents for real-world settings, and
 showcase it with an initial experiment using multiple generators. In Section 5.2, we discuss how
 problem complexity is scalable in Jumanji and present experiments demonstrating its impacts on
 agent performance.

  5.1                       F LEXIBILITY IN J UMANJI

 Discussion of Jumanji Generators Training agents on a wide range of data distributions has
 been demonstrated to enhance their robustness towards real-world scenarios (Bossek et al., 2019;
 Cobbe et al., 2019; Taiga et al., 2023). The flexibility to define the initial state distribution provided


                                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


by generators offers two significant advantages. Firstly, it enables users to train agents on desired
data distributions, by creating one or multiple custom generators to sample from. This is especially
useful for combinatorial problems where there is no canonical instance distribution. Secondly, the
environment dynamics are agnostic to the generator, this allows us to maintain consistent dynamics
while having the flexibility to alter the initial state distribution. This facilitates experimentation and
analysis on different initial state configurations, enhancing our ability to understand a given agent’s
behavior across various scenarios.
        Cluster     Linear Compression   Explosion               Cluster             Linear Compression         Explosion


                  (a) TSP generators                                          (b) Connector generators

Figure 4: Samples from three custom generators: cluster (left), linear compression (middle), and
explosion (right), for TSP and Connector environments. In TSP, gray dots represent cities. In
Connector, the node pairs to be connected are depicted in the same color, and the large and small
blocks indicate the starting and ending nodes, respectively.


Example Generators Here, we provide illustrative examples of possible generators for two envi-
ronments. Specifically, we showcase three different generators for the Traveling Salesman Problem
(TSP) and Connector environments in Figure 4. In both environments, an instance consists of 2D
node coordinates, with the objective being to form a brief cycle (TSP) or connect all same-type node
pairs without overlap (Connector). Problem instances are created using the different generators:
cluster, linear compression, and explosion. The cluster generator allocates points within a specified
radius and center point, the linear compression generator randomly aligns the points along a 2D line
within the space, and the explosion generator pushes the points away from a given reference point in
the space.

Experiments using Multiple Generators We train
two A2C agents on different initial state distributions
for a TSP environment comprised of 50 cities and                                                          Single Generator
                                                                        7.5                               Four Generators
evaluate the generalization capabilities of the result-
ing agents. Specifically, one agent is trained using
                                                                        7.0
                                                          Tour Length


random uniform instances, while the second agent
samples from a combination of the uniform genera-
tor and the three previously introduced TSP genera-                     6.5
tors. To evaluate our agents, we create two datasets
from the VLSI TSP Benchmark Dataset (Rohe) 1                            6.0
that contain real-world problem instances. During
training, we use 102 problem instances to evaluate
                                                                               0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0    2.5        3.0
the agent’s performance whilst at test time, we use a                                   Environment Steps                   1e8
larger dataset of 1 020 instances.
Figure 5 shows the learning curves of the two A2C Figure 5: Learning curves of two agents train-
agents (smaller tour length is better). At test time, on ing on TSP, sampling from a single uniform
the larger set of problem instances, the agent trained generator versus sampling from four gener-
on a single uniform generator achieved a mean tour ators (uniform, cluster, explosion, and com-
length of 6.090 (±0.029), whereas the agent trained pression). Lower tour length is better.
on the four generators attained a better average tour
length of 5.815 (±0.025). These results demonstrate that the model trained on a broader data
distribution, facilitated by the inclusion of multiple generators, outperforms the model trained with a
single generator on an unseen, real-world test set and thus, shows better generalization capabilities.
For further experimental details, please refer to Appendix C.3.
   1
       https://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/vlsi/index.html


                                                     8
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       1.00                                                           1.00                                                                1.0


                                                                                                                                  Ratio of Solved Cubes
Ratio of Connections
                       0.95                                                           0.95                                                                0.8


                                                                 Volume Utilization
                                                                                      0.90                                                                0.6
                       0.90                                                                                                                                                             C=3, N=3
                                                                                      0.85                                                                0.4                           C=4, N=3
                                                    G=10, N=2                                                                                                                           C=3, N=5
                       0.85                         G=10, N=10                                                           N=10                                                           C=3, N=7
                                                    G=12, N=12                        0.80                               N=20                             0.2                           C=3, N=9
                                                    G=14, N=14                                                           N=30                                                           C=4, N=5
                       0.80 0.0                                                       0.75 0.0                                                            0.0
                                  0.5   1.0   1.5    2.0   2.5                                   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0                                   0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5
                                    Environment Steps      1e8                                     Environment Steps        1e8                                         Environment Steps     1e8

                                  (a) Connector                                                  (b) BinPack                                                          (c) RubiksCube

   Figure 6: The learning curves of the A2C agent on varying difficulty levels in three different Jumanji
   environments. In Connector, the size of the grid (G) and the number of node pairs to be connected
   (N ) are varied. In BinPack, the number of items (N ) is varied. In RubiksCube, the size of the cube
   (C) and the number of scrambles made from a solved Rubiks Cube (N ) are varied.


    5.2                       S CALABILITY IN J UMANJI

   Jumanji environments are scalable: each environment is equipped with one or more adjustable
   variables (such as the number of cities for TSP or the number of node pairs and grid size for Connector)
   that allow for arbitrary complexity. This flexibility is a key attribute of Jumanji environments, as it
   enables users to control the problem complexity and examine its impact on the agent’s performance.

    Experiments varying Problem Complexity To showcase scalability, we investigate the scaling
    properties of an A2C agent on three Jumanji environments: 1) Connector, where we vary the grid
    size and the number of node pair that need connecting; 2) BinPack, we vary the number of items to
    pack; 3) RubiksCube, we vary the size of the cube and the minimal number of actions required for a
    solution. Appendix C.4 provides additional details on these experiments.
   We present learning curves of the three environments with varying difficulty settings in Figure 6. We
   observe a strong degradation in performance across all environments as we increase the problem
   complexity. For example, in RubiksCube, the hardest problem setting we experiment with leads the
   A2C agent to a complete failure to learn.
   This experiment provides a proof of concept into scaling the complexity of Jumanji environments. It
   highlights how Jumanji can be used to study scaling properties of agents.


    6                     C ONCLUSION

    For RL research to be useful in real-world applications, challenging new benchmark environments
    are required. To this end, we introduce Jumanji, an open-source and diverse suite of industry-inspired
    RL environments that are fast, flexible, and scalable. Written in JAX, Jumanji environments can be
    parallelized and seamlessly scale with hardware (see Section 4.3). Flexibility is provided by allowing
    users to define custom initial-state distributions via generators (see Section 3.2 and 5.1). At the heart
    of Jumanji is a set of NP-hard COPs with scalable environment dynamics that facilitate industry-scale
    research. While Jumanji provides industry-inspired environments, capturing the full complexity of
    industry situations within a single benchmark remains a challenging task. Nor can a single benchmark
    cover the full range of possible industry situations.
   Jumanji is open-source, lightweight, and easy to extend. We welcome contributions from the
   community. Current environments all have discrete actions, yet Jumanji supports both discrete and
   continuous actions. Similarly, Jumanji supports multi-agent environments but only contains single-
   agent implementations. Future work will expand the library to include multi-agent implementations,
   environments with continuous actions, and more environments representative of real-world problems,
   such as in the life sciences, agriculture, logistics, and beyond. By providing a diverse suite of tasks,
   Jumanji aims to inspire future research toward RL agents that can learn to solve a wide range of
   important problems.


                                                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research supported with Cloud TPUs from Google’s TPU Research Cloud (TRC). We would like
to thank the many open-source contributors who have contributed to the library, including Ugo
Okoroafor, Randy Brown, Ole Jorgensen, Danila Kurganov, and Marta Wolinska. We also thank
Thomas Barrett, Matthew Morris, Cyprien Courtot, Edan Toledo, Paul Caron, and Ian Davies for
their help in the initial design of the library. Laurence Illing Midgley acknowledges support from
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato’s Turing AI Fellowship under grant EP/V023756/1.

R EFERENCES
Igor Babuschkin, Kate Baumli, Alison Bell, Surya Bhupatiraju, Jake Bruce, Peter Buchlovsky,
  David Budden, Trevor Cai, Aidan Clark, Ivo Danihelka, Antoine Dedieu, Claudio Fantacci,
  Jonathan Godwin, Chris Jones, Ross Hemsley, Tom Hennigan, Matteo Hessel, Shaobo Hou, Steven
  Kapturowski, Thomas Keck, Iurii Kemaev, Michael King, Markus Kunesch, Lena Martens, Hamza
  Merzic, Vladimir Mikulik, Tamara Norman, George Papamakarios, John Quan, Roman Ring,
  Francisco Ruiz, Alvaro Sanchez, Rosalia Schneider, Eren Sezener, Stephen Spencer, Srivatsan
  Srinivasan, Wojciech Stokowiec, Luyu Wang, Guangyao Zhou, and Fabio Viola. The DeepMind
  JAX Ecosystem, 2020. URL http://github.com/deepmind.
Bharathan Balaji, Jordan Bell-Masterson, Enes Bilgin, Andreas Damianou, Pablo Moreno Garcia,
  Arpit Jain, Runfei Luo, Alvaro Maggiar, Balakrishnan Narayanaswamy, and Chun Ye. ORL:
  Reinforcement Learning Benchmarks for Online Stochastic Optimization Problems, 2019.
Charles Beattie, Joel Z. Leibo, Denis Teplyashin, Tom Ward, Marcus Wainwright, Heinrich Küttler,
  Andrew Lefrancq, Simon Green, Víctor Valdés, Amir Sadik, Julian Schrittwieser, Keith Anderson,
  Sarah York, Max Cant, Adam Cain, Adrian Bolton, Stephen Gaffney, Helen King, Demis Hassabis,
  Shane Legg, and Stig Petersen. DeepMind Lab, 2016.
M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The Arcade Learning Environment: An
 Evaluation Platform for General Agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:253–279,
 jun 2013.
Yoshua Bengio, Andrea Lodi, and Antoine Prouvost. Machine learning for combinatorial optimization:
  a methodological tour d’horizon. European Journal of Operational Research, 290(2):405–421,
  2021.
Jakob Bossek, Pascal Kerschke, Aneta Neumann, Markus Wagner, Frank Neumann, and Heike
  Trautmann. Evolving diverse tsp instances by means of novel and creative mutation operators.
  In Proceedings of the 15th ACM/SIGEVO Conference on Foundations of Genetic Algorithms, pp.
  58–71, 2019.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and
  Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
  http://github.com/google/jax.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. OpenAI Gym, 2016.
Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging Procedural Generation
  to Benchmark Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01588, 2019.
Steven Dalton and iuri frosio. Accelerating Reinforcement Learning through GPU Atari Em-
  ulation. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 19773–19782. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  e4d78a6b4d93e1d79241f7b282fa3413-Paper.pdf.
Steven Dalton, Iuri Frosio, and Michael Garland. GPU-Accelerated Atari Emulation for Reinforce-
  ment Learning, 2019.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-
   scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
   Recognition, pp. 248–255, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
C. Daniel Freeman, Erik Frey, Anton Raichuk, Sertan Girgin, Igor Mordatch, and Olivier Bachem.
  Brax - A Differentiable Physics Engine for Large Scale Rigid Body Simulation, 2021. URL
  http://github.com/google/brax.
Google. OR-Tools - Google Optimization Tools. https://github.com/google/or-tools,
  2023. Google’s software suite for combinatorial optimization.
Arthur Guez, Mehdi Mirza, Karol Gregor, Rishabh Kabra, Sébastien Racanière, Théophane Weber,
  David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Laurent Orseau, Tom Eccles, Greg Wayne, David Silver, and
  Timothy Lillicrap. An investigation of model-free planning, 2019.
Matteo Hessel, Manuel Kroiss, Aidan Clark, Iurii Kemaev, John Quan, Thomas Keck, Fabio Viola,
 and Hado van Hasselt. Podracer architectures for scalable reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2104.06272, 2021.
Christian D. Hubbs, Hector D. Perez, Owais Sarwar, Nikolaos V. Sahinidis, Ignacio E. Grossmann,
  and John M. Wassick. OR-Gym: A Reinforcement Learning Library for Operations Research
  Problems, 2020.
Arthur Juliani, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Ervin Teng, Andrew Cohen, Jonathan Harper, Chris Elion,
  Chris Goy, Yuan Gao, Hunter Henry, Marwan Mattar, and Danny Lange. Unity: A general platform
  for intelligent agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02627, 2020.
Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling. Attention, learn to solve routing problems!, 2018.
Sotetsu Koyamada, Shinri Okano, Soichiro Nishimori, Yu Murata, Keigo Habara, Haruka Kita, and
  Shin Ishii. Pgx: Hardware-accelerated parallel game simulation for reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.17503, 2023.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. ImageNet Classification with Deep
  Convolutional Neural Networks. In F. Pereira, C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, and K.Q. Wein-
  berger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2012. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2012/file/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf.
Yeong-Dae Kwon, Jinho Choo, Byoungjip Kim, Iljoo Yoon, Youngjune Gwon, and Seungjai Min.
  Pomo: Policy optimization with multiple optima for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:21188–21198, 2020.
Marc Lanctot, Edward Lockhart, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Vinicius Zambaldi, Satyaki Upadhyay,
 Julien Pérolat, Sriram Srinivasan, Finbarr Timbers, Karl Tuyls, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Daniel
 Hennes, Dustin Morrill, Paul Muller, Timo Ewalds, Ryan Faulkner, János Kramár, Bart De Vylder,
 Brennan Saeta, James Bradbury, David Ding, Sebastian Borgeaud, Matthew Lai, Julian Schrit-
 twieser, Thomas Anthony, Edward Hughes, Ivo Danihelka, and Jonah Ryan-Davis. OpenSpiel: A
 Framework for Reinforcement Learning in Games, 2020.
Robert Tjarko Lange. gymnax: A JAX-based Reinforcement Learning Environment Library, 2022.
  URL http://github.com/RobertTLange/gymnax.
Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent
  actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30, 2017.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, and Gavriel State. Isaac Gym: High
  Performance GPU-Based Physics Simulation For Robot Learning, 2021.
Michael Matthews, Michael Beukman, Benjamin Ellis, Mikayel Samvelyan, Matthew Jackson,
 Samuel Coward, and Jakob Foerster. Craftax: A lightning-fast benchmark for open-ended rein-
 forcement learning, 2024.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous Methods for Deep Reinforcement
  Learning, 2016.
Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, John Aslanides, Tim Harley, Tom Ward, and Siqi Liu. dm_env: A
  Python interface for reinforcement learning environments, 2019. URL http://github.com/
  deepmind/dm_env.
Ian Osband, Yotam Doron, Matteo Hessel, John Aslanides, Eren Sezener, Andre Saraiva, Katrina
  McKinney, Tor Lattimore, Csaba Szepesvari, Satinder Singh, Benjamin Van Roy, Richard Sutton,
  David Silver, and Hado Van Hasselt. Behaviour suite for reinforcement learning, 2020.
Georgios Papoudakis, Filippos Christianos, Lukas Schäfer, and Stefano V. Albrecht. Benchmarking
  multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooperative tasks. In Proceedings of the
  Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks (NeurIPS), 2021. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07869.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 1994.
Andre Rohe. Vlsi data sets. https://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/vlsi/index.
  html.
Alexander Rutherford, Benjamin Ellis, Matteo Gallici, Jonathan Cook, Andrei Lupu, Gardar Ing-
  varsson, Timon Willi, Akbir Khan, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Alexandra Souly, Saptarashmi
  Bandyopadhyay, Mikayel Samvelyan, Minqi Jiang, Robert Tjarko Lange, Shimon Whiteson,
  Bruno Lacerda, Nick Hawes, Tim Rocktaschel, Chris Lu, and Jakob Nicolaus Foerster. Jaxmarl:
  Multi-agent rl environments in jax, 2023.
Max-Philipp B. Schrader.          gym-sokoban.        https://github.com/mpSchrader/
 gym-sokoban, 2018.
Adrien Ali Taiga, Rishabh Agarwal, Jesse Farebrother, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Investigating multi-task pretraining and generalization in reinforcement learning. In The Eleventh
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=sSt9fROSZRO.
Open Ended Learning Team, Adam Stooke, Anuj Mahajan, Catarina Barros, Charlie Deck, Jakob
  Bauer, Jakub Sygnowski, Maja Trebacz, Max Jaderberg, Michael Mathieu, Nat McAleese, Nathalie
  Bradley-Schmieg, Nathaniel Wong, Nicolas Porcel, Roberta Raileanu, Steph Hughes-Fitt, Valentin
  Dalibard, and Wojciech Marian Czarnecki. Open-Ended Learning Leads to Generally Capable
 Agents, 2021.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033.
  IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All you Need. In I. Guyon, U. Von
  Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2017.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
  file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Théophane Weber, Sébastien Racanière, David P. Reichert, Lars Buesing, Arthur Guez,
  Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Adria Puigdomènech Badia, Oriol Vinyals, Nicolas Heess, Yujia Li,
  Razvan Pascanu, Peter Battaglia, Demis Hassabis, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Imagination-
  augmented agents for deep reinforcement learning, 2018.
Jiayi Weng, Min Lin, Shengyi Huang, Bo Liu, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Zichen
   Liu, Yufan Song, Ting Luo, Yukun Jiang, Zhongwen Xu, and Shuicheng Yan. Envpool: A highly
   parallel reinforcement learning environment execution engine. 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A The Jumanji Library                                                                            14

         A.1   Logic Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       14
         A.2   Packing Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
         A.3   Routing Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
         A.4   Extending the library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    19
         A.5   Multi-agent RL with Jumanji . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21

     B Networks                                                                                       21

     C Experiments                                                                                    23

         C.1   Actor-Critic Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    23
         C.2   Environment Parallelization Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        23
         C.3   Flexibility Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24
         C.4   Scalability Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25

     D Roll out the Environment                                                                       27
         D.1   Animate an Episode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27
         D.2   Placement of the Environment on Device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         28

     E Discussion on Parallelization                                                                  29

         E.1   Parallelizing the dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     29
         E.2   Parallelizing auto-reset during training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29

     F License                                                                                        30


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     T HE J UMANJI L IBRARY
The Jumanji library contains 22 diverse RL environments designed to be fast, flexible, and scalable.
These environments are organized into three categories: logic, packing, and routing, and Table
1 shows the environments in each category. The following subsections provide a more detailed
description of each environment and are sorted by the different environment categories.

                                  Table 1: Jumanji Environments.

                              Logic          Packing         Routing
                            Game2048         BinPack         Cleaner
                         GraphColoring       FlatPack       Connector
                          Minesweeper        JobShop          CVRP
                           RubiksCube        Knapsack          Maze
                        SlidingTilePuzzle     Tetris          MMST
                             Sudoku                         MultiCVRP
                                                             PacMan
                                                          RobotWarehouse
                                                              Snake
                                                             Sokoban
                                                               TSP


A.1   L OGIC E NVIRONMENTS

G AME 2048
                    Component        Description
                    Objective        Reach a high-valued tile, aiming to surpass 2048.
                    Observation      Board, action mask, and step count.
                    Action           Up (0), right (1), down (2), or left (3).
                    Reset            4x4 grid with a single cell being either 2 or 4.
                    Reward           Sum of merged cells upon taking an action.
                    Versions         Game2048-v1



G RAPH C OLORING
                    Component        Description
                    Objective        Color graph vertices without adjacent vertices sharing the
                                     same color.
                    Observation      Graph, colors of the vertices, action mask, and current node.
                    Action           Integer to represent a unique color.
                    Reset            Graph with 20 nodes and a 0.8 edge probability.
                    Reward           Negative of the number of unique colors used for all vertices.
                    Versions         GraphColoring-v0



M INESWEEPER
                    Component        Description
                    Objective        Clear the board without detonating any mines.
                    Observation      Board, action mask, number of mines, and step count.
                    Action           Coordinates of the square to explore.
                    Reset            Uniformly samples 10 mines in a 10x10 grid.
                    Reward           1 reward for a square without a mine, and 0 otherwise.
                    Versions         Minesweeper-v0



                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


RUBIKS C UBE

                   Component      Description
                   Objective      Match all stickers on each face to a single color.
                   Observation    View of the current cube state and the step count.
                   Action         Tuple representing: face, depth, and direction of the turn.
                   Reset          Applies a number of scrambles to a 3x3 solved cube.
                   Reward         Reward of 1 for solving the cube and otherwise 0.
                   Optimal Return Solved ratio equal to 1.0.
                   Versions       RubiksCube-v0, RubiksCube-partly-scrambled-v0


S LIDING T ILE P UZZLE

                   Component      Description
                   Objective      Move tiles to the adjacent empty slot until the puzzle is sorted.
                   Observation    Puzzle, position of the empty tile, and step count.
                   Action         Up (0), right (1), down (2), or left (3).
                   Reset          Applies a number of random swaps to a 5x5 solved puzzle.
                   Reward         Reward of 1 for newly correct tiles and -1 for newly wrong ones.
                   Optimal Return prop_correctly_placed ratio equal to 1.0.
                   Versions       SlidingTilePuzzle-v0


S UDOKU

                   Component      Description
                   Objective      Fill N × N grid with digits 1 to N in each column, row,
                                  and subgrid.
                   Observation    Board, and the action mask.
                   Action         Tuple representing the square coordinates and the digit.
                   Reset          Uniformly samples a puzzle database.
                   Reward         Reward is 1 if the board is correctly solved, and 0 otherwise.
                   Optimal Return Solved ratio equal to 1.0.
                   Versions       Sudoku-v0, Sudoku-very-easy-v0


A.2   PACKING E NVIRONMENTS

B IN PACK

                   Component      Description
                   Objective      Pack boxes into a container to minimize empty space.
                   Observation    Available space, set of unpacked items, and action mask.
                   Action         Tuple representing the EMS (space) ID and the item ID.
                   Reset          Randomly splits a container into different items.
                   Reward         Volume utilization of the container (between 0.0 and 1.0).
                   Optimal Return Volume utilization equal to 1.0.
                   Versions       BinPack-v2



                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F LAT PACK

                   Component       Description
                   Objective       2D version of BinPack, place all the available blocks on a grid.
                   Observation     Current grid, available blocks.
                   Action          Block to place, rotation to make, coordinates on the grid.
                   Reset           Random instances guaranteed to be solvable.
                   Reward          Dense, fraction of the grid covered by the block.
                   Versions        FlatPack-v0


J OB S HOP

                   Component       Description
                   Objective       Minimize the time needed to process all the jobs.
                   Observation     Machines, operation details for each job, and action mask.
                   Action          Array containing a job ID for each machine.
                   Reset           Instances with a number of jobs, machines, operations, and
                                   max. duration.
                   Reward          Reward of -1 at each time step if not terminating.
                   Versions        JobShop-v0


K NAPSACK (KOOL ET AL ., 2018)


                   Component       Description
                   Objective       Maximize value by packing items within weight constraint.
                   Observation     Weights, value, and packed status of the items.
                   Action          Integer to represent the next item to pack.
                   Reset           Uniformly samples item weights & values from a unit square.
                   Reward          Sum of the values of the items packed in the bag.
                   Versions        Knapsack-v1


T ETRIS


                   Component       Description
                   Objective       Score maximum points by clearing lines in Tetris.
                   Observation     Grid, Tetromino, and action mask.
                   Action          Tuple denoting the x-position and rotation of the block.
                   Reset           Randomly samples Tetrominos from a predefined list.
                   Reward          Proportional to the number of lines cleared.
                   Versions        Tetris-v0



                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3     ROUTING E NVIRONMENTS

C LEANER

                   Component       Description
                   Objective       Clean as many tiles as possible in a given time budget.
                   Observation     Grid, agent location, action mask, and step count.
                   Action          Array denoting an action (left, right, up, down) per agent.
                   Reset           Randomly generates the structure of the grid.
                   Reward          The number of tiles cleaned at each timestep.
                   Versions        Cleaner-v0


C ONNECTOR

                   Component      Description
                   Objective      Connect each start and end position and minimize steps.
                   Observation    Grid, action mask, and step count.
                   Action         Array with an action (left, right, up, down, no-op) per agent.
                   Reset          Uniform randomly places start and end positions on the grid.
                   Reward         1 for connecting agents, −0.03 for non-connected agents.
                   Optimal Return Ratio of connections equal to 1.0.
                   Versions       Connector-v2


CVRP (KOOL ET AL ., 2018)

                   Component       Description
                   Objective       Find shortest route visiting each city once and covering the
                                   demands.
                   Observation     Coordinates, demands, current position, and vehicle capacity.
                   Action          Integer representing the next city or depot to visit.
                   Reset           Uniformly samples coordinates and demands.
                   Reward          Negative tour length of the route.
                   Versions        CVRP-v1


M AZE

                   Component       Description
                   Objective       Reach the single target cell.
                   Observation     Maze, agent and target position, action mask, and step count.
                   Action          Up (0), right (1), down (2), or left (3).
                   Reset           Randomly generates the structure of the maze.
                   Reward          1 for reaching target, 0 otherwise.
                   Versions        Maze-v0



                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


MMST

                   Component       Description
                   Objective       Connect all same-type nodes without using the same utility
                                   nodes.
                   Observation     Node types, adjacency matrix, action mask, and current
                                   agent position.
                   Action          Integer array to represent the next node per agent.
                   Reset           Randomly splits the graph into multiple sub-graphs.
                   Reward          10 for valid connection, −1 for no connection, −1 for invalid
                                   action.
                   Versions        MMST-v0


M ULTI CVRP

                   Component       Description
                   Objective       Route multiple agents to satisfy the demands of all cities.
                   Observation     Coordinates, demands, time windows, penalties agent
                                   locations, local times, and capacities.
                   Action          Integer array to represent the next city for each agent.
                   Reset           Uniformly samples coordinates and demands.
                   Reward          The negative tour length of all agents combined.
                   Versions        MultiCVRP-v0


PAC M AN

                   Component       Description
                   Objective       Collect all the pellets and avoid the ghosts.
                   Observation     Grid, agent location, ghost location, pellet location,
                                   power-pellet locations, and time left for scatter state.
                   Action          Up (0), right (1), down (2), left (3), or no-op (4).
                   Reset           Deterministic generator to start state of the game.
                   Reward          +10 for each pellet, +20 for a power pellet, +200 for a ghost.
                   Versions        PacMan-v0


ROBOT WAREHOUSE (PAPOUDAKIS ET AL ., 2021)

                   Component       Description
                   Objective       Deliver as many requested shelves in a given time budget.
                   Observation     View of other agents & shelves, action mask, and step count.
                   Action          No-op (0), forward (1), left (2), right (3), or toggle load (4)
                                   per agent.
                   Reset           Randomly places agents on the grid and uniformly selects
                                   shelves.
                   Reward          Number of shelves delivered during the timestep.
                   Versions        RobotWarehouse-v0



                                               18
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     S NAKE
                        Component      Description
                        Objective      Collect as many fruits without colliding with its own body.
                        Observation    Grid, action mask, and step count.
                        Action         Up (0), right (1), down (2), or left (3).
                        Reset          Randomly places snake’s head position and fruit on the grid.
                        Reward         Reward is +1 upon collection of a fruit and 0 otherwise.
                        Optimal Return Equal to 143.
                        Versions       Snake-v1



     S OKOBAN (W EBER ET AL ., 2018; G UEZ ET AL ., 2019; S CHRADER , 2018)

                        Component       Description
                        Objective       Box-pushing environment where the goal is to place all boxes on their targets.
                        Observation     Grid, and step count.
                        Action          Up (0), right (1), down (2), or left (3).
                        Reset           Sample from a dataset (Guez et al., 2019).
                        Reward          -0.1 for each step, +1/-1 for each correct/incorrect box, +10 if success.
                        Versions        Sokoban-v0



     TSP (KOOL ET AL ., 2018)
                        Component       Description
                        Objective       Find shortest route, visit each city once, and return to starting
                                        city.
                        Observation     Coordinates, current position, trajectory, and action mask.
                        Action          Integer representing the next city to visit.
                        Reset           Uniformly samples coordinates from a unit square.
                        Reward          Negative tour length.
                        Versions        TSP-v1



     A.4   E XTENDING THE LIBRARY

     Below is a template of how to extend Jumanji’s Environment interface to create a new environ-
     ment:

 1   from typing import Tuple, NamedTuple
 2
 3   import chex
 4   from chex import dataclass
 5   import jax
 6
 7   from jumanji import specs
 8   from jumanji.env import Environment
 9   from jumanji.types import TimeStep, restart, termination, transition
10
11
12   @dataclass
13   class State:
14       ...
15       key: chex.PRNGKey
16
17


                                                    19
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


18   class Observation(NamedTuple):
19       ...
20
21
22   class MyEnv(Environment[State]):
23       def __init__(self):
24           ...
25
26        def reset(
27            self, key: chex.PRNGKey
28        ) -> Tuple[State, TimeStep[Observation]]:
29            observation = Observation(...)
30            state = State(key=key, ...)
31            timestep = restart(observation)
32            return state, timestep
33
34        def step(
35            self, state: State, action: chex.Array
36        ) -> Tuple[State, TimeStep[Observation]]:
37            next_state = State(key=state.key, ...)
38            done = ...
39            reward = ...
40            next_observation = Observation(...)
41
42             next_timestep = jax.lax.cond(
43                 done,
44                 termination,
45                 transition,
46                 reward,
47                 next_observation,
48             )
49
50             return next_state, next_timestep
51
52        def observation_spec(self) -> specs.Spec[Observation]:
53            obs_spec = ...
54            return obs_spec
55
56        def action_spec(self) -> specs.Spec:
57            action_spec = ...
58            return action_spec


     After implementing a new environment, one may optionally add it to the registry using
     jumanji.register. This allows users to then instantiate the newly implemented environment
     with jumanji.make.


 1   from jumanji.registration import register
 2
 3   register(id="MyEnv-v0", entry_point="...:MyEnv", kwargs=...)
 4
 5   env = jumanji.make("MyEnv-v0")


     Wrappers Jumanji has several wrappers that one can use to convert a Jumanji environment to the
     API of one’s choice. For instance, one can use JumanjiToDMEnvWrapper to make a dm_env
     environment, or JumanjiToGymWrapper to convert it to the gym API.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   M ULTI - AGENT RL WITH J UMANJI

Jumanji includes several environments whose action space is multi-dimensional, such as Robot
Warehouse, an existing multi-agent environment (Papoudakis et al., 2021), as well as Connector,
MultiCVRP, MMST and Cleaner. These can be seen as homogeneous multi-agent environments
where each agent is responsible for a scalar action. For instance, Connector has N heads that need to
connect to their target. One can see it as a single-agent environment with an action of shape (N, )
(one value per head), or a multi-agent environment where each head is its own agent and outputs
a scalar action. This is called a homogeneous multi-agent environment because each agent has
the same observation and action shapes. However, Jumanji does lack a true multi-agent training
algorithm, as the intention is only to provide reasonable benchmarks. Instead, when training an agent
on a multi-agent environment, Jumanji trains in the style of centralized training with centralized
execution (Lowe et al., 2017) and treats the environment as a single-agent one.

B     N ETWORKS
We provide an implementation of an advantage actor-critic (A2C) agent running on each environment
in Jumanji. To do so, the algorithm is made agnostic to the environment and only assumes an
environment-specific actor-critic network that, given an observation, outputs a policy over actions
and a value of the current state. This means these networks can be used for any actor-critic algorithm
that uses state-value functions (e.g. A2C, PPO, TRPO, etc).
Each environment comes with its own set of symmetries such as invariance to index permutations and
is represented using a specific geometry, e.g. grids/images, sets, etc. Some symmetry groups are very
large, e.g. TSP is invariant to permutation of the node indices; such permutations form a group of
size n! where n is the number of cities. It is inconceivable to hope to statistically learn a good policy
for each of these permutations. Instead, we include geometrical biases in the network architectures
to get these symmetries for free. For instance, we make the TSP policy network equivariant to city
permutations and the critic network invariant to those permutations.
We open-source actor-critic networks for each environment in jumanji/training/networks
along with their configs in jumanji/training/configs/env. We list below some of the
symmetries existing in each environment and describe what network is implemented as a consequence.

BinPack The observation is composed of two sets: the spaces (EMS) and the items to pack in
the container. Therefore, we use an independent self-attention layer for each set and then use cross-
attention between each set based on whether an item fits in the corresponding space EMS). Then,
embeddings of both sets are joined using an outer product to ensure permutation equivariance (or
invariance for the critic) within both items and spaces.

Cleaner The grid is first copied n times where n is the number of agents. Each agent sees a version
of the grid where it is colored differently from the other agents. Then, a CNN is vmap-ed over the
different grids and outputs n feature vectors that are all passed through an MLP to output logits for
each agent. The network is equivariant to permutations of agent locations.

Connector The network is similar to Cleaner’s in processing the agent grids independently via a
CNN first. Then, as opposed to Cleaner, the n feature vectors are passed to a transformer so that each
agent can attend to one another in a permutation-equivariant way.

CVRP The network is adapted from Kool et al. (2018) to have a transformer encoder part that
encodes all non-visited nodes and a decoder that includes the current position to determine the next
action. The important symmetry to respect here is equivariance to permutations of nodes.

FlatPack The observation is permutation invariant with respect to the order of blocks. Therefore,
we use a sequence model (transformer) to process all the blocks and obtain a permutation-equivariant
policy. The grid is processed using a small U-net.

Game2048 The observation being an image, we use a CNN with valid padding to prevent modeling
the board edge the same way as empty cells.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GraphColoring The observation contains nodes and colors. They are represented as two sequences
and the graph-coloring problem is invariant to permutations of both nodes and colors. Consequently,
the provided network uses transformer blocks alternating between self-attention on each sequence
and cross-attention between these sequences. Alternatively, a GNN could be implemented instead
given the graph structure of the problem.

JobShop The observation contains two sequences with respect to which the problem is invariant
to permutations of indices: jobs and machines. Each job is itself a sequence of operations that
have to run on a specific machine. The problem is also invariant to renaming these indices by
permuting machines. To leverage these symmetries, we build a network that does cross-attention
between the operations and the machines they have to run on for each job (parallel across jobs). Then,
these operations sequences are reduced (averaged) to provide a single job embedding for each job.
Cross-attention between jobs and machines leads to the action distribution (resp. value estimation) in
a permutation-equivariant (resp. invariant) way.

Knapsack The problem is invariant to permutations of the items. The implemented network is
a transformer that is also adapted from Kool et al. (2018) and uses self-attention on the remaining
items.

Maze The observation is a grid/image, so we implement a CNN to process the grid before passing
it through an MLP to obtain the action logits or value estimate.

Minesweeper Same as the Maze, Minesweeper has a grid observation processed by a CNN.

MMST The observation contains information about two sequences: the different agents and the
nodes on the graph. The problem is invariant to permutations of agent IDs and node indices. Hence,
we implement a transformer network that alternates between self-attention layers on each sequence
and cross-attention between the agents and their nodes.

MultiCVRP The vehicles and the customers are first encoded. Then a series of self-attention and
cross-attention is used on both sequences.

PacMan We use a CNN to process the grid image. We then concatenate the grid embedding with
diverse observation features like the agent’s position and the ghosts’. A final MLP head projects these
embeddings to a value (critic) or logits (actor).

RobotWarehouse The observation contains a feature vector for each agent. They are processed as
a sequence by a transformer to be equivariant with respect to permutations of agents.

RubiksCube The cube is just flattened and then passed through an MLP. The network would
probably benefit from a more symmetry-preserving architecture for this environment. Yet, it is not
obvious how to do so.

SlidingTilePuzzle     We use a CNN to process the grid and then an MLP to project to value and
logits.

Snake The observation is an image with 5 feature maps. Therefore, we process it with a CNN
before using an MLP to output logits or a value estimate.

Sokoban A CNN processes the grid, and a final MLP head projects the grid embedding and the
step count to a value or logits.

Sudoku The environment has many symmetries, including permutations of digits (e.g. 3 and 6
are swapped), permutations of columns within a 3-column group, etc. We design a network that is
equivariant to the first symmetry. We flatten the grid and use this as a feature vector for each digit. We
then do self-attention in the digit sequence to respect the permutation equivariance and then transpose
back to the grid dimension.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tetris The observation is composed of the grid and the tetromino. We process the former with a
CNN to which we concatenate the flattened tetromino processed by an MLP. Last, an MLP head
outputs action logits or a value estimate.

TSP The network is almost equivalent to CVRP but does not include a depot node. The symmetry
that is respected is the permutation to node indices.


C     E XPERIMENTS

C.1   ACTOR -C RITIC BASELINE

                Name                         Version                        Wall-clock time
              BinPack                    "BinPack-v2"                             30h
              Cleaner                    "Cleaner-v0"                             11h
             Connector                 "Connector-v2"                             35h
               CVRP                        "CVRP-v1"                               3h
              FlatPack                  "FlatPack-v0"                             48h
             Game2048                   "Game2048-v1"                              3h
          GraphColoring              "GraphColoring-v0"                          7.5h
              JobShop                    "JobShop-v0"                           20 min
             Knapsack                   "Knapsack-v1"                           10 min
                Maze                       "Maze-v0"                            30 min
           Minesweeper                "Minesweeper-v0"                             3h
               MMST                        "MMST-v0"                               6h
            MultiCVRP                  "MultiCVRP-v0"                            1.5h
              PacMan                     "PacMan-v0"                             4.5h
         RobotWharehouse            "RobotWarehouse-v0"                          6.5h
            RubiksCube       "RubiksCube-partly-scrambled-v0"                      3h
         SlidingTilePuzzle        "SlidingTilePuzzle-v0"                        40 min
                Snake                     "Snake-v1"                               1h
              Sokoban                    "Sokoban-v0"                            3.5h
               Sudoku              "Sudoku-very-easy-v0"                         3.5h
                Tetris                   "Tetris-v0"                             3.5h
                 TSP                        "TSP-v1"                             2.5h

Table 2: Correspondance between the name reported in figure 3a legend and the environment version.


We train an actor-critic agent on each environment on 3 different seeds in figure 2. For this, we use
the registered versions displayed in table 2, the open-sourced networks described in section B, and
the configs available on GitHub as well.
We use the train.py script from https://github.com/instadeepai/jumanji/
blob/main/jumanji/training/train.py that alternates between evaluating the agent
and training it. Each training epoch consists of a number of num_learner_steps_per_epoch
of collecting n_steps on total_batch_size environments in parallel. If multiple devices
are available, the batch of environments is split between the accelerators, on which trajectories are
collected directly using a local copy of the model. After collecting trajectories, we compute an A2C
loss and update the parameters.
The A2C loss is a weighted mixing of three terms: a policy gradient term −A(τ ) log πθ (τ ), a critic
term A(τ )2 and an entropy bonus −H(πθ (τ ))
We release checkpoints for all the agents on Hugging Face Hub.

C.2   E NVIRONMENT PARALLELIZATION E XPERIMENTS

This section provides more details on the parallelization experiments described in section 4.3. The
first experiment aims to demonstrate how the environment dynamics can be parallelized to increase
the steps throughput, and the second experiment shows how a full training pipeline can benefit from
parallelization by reducing the time to optimality.


                                                 23
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Environment Parallelization This experiment shows how the raw environments’ speed increases
 with the number of environments that are run in parallel. The number of environments, gradually
 increasing from 128 to 8192, is equally divided among 8 TPUv4 cores. To evaluate the raw speed of
 the environment dynamics, only the duration of the actual step function has been considered. Starting
 from a generated initial state, the same action is applied 50 times in all the parallel environments. This
 procedure is run 500 times to form an epoch. The total number of steps ran in an epoch (50 multiplied
 by 500 multiplied by the number of parallel environments) is divided by the epoch duration to obtain
 the average number of steps per second. The throughput which is reported in figure 3a is the average
 over the second epoch run, the first epoch being longer as biased by the JIT compilation time which
 is only run once and thus is not representative of the final environment dynamics performance. The
 same experiment is executed on GPU (V100) and CPU as well, and the results are shown in Figure 7.
 Table 2 contains the version of each environment in which speed was measured in this experiment.

                        9                                      Maze                                                                                    Maze
                   10                                          RubiksCube                                                                              Knapsack
                                                               TSP                                                                                     TSP
                                                               Cleaner                                        7                                        CVRP
                        8                                      Knapsack                                  10                                            Cleaner
                   10                                          Sokoban                                                                                 MultiCVRP
                                                               Sliding Tile Puzzle                                                                     RubiksCube
Steps per Second


                                                                                      Steps per Second
                                                               CVRP                                                                                    Sokoban
                        7                                      Minesweeper                                    6                                        Minesweeper
                   10                                          MultiCVRP
                                                                                                         10                                            Sliding Tile Puzzle
                                                               GraphColoring                                                                           JobShop
                                                               Connector                                                                               Game2048
                        6                                      JobShop                                        5                                        Pacman
                   10                                          Game2048                                  10                                            GraphColoring
                                                               Snake                                                                                   Tetris
                                                               Tetris                                                                                  Connector
                        5                                      Pacman                                                                                  Snake
                   10                                          Sudoku                                         4                                        MMST
                                                               MMST                                      10                                            Sudoku
                                                               RobotWharehouse                                                                         RobotWharehouse
                        4                                      BinPack                                                                                 BinPack
                   10                                          FlatPack
                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                       FlatPack
                             28    210    212    214   216                                               10        28      210     212    214    216
                            Number of Parallel Environments                                                       Number of Parallel Environments
                                            (a) GPU                                                                                    (b) CPU

 Figure 7: Scaling of the effective environment steps per second (throughput) for each registered
 environment as the number of parallel environments increases on (a) GPU (Tesla V100) and (b) CPU
 (2 cores).



 Hardware scaling of A2C training This experiment shows the impact of increasing the training
 resources of the Jumanji A2C agent on the Connector-v2 environment. The training was done on
 different hardware: 1 CPU with 8 cores, 1 GPU (RTX 2080 super) and a TPU-v4 with a varying
 number of cores, i.e. 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128 cores. The training is run for 1000 epochs of 100 learning
 steps in which 256 trajectories of length 10 are sampled. The sampling of the trajectories is split
 across the available devices, but the number of environment steps sampled per epoch is the same for
 all the training settings. The A2C agent is run without normalizing advantages, with a discount factor
 of 1, a bootstrapping factor of 0.95, and a learning rate of 2 × 10−4 . We demonstrate almost linear
 scaling in hardware in table 3 by plotting training convergence speed as a function of the number of
 TPU cores.

                                                    TPU cores                    8                        16         32          64      128
                                                Convergence time (h)            12.8                      4.2        3.2         2.0     1.4

 Table 3: Time to reach 92% performance as a function of the TPU cores. This table completes the
 experiment presented in figure 3b.



  C.3                       F LEXIBILITY E XPERIMENTS

 This section provides additional details on the experiments conducted using multiple generators for
 the TSP problem (5.1).


                                                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Network The networks of the two A2C agents in this experiment are identical, and additionally,
it is the same network used in the baseline experiment for the TSP environment (section 4.2). Full
details of the network used in this experiment can be found in Appendix B.

Training Procedure The A2C agent trained on the single uniform generator was trained in an
identical manner as the A2C agent for the TSP baselines experiment, this includes the same training
hyper-parameters (e.g, the sequence length, batch size, and so forth). The only notable difference
between the training process of the two agents is that the baseline TSP agent is trained on 50
cities whereas the agent for this experiment is trained on 20 cities. The A2C agent trained on the
combination of the uniform generator and the three custom generators (cluster, linear compression,
and explosion). The custom generators were implemented by inheriting the abstract generator class
from their environment and then modifying the call method to return instances with the desired
initial state distribution. This A2C agent is trained in a similar manner with the following difference.
The batch of data used to update the single generator agent contains the agent’s trajectories on only
uniform instances, whereas, the four generators agent’s batch of data consists of its trajectories on
uniform, cluster, linear compression, and explosion instances. In the former, the agent interacts solely
in the environment with the uniform generator, whereas in the latter, the agent sequentially interacts
with four environments each with a specific (uniform or custom) generator. Lastly, both of the agents
were trained for 300 million environment steps.

Evaluation Dataset The dataset was created using the VLSI TSP Benchmark Dataset. There are
102 TSP instances in the VLSI dataset with instance size (i.e., number of cities) ranging from 131
to 744710. Since we conduct this experiment with a TSP environment with 50 cities, we randomly
sample 50 cities from each of the 102 instances to obtain an unseen, real-world validation dataset of
102 instances each with 50 cities. This dataset is used to evaluate the A2C agents during training.
Additionally, we create a larger dataset with 1020 instances by randomly sampling 50 cities from
each of the 102 instances 10 times. This larger dataset is used to create a lower-variance estimate of
the performance of both agents at test time.

Results Section 5.1 presents the results of the two                     7.0
A2C agents on the unseen, real-world instances, both                                            Single Generator
during training and at test time, and it can be seen                    6.8                     Four Generators
that the agent trained on a broader initial state dis-
                                                                        6.6
                                                          Tour Length


tribution (i.e., four generators agent) outperformed
the agent trained solely on uniform instances. To fur-                  6.4
ther analyze the two agents, they were also evaluated
on a random set of uniform instances during train-                      6.2
ing, and Figure 8 depicts the learning curves of the
agents. The aim of this evaluation was to determine                     6.0
the impact of training on a broader data distribution                         0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0     2.5   3.0
when evaluating on in-training distribution instances.                              Environment Steps         1e8
Even though it does appear that the learning curve
of the four generators agent is lower/better than the      Figure 8: Learning curves of two agents train-
single generator agent’s curve, this difference in per-    ing on TSP and evaluated on instances sam-
formance is not significant. Therefore, these results      pled from a uniform generator. One agent
suggest that training on a wider data distribution does    (blue) samples from a single uniform gener-
not lead to any significant improvement or degrada-        ator versus the other agent (orange) samples
tion of performance when evaluating on instances           from four generators (uniform, cluster, explo-
seen during training.                                      sion, and compression). Lower tour length is
                                                           better.
C.4   S CALABILITY E XPERIMENTS

This section provides additional details on the experiments conducted with varying degrees of problem
complexity for the Connector, BinPack, and RubiksCube environments (5.2).

Networks The agents in the scalability experiments are actor-critic networks which are fully defined
in Appendix B. Therefore, the agents for each environment have identical networks with the sole
difference being the complexity level of the environment they are trained on.


                                                  25
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Training The training process is identical to the baselines experiments, we use the same training
     hyper-parameters and use the jumanji/training/train.py script in the same manner as
     described in Appendix C.1. The only difference is that for the purpose of the scalability experiments,
     we instantiate the Connector, BinPack and RubiksCube environments with different configurations
     (whereas for the baselines experiment, the default environment parameters configuration is used).
     The code snippets below show the instantiation of the different environments for the three problems.
     Connector setup

 1   from jumanji.environments import Connector
 2   from jumanji.environments.routing.connector.generator import RandomWalkGenerator
 3
 4   env_1 = Connector(generator=RandomWalkGenerator(grid_size=10, num_agents=2))
 5   env_2 = Connector(generator=RandomWalkGenerator(grid_size=10, num_agents=10))
 6   env_3 = Connector(generator=RandomWalkGenerator(grid_size=12, num_agents=12))
 7   env_4 = Connector(generator=RandomWalkGenerator(grid_size=14, num_agents=14))



     BinPack setup

 1   from jumanji.environments import BinPack
 2   from jumanji.environments.packing.bin_pack.generator import RandomGenerator
 3
 4   env_1 = BinPack(
 5       generator=RandomGenerator(
 6           max_num_items=10, max_num_ems=15, split_num_same_items=2,
 7       ),
 8       obs_num_ems=15,
 9   )
10   env_2 = BinPack(
11       generator=RandomGenerator(
12           max_num_items=20, max_num_ems=40, split_num_same_items=2,
13       ),
14       obs_num_ems=40,
15   )
16   env_3 = BinPack(
17       generator=RandomGenerator(
18           max_num_items=30, max_num_ems=60, split_num_same_items=2,
19       ),
20       obs_num_ems=50,
21   )



     RubiksCube setup

 1   from jumanji.environments import RubiksCube
 2   from jumanji.environments.logic.rubiks_cube.generator import ScramblingGenerator
 3
 4   env_1 = RubiksCube(
 5       generator=ScramblingGenerator(cube_size=3, num_scrambles_on_reset=3),
 6   )
 7   env_1 = RubiksCube(
 8       generator=ScramblingGenerator(cube_size=4, num_scrambles_on_reset=3),
 9   )
10   env_1 = RubiksCube(
11       generator=ScramblingGenerator(cube_size=3, num_scrambles_on_reset=5),
12   )
13   env_1 = RubiksCube(
14       generator=ScramblingGenerator(cube_size=3, num_scrambles_on_reset=7),
15   )
16   env_1 = RubiksCube(


                                                      26
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


17       generator=ScramblingGenerator(cube_size=3, num_scrambles_on_reset=9),
18   )
19   env_1 = RubiksCube(
20       generator=ScramblingGenerator(cube_size=4, num_scrambles_on_reset=5),
21   )



                                Table 4: Results of the scalability experiments.

                                                                                  Final
                   Environment       Configuration     Complexity Level
                                                                              Performance
                                     G = 10, N = 2            Easy               0.983
                                     G = 10, N = 10          Medium              0.885
                     Connector
                                     G = 12, N = 12          Medium              0.855
                                     G = 14, N = 14          Difficult           0.785
                                        N = 10                Easy               0.993
                      BinPack           N = 20               Medium              0.934
                                        N = 30               Difficult           0.870
                                      C = 3, N = 3            Easy               0.987
                                      C = 4, N = 3           Medium              0.829
                                      C = 3, N = 5           Medium              0.838
                    RubiksCube
                                      C = 3, N = 7           Difficult           0.213
                                      C = 3, N = 9           Difficult           0.000
                                      C = 4, N = 5           Difficult           0.000


     Results We further describe the results obtained from the scalability experiments in Table 4. This
     table shows the different configurations for each environment along with its qualitative definition of
     the complexity level and shows the final performance obtained by the A2C agent for each environment
     and configuration. It can be seen that with the increasing complexity of the environment, the agent
     performance worsens.

     D     ROLL OUT THE E NVIRONMENT
     D.1   A NIMATE AN E PISODE

     Below is a code example of how to take random actions in the BinPack environment and an-
     imate an episode. This code can run in a notebook or e.g. on Google Colab. Please see
     the load_checkpoints.ipynb notebook on https://github.com/instadeepai/
     jumanji/blob/main/examples/load_checkpoints.ipynb to load pre-trained agents
     or roll out a random policy.

 1   %pip install --quiet jumanji[train]
 2
 3   %matplotlib notebook
 4   import jax
 5   import jumanji
 6   from jumanji.training import networks
 7
 8   env = jumanji.make("BinPack-v2")
 9   reset_fn = jax.jit(env.reset)
10   step_fn = jax.jit(env.step)
11   random_policy = networks.make_random_policy_bin_pack(env.unwrapped)
12
13   @jax.jit
14   def select_random_action(observation, key):
15       """Call `random_policy` which expects a batch of observations."""
16       batched_observation = jax.tree_util.tree_map(


                                                      27
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


17             lambda x: x[None], observation,
18         )
19         return random_policy(batched_observation, key).squeeze(axis=0)
20
21   key = jax.random.PRNGKey(0)
22   state, timestep = reset_fn(key)
23   states = [state]
24
25   # Loop until the episode is done.
26   while not timestep.last():
27       # Select an action.
28       action_key, key = jax.random.split(key)
29       action = select_random_action(timestep.observation, action_key)
30       # Step in the environment.
31       state, timestep = step_fn(state, action)
32       states.append(state)
33
34   env.animate(states, interval=100)


     D.2   P LACEMENT OF THE E NVIRONMENT ON D EVICE
                             Effective Steps per Sec.


                                                    103


                                                    102


                                                    101


                                                          GPU (L + I + E) GPU (L + I)   GPU (L)   CPU

     Figure 9: Throughput ablation of the full Anakin GPU setup. The experiment uses the Connector
     environment and is run on a V100 GPU with a batch size of 2048. The pipeline alternates between
     phases of acting (policy inference and environment step) and learning (back-propagation). CPU: The
     whole Jumanji pipeline is run on the CPU. GPU (L): The inference and environment step remain on
     the CPU but the data is sent to the GPU for the learning step (L). GPU (L + I): Only the environment
     step is done on CPU. The inference (I) and the learning step are done on the GPU. GPU (L + I + E):
     The Anakin implementation. The whole training pipeline is performed on GPU, now including the
     environment step (E).



     Implementing environments in Jax achieves its fullest potential when using the Anakin (Hessel et al.,
     2021) architecture for fully optimizing device accelerators. The pipeline consists of a synchronous
     execution of actor inference (action selection), environment step, and learner step (back-propagation)
     all on the device (e.g. GPU, TPU). High throughput is achieved by removing any host-device
     communication (e.g. CPU to GPU) during the process. We run an ablation study in figure 9 to study
     the speed-up that comes with implementing the environment in Jax and running it on the device.
     We use the Connector environment with a batch size of 2048. We observe that most of the speed
     gain arises from running the environment on GPU and not transferring data between the host and the
     device.


                                                                                 28
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     E     D ISCUSSION ON PARALLELIZATION

     E.1   PARALLELIZING THE DYNAMICS

     Although the Environment framework within Jumanji is agnostic to using discrete or continuous
     actions, all of the implemented environments use a discrete action space. Having discrete actions
     often leads to the impossibility of fully parallelizing the dynamics, i.e. the environment step function.
     For instance, in Sudoku, there are 18 possible actions (6 faces and 3 different rotations). Each action
     leads to doing a different operation on the cube (3D array). When the step function is vmap-ed, the
     discrete choice of selecting the rotation to perform as a function of the action is not parallelizable
     within the SIMD (single instruction, multiple data) paradigm. Therefore, vmap-ing the dynamics
     leads to transforming the conditional branching to a select XLA statement. This means each of the 18
     actions is performed for the whole batch and then the correct rotation is selected based on the action.
     When executed, the code below shows how JAX’s jax.lax.cond is transformed into a select
     when the function is vmap-ed.


 1   import jax
 2   import jax.numpy as jnp
 3
 4   def f(x, bool_):
 5       return jax.lax.cond(bool_, lambda a: a+100, lambda a: a, x)
 6
 7   args = jnp.array(0, float), jnp.array(False)
 8   print(jax.xla_computation(f)(*args).as_hlo_text())
 9   print("---")
10   print(
11       jax.xla_computation(jax.vmap(f))(
12           jnp.array([0], float), jnp.array([False]),
13       ).as_hlo_text()
14   )


     Because the vmap-ed dynamics have to generate all possible actions for the whole batch, it may
     explain why some environments end up being slower than expected on a hardware accelerator. Yet,
     the use of hardware-accelerated environments really shines when training a neural network as the
     policy since we avoid transferring data between the CPU and the accelerator.


     E.2   PARALLELIZING AUTO - RESET DURING TRAINING

     During training, we roll out a few steps on a batch of parallel environments with an automatic reset
     behavior. This means any of the environments that reaches a terminal state is automatically reset to
     an initial state (with a discount of 0).
     In Jumanji, we implement an environment wrapper called AutoResetWrapper to do this auto-
     reset automatically. This wrapper first calls the environment step function, then checks if it reaches
     a terminal state and if so, it resets the environment. Similar to explained above, this conditional
     statement is not parallelizable when used with vmap. As a consequence, if the wrapper is vmap-ed (for
     instance by wrapping it into Jumanji’s VmapWrapper), both branches (resetting and not resetting)
     will be executed on all environments across the batch, at every timestep. This may be very slow if the
     environment reset is a slow function, which is the case for Rubikscube where the reset function is
     literally 100 times as computationally heavy as the step function.
     An alternative to calling the reset function at every step is to use Jumanji’s
     VmapAutoResetWrapper that is equivalent to vmap-ing the auto-reset behavior but ac-
     tually only vmaps the step function and then loop over the environments to reset the ones that reach a
     terminal state. This way, if none of the states in the batch has terminated, the wrapper will not call
     reset once, compared to the previous wrapper which would still call reset on the whole batch.


                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F   L ICENSE
Jumanji is released under an Apache License 2.0.


                                               30
