Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G RAPH N EURAL M ODELING OF N ETWORK F LOWS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Network flow problems, which involve distributing traffic such that the underly-
         ing infrastructure is used effectively, are ubiquitous in transportation and logis-
         tics. Among them, the general Multi-Commodity Network Flow (MCNF) prob-
         lem concerns the distribution of multiple flows of different sizes between sev-
         eral sources and sinks, while achieving effective utilization of the links. Due to
         the appeal of data-driven optimization, these problems have increasingly been
         approached using graph learning methods. In this paper, we propose a novel
         graph learning architecture for network flow problems called Per-Edge Weights
         (PEW). This method builds on a Graph Attention Network and uses distinctly
         parametrized message functions along each link. We extensively evaluate the
         proposed solution through an Internet flow routing case study using 17 Service
         Provider topologies and 2 routing schemes. We show that PEW yields substan-
         tial gains over architectures whose global message function constrains the routing
         unnecessarily. We also find that an MLP is competitive with other standard archi-
         tectures. Furthermore, we analyze the relationship between graph structure and
         predictive performance for data-driven routing of flows, an aspect that has not
         been considered by existing work in the area.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Flow routing represents a fundamental problem that captures a variety of optimization scenarios that
arise in real-world networks (Ahuja, 1993, Chapter 17). One classic example is the maximum flow
problem, which seeks to find the best (in terms of maximum capacity) path between a source node
and a sink node. The more general Multi-Commodity Network Flow problem allows for multiple
flows of different sizes between several sources and sinks that share the same distribution network.
It is able to formalize the distribution of packets in a computer network, of goods in a logistics
network, or cars in a rail network (Hu, 1963). We illustrate MCNF problems in Figure 1.
For maximum flow problems, efficient algorithms have been developed (Cormen et al., 2022, Chap-
ter 26), including a recent near-linear time approach (Chen et al., 2022). For the more complex
MCNF problems, Linear Programming solutions can be leveraged in order to compute, in poly-
nomial time, the optimal routes given knowledge of pairwise demands between the nodes in the
graph (Fortz & Thorup, 2000; Tardos, 1986). At the other end of the spectrum, oblivious routing
methods derive routing strategies with partial or no knowledge of traffic demands, optimizing for
“worst-case” performance (Räcke, 2008).
As recognized by existing works, a priori knowledge of the full demand matrix is an unrealistic
assumption, as loads in real systems continuously change (Feldmann et al., 2001). Instead, ML
techniques may enable a middle ground (Valadarsky et al., 2017): learning a model trained on past
loads that can perform well in a variety of traffic scenarios, without requiring a disruptive rede-
ployment of the routing strategy (Fortz & Thorup, 2002). Hence, developing an effective learning
representation is fundamental to the application of ML in flow routing scenarios.
From a more practical point of view, this shift towards data-driven approaches is illustrated by the
concepts of data-driven computer networking (Jiang et al., 2017) and self-driving networks (Feam-
ster & Rexford, 2017). Early works in this area were based on MLP architectures (Valadarsky et al.,
2017; Reis et al., 2019). More recently, models purposely designed to operate on graphs, including
variants of the expressive Message Passing Neural Networks (Rusek et al., 2019; Almasan et al.,
2021) and Graph Nets (Battaglia et al., 2018), have been adopted.


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         ?
                                                                                     ?         ? ? ?
                                         train    GNN        predict            ?
                                                                                     ?
                                                                                             ??
                                                                                                 ??
                                                  Model                             ?
                                                                                         ?
                                                                                              ??


Figure 1: Top. An illustration of the Multi-Commodity Network Flow family of problems. The
requirements of the routing problem are defined using a matrix that specifies the total amount of
traffic that has to be routed between each pair of nodes in a graph. We are also given a graph
topology in which links are equipped with capacities. All flows have an entry and exit node and
share the same underlying transportation infrastructure. Under a particular routing scheme, such as
shortest path routing, the links are loaded by the total amount of traffic passing over them. Bottom.
A model is trained using a dataset of the link utilizations for certain demand matrices and graph
topologies, and is then used to predict the Maximum Link Utilization for an unseen demand matrix.


Despite the promise of graph learning, current works nevertheless adopt schemes that aggregate mes-
sages along neighboring edges using the same message functions. In the context of routing flows,
this constrains the model unnecessarily. Instead, we argue that nodes should be able to weight flows
along each link separately, so that each node may independently update its state given incoming and
outgoing traffic, leading to better algorithmic alignment (Xu et al., 2020) between the computational
mechanism of the GNN and the task. We illustrate this in Figure 2.
Furthermore, the ways in which prior works encode the demands as node features varies between the
full demand matrix (Valadarsky et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020) and a node-wise summation (Hope
& Yoneki, 2021), and it is unclear when either is beneficial. Besides the learning representation
aspects, existing approaches in this area are trained using very few graph topologies (typically 1 or
2) of small sizes (typically below 20 nodes). This makes it difficult to assess the gain that graph
learning solutions bring over vanilla architectures such as the MLP. Additionally, a critical point that
has not been considered is the impact of the underlying graph topology on the effectiveness of the
learning process. To address these shortcomings, we make contributions along the following axes:

       • Learning representations for data-driven flow routing. We propose a novel mecha-
         nism for aggregating messages along each link with a different parametrization, which
         we refer to as Per-Edge Weights (PEW). We propose an instantiation that extends the
         GAT (Veličković et al., 2018) via a construction akin to the RGAT (Busbridge et al., 2019).
         Despite its simplicity, we show that this mechanism yields substantial predictive gains over
         architectures that use the same message function for all neighbors. We also find that PEW
         can exploit the complete demand matrix as node features, while the GAT performs better
         with the lossy node-wise sum used in prior work.
       • Rigorous and systematic evaluation. Whereas existing works test on few, small-scale
         topologies, we evaluate the proposed method and 4 baselines on 17 real-world Internet Ser-
         vice Provider topologies and 2 routing schemes in the context of a case study in computer
         networks, yielding 81600 independent model training runs. Perhaps surprisingly, we find
         that a well-tuned MLP is competitive with other GNN architectures when given an equal
         hyperparameter and training budget.
       • Understanding the impact of topology. The range of experiments we carry out allows us
         to establish that a strong link exists between topology and the difficulty of the prediction
         task, which is consistent across routing schemes. Generally, the predictive performance
         decreases with the size of the graph and increases with heterogeneity in the local node and
         edge properties. Moreover, we find that, when graph structure varies through the presence
         of different subsets of nodes, the predictive performance of GNNs increases compared to
         structure-agnostic methods, such as MLP.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Left. An illustration of the MPNN used in previous flow routing works, which uses the
same message function M (l) for aggregating neighbor messages. Right. An illustration of our
proposed Per-Edge Weights (PEW), which uses uniquely parametrized per-edge message functions.



2   R ELATED WORK

Neural networks operating on graphs. Much effort has been devoted in recent years to devel-
oping neural network architectures operating on graphs. Several approaches, such as Graph Con-
volutional Networks (GCNs), use convolutional filters based on the graph spectrum, which can be
approximated efficiently (Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017). An alternative line of work
is based on message passing on graphs (Sperduti & Starita, 1997; Scarselli et al., 2009) as a means
of deriving vectorial embeddings. Both Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al.,
2017) and Graph Networks (Battaglia et al., 2018) are attempts to unify related methods in this
space, abstracting the commonalities of existing approaches with a set of primitive functions.
Expressivity is another major concern in the design of this class of architectures. Notably, Gated
Graph Neural Networks (GG-NNs) (Li et al., 2017) add gating mechanisms and support for dif-
ferent relation types, as well as removing the need to run the message propagation to convergence.
Graph Attention Networks (GATs) (Veličković et al., 2018) propose the use of attention mechanisms
as a way to perform flexible aggregation of neighbor features. Relational learning models for knowl-
edge graphs, such as the RGCNs (Schlichtkrull et al., 2018) that extends the GCN architecture, use
different parametrizations for edges with different types. The RGATs (Busbridge et al., 2019) follow
the blueprint of RGCNs and extend the GAT approach to the relational setting. Despite the tremen-
dous success of relational models for a variety of tasks, perhaps surprisingly, recent work shows that
randomly trained relation weights may perform similarly well (Degraeve et al., 2022).

ML for routing flows in computer networks. Several works have considered machine learning
approaches to perform supervised learning for routing flows in computer networks. (Geyer & Carle,
2018) proposes a variant of the GG-NN and trains it to predict paths taken by conventional routing
algorithms. (Rusek et al., 2019) proposes a MPNN variant and uses it to predict graph-level metrics
such as delay and jitter. (Reis et al., 2019) uses an MLP representation and supervised learning to
predict the full path that a flow should take through the network. Other works have considered rein-
forcement learning the routing protocol itself in a variety of problem formulations: (Valadarsky et al.,
2017) uses an MLP and considers learning per-edge coefficients that are used with “softmin” rout-
ing. (Xu et al., 2018) proposes an MLP approach for learning traffic split ratios for a set of candidate
paths. (Zhang et al., 2020) uses a CNN to re-route a proportion of important (critical) flows. (Al-
masan et al., 2021) proposes a formulation that routes flows sequentially, which then become part of
the state. It uses a MPNN representation. Most recently, (Hope & Yoneki, 2021) adopts the formu-
lation in (Valadarsky et al., 2017), showing that the use of Graph Networks improves performance
in one graph topology.

Algorithmic reasoning. Another relevant area is algorithmic reasoning (Veličković et al., 2018;
Cappart et al., 2021), which trains neural networks to execute the steps taken by classic algo-
rithms (Cormen et al., 2022) with the goal of obtaining strong generalization on larger unseen
inputs. (Georgiev & Liò, 2020) trains a MPNN to mimic the steps taken by the Ford-Fulkerson
maximum flow algorithm (Cormen et al., 2022, Chapter 24). An important difference to this line
of work is that in our case our model does not include any knowledge of the routing scheme, while
the approaches based on algorithmic reasoning use the granular algorithm steps themselves as the
supervision signal.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     M ETHODS
3.1    ROUTING FORMALIZATION AND LEARNING TASK

Flow routing formalization. We assume the splittable-flow routing formalization proposed by Fortz
& Thorup (2004). We let G = (V, E) be a directed graph, with V representing the set of nodes and E
the set of edges. We use N = |V | and m = |E| as shorthands, as well as vi and ei,j to denote specific
nodes and edges, respectively. Each edge has an associated capacity κ(ei,j ) ∈ R+ . We also define a
demand matrix D ∈ RN ×N where entry Dsrc,dst is the traffic that source node src sends to destina-
                                                                                       (src,dst)
tion dst. With each tuple (src, dst, ei,j ) ∈ V ×V ×E we associate the quantity fei,j            ≥ 0, which
specifies the amount of traffic flow from src to dst that goes over the edge ei,j . The load of edge
                                                                                 P                 (src,dst)
ei,j , load(ei,j ), is the total traffic flow traversing it, i.e., load(ei,j ) =  (src,dst)∈V ×V fei,j       .
                                     (src,dst)
Furthermore, the quantities fei,j                must obey the following flow conservation constraints:

                                                                        
                       X                         X                      Dsrc,dst    if vi = src,
                                 fe(src,dst) −             fe(src,dst) = −Dsrc,dst   if vi = dst,         (1)
                                                                        
                     e∈δ + (vi )               e∈δ − (vi )                0          otherwise.

where the sets δ + (vi ), δ − (vi ) are node vi ’s outgoing and incoming edges, respectively. Intuitively,
these constraints capture the fact that traffic sent from src to dst originates at the source (first clause),
must be absorbed at the target (second clause), and ingress equals egress for all other nodes (final
clause).
Routing schemes. A routing scheme R specifies how to distribute the traffic flows. Specifically, we
consider two well-known routing schemes. The first is the Standard Shortest Paths (SSP) scheme
in which, for a given node, the full flow quantity with destination dst is sent to the neighbor on the
shortest path to dst. The widely used ECMP scheme (Hopps, 2000) instead splits outgoing traffic
among all the neighbors on the shortest path to dst if multiple such neighbors exist.
Prediction target. A common way of evaluating a routing strategy R is Maximum Link Utilization
(MLU), i.e., the maximal ratio between link load and capacity. Formally, given a demand matrix
                                            load(e )
D, we denote it as MLU(D) = maxei,j ∈E κ(ei,ji,j) . This target metric has been extensively stud-
ied in prior work (Kandula et al., 2005) and is often used by ISPs to gauge when the underlying
infrastructure needs to be upgraded (Guichard et al., 2005).
Supervised learning setup. We assume that we are provided with a dataset of traffic matrices
D = ∪k {D(k) , MLU(D(k) )}. Given that our model produces an approximation MLU(D[ (k) )
of the true Maximum Link Utilization, the goal is to minimize the Mean Squared Error
P              (k)  [ (k) ))2
    k (MLU(D     )−MLU(D
                |D|           .

3.2    P ER -E DGE W EIGHTS

We propose a simple mechanism to increase the expressivity of models for data-driven flow routing.
As previously mentioned, several works in recent years have begun adopting various graph learning
methods for flow routing problems such as variants of Message Passing Neural Networks (Geyer &
Carle, 2018; Rusek et al., 2019; Almasan et al., 2021) or Graph Networks (Hope & Yoneki, 2021).
                                              (l)
In particular, MPNNs derive hidden features hvi for node vi in layer l + 1 by computing messages
m(l+1) and applying updates of the form:
                                        X
                             m(l+1)
                               vi   =           M (l) h(l)    (l)
                                                        vi , hvj , xei,j
                                                  vj ∈N (vi )                                             (2)

                                    h(l+1)
                                     vi    = U (l)          h(l)    (l+1)
                                                             vi , m vi

where N (vi ) is the neighborhood of node vi , xei,j are features for edge ei,j , and M (l) and U (l)
are the differentiable message (sometimes also called edge) and vertex update functions in layer


                                                                4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


l. Typically, M (l) is some form of MLP that is applied in parallel when computing the update for
each node in the graph. An advantage of applying the same message function M (l) across the entire
graph is that the number of parameters remains fixed in the size of the graph, enabling a form of
combinatorial generalization (Battaglia et al., 2018). However, while this approach has been very
successful in many graph learning tasks such as graph classification, we argue that it is not best
suited for flow routing problems.
Instead, for this family of problems, the edges do not have uniform semantics. Each of them plays
a different role when the flows are routed over the graph and, as shown in Figure 1, each will take
on varying levels of load. Equivalently, from a node-centric perspective, each node should be able
to decide flexibly how to distribute several flows of traffic over its neighboring edges. This intuition
                                                               (l)
can be captured by using a different message function Mi,j when aggregating messages received
along each edge ei,j . We call this mechanism Per-Edge Weights, or PEW. We illustrate the difference
between PEW and a typical MPNN in Figure 2.
Let us formulate the PEW architecture by a similar construction to the additive self-attention, across-
relation variant of RGAT (Busbridge et al., 2019). Let N [vi ] and N (vi ) denote the closed and open
neighborhoods of node vi . To compute the coefficients for each edge, one first needs to compute
                              (l)         (l)
intermediate representations gvi ,ei,j = Wei,j hvi by multiplying the node features with the per-edge
                   (l)
weight matrix Wei,j . Subsequently, the “query” and “key” representations are defined as below,
          (l)        (l)
where Qei,j and Kei,j represent per-edge query and key kernels respectively:

                          q(l)         (l)         (l)       (l)         (l)         (l)
                           vi ,ei,j = gvi ,ei,j · Qei,j and kvi ,ei,j = gvi ,ei,j · Kei,j .               (3)
                                      (l)
Then, the attention coefficients ζei,j are computed according to:

                                                 (l)             (l)             (l)
                           exp LeakyReLU qvi ,ei,j + kvj ,ei,j + W1 xei,j
            ζe(l)
               i,j
                   =P                                                                                 ,   (4)
                                                         (l)           (l)             (l)
                       vk ∈N [vi ] exp   LeakyReLU     q v i ,ei,k + k v k ,ei,k +   W1    x e i,k


Finally, the embeddings are computed as:

                                                                               
                                                          X
                                 h(l+1)
                                  vi    = ReLU                      ζe(l) g(l)  .
                                                                        i,j vj ,ei,j
                                                                                                          (5)
                                                       vj ∈N (vi )



4    E VALUATION PROTOCOL

This section describes the experimental setup we use for our evaluation. We focus on a case study on
routing flows in computer networks to demonstrate its effectiveness in real-world scenarios, which
can be considered representative of a variety of settings in which we wish to predict characteristics
of a routing scheme from an underlying network topology and a set of observed demand matrices.
Model architectures. We compare PEW with three widely used graph learning architectures: the
GAT (Veličković et al., 2018), GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), and GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al.,
2017). We also compare against a standard MLP architecture made up of fully-connected layers
followed by ReLU activations. The features provided as input to the five methods are the same:
for the GNN methods, the node features are the demands D in accordance with the demand input
representations defined later in this section, while the edge features are the capacities κ, and the
adjacency matrix A governs the message passing. For GCN and GraphSAGE, which do not support
edge features, we include the mean edge capacity as a node feature. For the MLP, we unroll and
concatenate the demand input representation derived from D, the adjacency matrix A, and all edge
capacities κ in the input layer. We note that other non-ML baselines, such as Linear Programming,
are not directly applicable for this task: while they can be used to derive a routing strategy, in this
chapter the goal is to predict a property of an existing routing strategy (SSP or ECMP, as defined in
Section 3.1).


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Traffic generation. In order to generate synthetic flows of traffic, we use the “gravity” approach
proposed by Roughan (2005). Akin to Newton’s law of universal gravitation, the traffic Di,j be-
tween nodes vi and vj is proportional to the amount of traffic, Diin , that enters the network via vi
and Djout , the amount that exits the network at vj . The values Diin and Djout are random variables
that are identically and independently distributed according to an exponential distribution. Despite
its simplicity in terms of number of parameters, this approach has been shown to synthesize traffic
matrices that correspond closely to those observed in real-world networks (Roughan, 2005; Hartert
et al., 2015). We additionally apply a rescaling of the volume by the MLU (defined in Section 3.1)
under the LP solution of the MCNF formulation, as recommended in the networking literature (Had-
dadi & Bonaventure, 2013; Gvozdiev et al., 2018).
Network topologies. We consider real-world network topologies that are part of the Repetita and
Internet Topology Zoo repositories (Gay et al., 2017; Knight et al., 2011). In case there are multiple
snapshots of the same network topology, we only use the most recent so as not to bias the results
towards these graphs. We limit the size of the considered topologies to between [20, 100] nodes,
which we note is still substantially larger than topologies used for training in prior work on ML for
routing flows. Furthermore, we only consider heterogeneous topologies with at least two different
link capacities. Given the traffic model above, for some topologies the MLU dependent variable is
nearly always identical regardless of the demand matrix, making it trivial to devise a good predictor.
Out of the 39 resulting topologies, we filter out those for which the minimum MLU is equal to the
90th percentile MLU over 100 demand matrices, leaving 17 unique topologies. The properties of
these topologies are summarized in the Appendix. For the experiments involving topology varia-
tions, they are generated as follows: a number of nodes to be removed from the graph is chosen
uniformly at random in the range [1, N5 ], subject to the constraint that the graph does not become
disconnected. Demand matrices are generated starting from this modified topology.
Datasets. The datasets Dtrain , Dvalidate , Dtest of demand matrices are disjoint and contain 103 demand
matrices each. Both the demands and capacities are standardized by dividing them by the maximum
value across the union of the datasets. As shown in the Appendix, the datasets for the smallest
topology contain 1.2 ∗ 106 flows, while the datasets for the largest topology consist of 2 ∗ 107 flows.
Demand input representation. We also consider two different demand input representations that
                                                                                                      2N
appear in prior work, which we term raw and sum. In the former, the feature vector xraw       vi ∈ R
for node vi is [D1,i , . . . , DN,i , Di,1 , . . . , Di,N ], which corresponds to the concatenated outgo-
                                                                                               2
ing
 P and incoming
           P       demands, respectively. The latter is an aggregated version xsum     vi ∈ R equal to
[ j Di,j , i Dj,i ], i.e., it contains the summed demands.
Training and evaluation protocol. Training and evaluation are performed separately for each graph
topology and routing scheme. All methods are given an equal grid search budget of 12 hyperparam-
eter configurations whose values are provided in the Appendix. To compute means and confidence
intervals, we repeat training and evaluation across 10 different random seeds. Training is done by
mini-batch SGD using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) and proceeds for 3000 epochs
with a batch size of 16. We perform early stopping if the validation performance does not improve
after 1500 epochs, also referred to as “patience” in other graph learning works (Veličković et al.,
2018; Errica et al., 2020). Since the absolute value of the MLUs varies significantly in datapoints
generated for different topologies, we apply a normalization when reporting results such that they
are comparable. Namely, the MSE of the predictors is normalized by the MSE of a simple baseline
that outputs the average MLU for all DMs in the provided dataset. We refer to this as Normalized
MSE (NMSE).
Scale of experiments. Given the range of considered graph learning architectures, hyperparameter
configurations, network topologies and routing models, to the best of our knowledge, our work
represents the most extensive suite of benchmarks on graph learning for the MCNF problem to date.
The primary experiments consist of 20400 independent model training runs, while the entirety of
our experiments comprise 81600 runs. We believe that this systematic experimental procedure and
evaluation represents in itself a significant contribution of our work and, akin to (Errica et al., 2020)
for graph classification, it can serve as a foundation for members of the graph learning community
working on MCNF scenarios to build upon.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     0.8                                                                             SSP



    Normalized MSE
                     0.6

                     0.4

                     0.2

                     0.0
                             et


                                   is



                                           s



                                                    t


                                                                     et


                                                                                 Iij
                                                                    06


                                                                                                e


                                                                                                                             et
                                                                                                             e


                                                                                                                     n


                                                                                                                                  if



                                                                                                                                            L3


                                                                                                                                                  t



                                                                                                                                                             3


                                                                                                                                                                      t



                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                   e


                                                                                                                                                 ne


                                                                                                                                                                  ne
                                        ne


                                                                                             d


                                                                                                          ns


                                                                                                                                                          hL


                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                     e


                                                                                                                                  Ni
                                  Ag
                            on


                                                rn


                                                                  rn


                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                  ar
                                                                 10


                                                                                          no


                                                                                                                                            er
                                                                                                                         ar


                                                                                                                                                 Si


                                                                                                                                                                 ak
                                        Ar


                                                                                                      tle


                                                                                                                                                                             t2
                                                                                                                                                       itc
                                               Ce


                                                                G
                           Ac


                                                                                                                 K


                                                                                                                                          i
                                                               20


                                                                                            r


                                                                                                                                       on
                                                                                                                         M


                                                                                                                                                                           et
                                                                                                                                                                 Ul
                                                                                         te


                                                                                                      ne


                                                                                                                                                      Sw
                                                             t


                                                                                                                                                                           in
                                                                                       In


                                                                                                                                       Pi
                                                          ne


                                                                                                    Ja


                                                                                                                                                                          Un
                                                           s
                                                        Ce
                     0.8                                                                            ECMP                                                              PEW (ours)
    Normalized MSE


                                                                                                                                                                      GAT
                     0.6                                                                                                                                              MLP
                                                                                                                                                                      GraphSAGE
                     0.4                                                                                                                                              GCN


                     0.2

                     0.0
                             et


                                   is



                                         s



                                                    t


                                                                            et


                                                                                 Iij


                                                                                                                             et
                                                                     6


                                                                                                e


                                                                                                            se


                                                                                                                     n


                                                                                                                                  if



                                                                                                                                           L3


                                                                                                                                                  t



                                                                                                                                                             3


                                                                                                                                                                      t



                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                 ne


                                                                                                                                                 ne


                                                                                                                                                                  ne
                                        ne


                                                                                            od
                                                                  00


                                                                                                                                                          hL


                                                                                                                                                                                01
                                                                                                                     e


                                                                                                                                  Ni
                                  Ag
                            on


                                                                          rn


                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                         len


                                                                                                                  ar


                                                                                                                                        ier
                                                  r


                                                                                                                         ar


                                                                                                                                                 Si


                                                                                                                                                                 ak
                                        Ar


                                                               01


                                                                                                                                                                               t2
                                                                                          rn


                                                                                                                                                        tc
                                               Ce


                                                                         G
                           Ac


                                                                                                                 K
                                                                                                        t


                                                                                                                                       on
                                                                                                                         M


                                                                                                                                                                           et
                                                                                                                                                                 Ul
                                                                                         te


                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                     ne
                                                           t2


                                                                                                                                                      Sw


                                                                                                                                                                           in
                                                                                       In


                                                                                                                                       Pi
                                                          ne


                                                                                                    Ja


                                                                                                                                                                          Un
                                                           s
                                                        Ce


Figure 3: Normalized MSE obtained by the predictors on different topologies for the SSP (top)
and ECMP (bottom) routing schemes. Lower values are better. PEW improves over vanilla GAT
substantially and performs best out of all architectures. An MLP is competitive with the other GNNs.


5          E VALUATION RESULTS

Benefits of PEW for flow routing. The primary results are shown in Figure 3, in which we compare
the normalized MSE obtained by the 5 architectures on the 17 topologies. The two rows correspond
to the SSP and ECMP schemes respectively. Learning curves for the best-performing hyperpa-
rameter configurations are presented in the Appendix. We find that PEW improves the predictive
performance over a vanilla GAT in nearly all (88%) of the settings tested, and that it performs the
best out of all predictors in 64.7% of cases. Hence, this highlights the importance of parametrizing
links differently, suggesting that it is an effective inductive bias for this family of problems. Inter-
estingly, the MLP performs better than GAT in 80% of the considered cases, and is competitive with
GCN and GraphSAGE. This echoes findings in other graph learning works (Errica et al., 2020), i.e.,
the fact that a well-tuned MLP can be competitive against GNN architectures and even outperform
them. Furthermore, both the relative differences between predictors and their absolute normalized
MSEs are fairly consistent across the different topologies.
Varying graph structure. Next, we investigate the impact of variations in topology on predictive
performance. In this experiment, the sole difference wrt. the setup described above is that the
datasets contain 103 demand matrices that are instead distributed on 25 variations in topology of the
original graph (i.e., we have 40 DMs per variation making up each dataset). To evaluate the methods,
we use two ranking metrics: the Win Rate (WR) is the percentage of topologies for which the method
obtains the lowest NMSE, and the Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) is the arithmetic average of the
complements of the ranks of the three predictors. For both metrics, higher values are better. Results
are shown in Table 1. PEW remains the best architecture and manifests a decrease in MRR for SSP
and a gain for ECMP. We also find that the relative performance of the GCN increases while that
of the MLP decreases when varying subsets of the nodes in the original graph are present. This
suggests that GNN-based approaches are more resilient to changes in graph structure (e.g., nodes
joining and leaving the network), a commonly observed phenomenon in practice.
Best demand input representation. To compare the two demand input representations, we addi-
tionally train the model architectures on subsets of 5%, 10%, 25% and 50% of the datasets. Recall
that the raw representation contains the full demand matrix while the sum representation is a lossy
aggregation of the same information. The latter may nevertheless help to avoid overfitting. Further-
more, given that the distribution of the demands is exponential, the largest flows will dominate the
values of the features. Results are shown in Figure 4. The x-axis indicates the number of demand
matrices used for training and evaluation, while the y-axis displays the difference in normalized
MSE between the raw and sum representations, averaged across all topologies. As marked in the
figure, y > 0 means that the raw representation performs better, while the reverse is true for y < 0.


                                                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Mean Reciprocal Rank and Win Rates for the different predictors. PEW maintains the
overall best performance. The relative performance of the MLP decreases when the graph structure
varies by means of different subsets of nodes being present and generating demands.
                                                      PEW (ours)                             GAT                        MLP                   GraphSAGE                     GCN
                      R           Metric         Original G         Variations    Original G      Variations   Original G    Variations   Original G   Variations   Original G   Variations
                      SSP         MRR ↑               0.798             0.747             0.252       0.240          0.419       0.396        0.367        0.349        0.448        0.551
                                  WR ↑               70.588            58.824             0.000       0.000         17.647      11.765        0.000        5.882       11.765       23.529
                      ECMP        MRR ↑               0.734             0.755             0.250       0.254          0.462       0.413        0.381        0.338        0.456        0.524
                                  WR ↑               58.824            58.824             0.000       0.000         23.529      11.765        5.882        5.882       11.765       23.529


                                     PEW (ours)                     GAT
                                                                                            With very few datapoints, the two input representations yield
                                  SSP                               ECMP
                                                                                            similar errors for both PEW and GAT. Beyond this, two inter-
                 0.2                                                                        esting trends emerge: as the number of datapoints increases,
                       demands


                                                          demands


                                                                                            PEW performs better with the raw demands, while the vanilla
                       better


                                                          better
                       raw


                                                          raw
raw NMSE − sum NMSE


                 0.1                                                                        GAT performs better with the lossy representation. This sug-
                                                                                            gests that, while the PEW model is able to exploit the granular
                 0.0                                                                        information contained in the raw demands, they instead cause
                                                                                            the standard GAT to overfit and obtain worse generalization
           −0.1                                                                             performance.
                       demands


                                                          demands


                                           Impact of topology. Our final set of experiments examines the
                       better


                                                          better
                       sum


                                                          sum


           −0.2
                                           relationship between the topological characteristics of graphs
       # of training DMs
                            250    500
                         # of training DMs and the relative performance of our proposed model architec-
                                           750     1000       250     500   750    1000


                                           ture. The six properties that we examine are defined as follows,
Figure 4: Difference in normalized noting that the first three are global properties while the final
MSE between the raw and sum three measure the variance in local node and edge properties:
demand input representations as a
function of the number of training • Number of nodes: the cardinality N of the node set V ;
datapoints for PEW and GAT for
the SSP (left) and ECMP routing • Diameter: max. length among pairwise shortest paths;
schemes (right). As the dataset size
                                           • Edge density: the ratio of links to nodes mN;
increases, PEW is able to exploit
the granular demand information, • Capacity variance: the variance in the normalized capaci-
while GAT performs better with a             ties κ(ei,j );
lossy aggregation of the demand
                                                                                     i)
information.                               • Degree variance: the variance in deg(v
                                                                                  N ;

                                                                                            • Weighted betweenness variance: the variance in a
                                                                                              weighted version of betweenness centrality (Brandes, 2001)
                                                                                              measuring the fraction of all-pairs shortest paths passing
                                                                                              through each node.

The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 5. As previously, the normalized MSE of the PEW
model is shown on the y-axis, while the x-axis measures properties of the graphs. Each datapoint
represents one of the 17 topologies. We find that topological characteristics do not fully determine
model performance but, nevertheless, it is possible to make a series of observations related to them.
Generally, the performance of the method decreases as the size of the graph grows in number of
nodes, diameter, and edge density (metrics that are themselves correlated). This result can be ex-
plained by the fact that our experimental protocol relies on a fixed number of demand matrices,
which represent a smaller sample of the distribution of demand matrices as the graph increases in
size. Hence, this can lead to a model with worse generalization from the training to the test phase,
despite the larger parameter count. On the other hand, the performance of the method typically
improves with increasing heterogeneity in node and link-level properties (namely, variance in the
capacities and degree / weighted betweenness centralities). The relationship between the NMSE
and some properties (e.g., weighted betweenness) may be non-linear. Additional results that re-
late topological characteristics to the percentage changes in NMSE from the other architectures to
PEW are presented in the Appendix. These analyses further corroborate the findings concerning the
relationship between the predictive performance of PEW and graph structure.


                                                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Aconet       Cernet             Iij                    Karen          PionierL3              Ulaknet
       1.00                Agis         Cesnet201006       Internode              Marnet         Sinet                  Uninett2011
                           Arnes        Grnet              Janetlense             Niif           SwitchL3
       0.75
PEW NMSE
   SSP

       0.50

       0.25

       0.00
              25      50       75   5              10 2          3          0.0            0.1     0.0         0.1         0.2        0.02    0.04
       1.00

       0.75
PEW NMSE
  ECMP


       0.50

       0.25

       0.00
              25      50       75   5              10 2          3          0.0            0.1     0.0         0.1         0.2        0.02    0.04
                   number of        diameter                edge                    capacity                  degree             weighted betweenness
                                                                  m
                    nodes N                               density N                 variance                 variance                  variance


Figure 5: Impact of topological characteristics on the predictive performance of PEW. Performance
degrades as the graph size increases (first 3 columns), but improves with higher levels of hetero-
geneity of the graph structure (last 3 columns).


6          C ONCLUSION , LIMITATIONS , AND FUTURE WORK

Summary. In this work, we have addressed the problem of data-driven routing of flows across
a graph, which has several applications of practical relevance in areas as diverse as logistics and
computer networking. We have proposed Per-Edge Weights (PEW), an effective model architecture
for predicting link loads in a network based on historical observations, given a demand matrix and a
routing strategy. The novelty of our approach resides in the use of weight parametrizations for aggre-
gating messages that are unique for each edge of the graph. In a rigorous and systematic evaluation
comprising 81600 training runs, we have demonstrated that PEW improves predictive performance
over standard graph learning and MLP approaches. Furthermore, we have shown that PEW is able
to exploit the full demand matrix, unlike the standard GAT, for which a lossy aggregation of features
is preferable. Our findings also highlight the importance of topology for data-driven routing. Given
the same number of historical observations, performance typically decreases when the graph grows
in size, but increases with higher levels of heterogeneity of local properties.
Limitations. A possible disadvantage of PEW is that the number of parameters grows linearly with
the edge count. However, since the same amount of computations are performed, there is no increase
in runtime compared to the GAT. Additionally, given the relatively small scale of ISP backbone net-
works (several hundreds of nodes), in practice, the impact on memory usage has not been significant
in our experiments. The largest PEW model, used for the Uninett2011 graph, has approximately
8 ∗ 105 parameters. If required, approaches for reducing the parameter count, such as the basis and
block-diagonal decompositions proposed by Schlichtkrull et al. (2018), have already been validated
for significantly larger-scale relational graphs. Other routing-specific options that may be investi-
gated in future work could be the “clustering” of the edges depending on the structural roles that
they play (such as peripheral or core links) or the use of differently parametrized neighborhoods for
the regions of the graph, which may perform well if a significant proportion of the traffic is local.
Furthermore, a key assumption behind PEW is that node identities are known, so that when topolo-
gies vary, the mapping to a particular weight parametrization is kept consistent. This is a suitable
assumption for a variety of real-world networks, such as the considered ISP backbone networks,
which are characterized by infrequent upgrades. However, performance may degrade in highly dy-
namic networks, where the timescale of the structural changes is substantially lower than the time
needed in order for systems making use of such a predictive model to adapt.
Future work. While this paper has focused on learning the properties of existing routing protocols,
in future work we aim to investigate learning new routing protocols given the proposed learning
representation and broader insights in this problem space that we have obtained.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ravindra K. Ahuja. Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications. Prentice Hall, Engle-
  wood Cliffs, NJ, 1993.
Paul Almasan, José Suárez-Varela, Bo Wu, Shihan Xiao, Pere Barlet-Ros, and Albert Cabello. To-
  wards real-time routing optimization with deep reinforcement learning: Open challenges. In
  HPSR, 2021.
Peter W. Battaglia, Jessica B. Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Álvaro Sánchez-González, Vinicius Zambaldi,
  Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, Caglar
  Gulcehre, Francis Song, Andrew Ballard, Justin Gilmer, George Dahl, Ashish Vaswani, Kelsey
  Allen, Charles Nash, Victoria Langston, Chris Dyer, Nicolas Heess, Daan Wierstra, Pushmeet
  Kohli, Matt Botvinick, Oriol Vinyals, Yujia Li, and Razvan Pascanu. Relational inductive biases,
  deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261, 2018.
Ulrik Brandes. A faster algorithm for betweenness centrality. Journal of Mathematical Sociology,
  25(2):163–177, 2001.
Dan Busbridge, Dane Sherburn, Pietro Cavallo, and Nils Y. Hammerla. Relational graph attention
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05811, 2019.
Quentin Cappart, Didier Chételat, Elias Khalil, Andrea Lodi, Christopher Morris, and Petar
  Veličković. Combinatorial optimization and reasoning with graph neural networks. In IJCAI,
  2021.
Deli Chen, Yankai Lin, Wei Li, Peng Li, Jie Zhou, and Xu Sun. Measuring and relieving the over-
  smoothing problem for graph neural networks from the topological view. In AAAI, 2020.
Li Chen, Rasmus Kyng, Yang P. Liu, Richard Peng, Maximilian Probst Gutenberg, and Sushant
  Sachdeva. Maximum flow and minimum-cost flow in almost-linear time. In FOCS, 2022.
Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein. Introduction to
  Algorithms. MIT Press, Fourth edition, 2022.
Michaël Defferrard, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Convolutional Neural Networks on
 Graphs with Fast Localized Spectral Filtering. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Vic Degraeve, Gilles Vandewiele, Femke Ongenae, and Sofie Van Hoecke. R-GCN: The R could
  stand for random. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02424, 2022.
Federico Errica, Marco Podda, Davide Bacciu, and Alessio Micheli. A fair comparison of graph
  neural networks for graph classification. In ICLR, 2020.
Nick Feamster and Jennifer Rexford. Why (and how) networks should run themselves. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1710.11583, 2017.
Anja Feldmann, Albert Greenberg, Carsten Lund, Nick Reingold, Jennifer Rexford, and Fred True.
  Deriving traffic demands for operational IP networks: Methodology and experience. IEEE/ACM
  Transactions On Networking, 9(3):265–279, 2001.
Matthias Fey and Jan Eric Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
 ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Bernard Fortz and Mikkel Thorup. Internet Traffic Engineering by Optimizing OSPF Weights. In
  IEEE INFOCOM, 2000.
Bernard Fortz and Mikkel Thorup. Optimizing OSPF/IS-IS Weights in a Changing World. IEEE
  Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 20(4):756–767, 2002.
Bernard Fortz and Mikkel Thorup. Increasing internet capacity using local search. Computational
  Optimization and Applications, 29(1):13–48, 2004.
Steven Gay, Pierre Schaus, and Stefano Vissicchio. Repetita: Repeatable experiments for perfor-
  mance evaluation of traffic-engineering algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.08665, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dobrik Georgiev and Pietro Liò. Neural bipartite matching. In ICML Workshop on Graph Repre-
  sentation Learning and Beyond (GRL+), 2020.
Fabien Geyer and Georg Carle. Learning and Generating Distributed Routing Protocols Using
  Graph-Based Deep Learning. In Big-DAMA, 2018.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural
  Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry. In ICML, 2017.
Jim Guichard, François Le Faucheur, and Jean-Philippe Vasseur. Definitive MPLS Network Designs.
  Cisco Press, 2005.
Nikola Gvozdiev, Stefano Vissicchio, Brad Karp, and Mark Handley. On low-latency-capable
  topologies, and their impact on the design of intra-domain routing. In SIGCOMM, 2018.
Hamed Haddadi and Olivier Bonaventure. Recent Advances in Networking. 2013.
Aric Hagberg, Pieter Swart, and Daniel S. Chult. Exploring network structure, dynamics, and func-
  tion using networkx. In SciPy, 2008.
William L. Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive Representation Learning on Large
 Graphs. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Renaud Hartert, Stefano Vissicchio, Pierre Schaus, Olivier Bonaventure, Clarence Filsfils, Thomas
  Telkamp, and Pierre Francois. A declarative and expressive approach to control forwarding paths
  in carrier-grade networks. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 45(4):15–28,
  2015.
Oliver Hope and Eiko Yoneki. GDDR: GNN-based Data-Driven Routing. In ICDCS, 2021.
C. Hopps. Analysis of an equal-cost multi-path algorithm. RFC 2992, RFC Editor, November 2000.
T. Chiang Hu. Multi-commodity network flows. Operations Research, 11(3):344–360, 1963.
J. D. Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment. Computing in Science & Engineering, 9(3):
   90–95, 2007.
Junchen Jiang, Vyas Sekar, Ion Stoica, and Hui Zhang. Unleashing the potential of data-driven
  networking. In COMSNETS, 2017.
Srikanth Kandula, Dina Katabi, Bruce Davie, and Anna Charny. Walking the tightrope: Responsive
  yet stable traffic engineering. In SIGCOMM, 2005.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Net-
  works. In ICLR, 2017.
Simon Knight, Hung X. Nguyen, Nickolas Falkner, Rhys Bowden, and Matthew Roughan. The
  Internet Topology Zoo. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 29(9):1765–1775,
  2011.
Yujia Li, Daniel Tarlow, Marc Brockschmidt, and Richard Zemel. Gated Graph Sequence Neural
  Networks. In ICLR, 2017.
Wes McKinney. pandas: a foundational Python library for data analysis and statistics. Python for
 High Performance and Scientific Computing, 14(9):1–9, 2011.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Ed-
  ward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In NeurIPS, 2019.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Harald Räcke. Optimal hierarchical decompositions for congestion minimization in networks. In
  STOC, 2008.
Joao Reis, Miguel Rocha, Truong Khoa Phan, David Griffin, Franck Le, and Miguel Rio. Deep
  neural networks for network routing. In IJCNN, 2019.
Matthew Roughan. Simplifying the synthesis of internet traffic matrices. ACM SIGCOMM Com-
 puter Communication Review, 35(5):93–96, 2005.
Krzysztof Rusek, José Suárez-Varela, Albert Mestres, Pere Barlet-Ros, and Albert Cabellos-
  Aparicio. Unveiling the potential of graph neural networks for network modeling and optimization
  in SDN. In SOSR, 2019.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini.
  The Graph Neural Network Model. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 20(1):61–80, 2009.
Michael Schlichtkrull, Thomas N. Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne van den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max
 Welling. Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks. In ESWC, pp. 593–607.
 Springer, 2018.
Alessandro Sperduti and Antonina Starita. Supervised neural networks for the classification of
  structures. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 8(3):714–735, 1997.
Éva Tardos. A strongly polynomial algorithm to solve combinatorial linear programs. Operations
   Research, 34(2):250–256, 1986.
Asaf Valadarsky, Michael Schapira, Dafna Shahaf, and Aviv Tamar. Learning to route. In ACM
  HotNets, 2017.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In ICLR, 2018.
Michael L. Waskom. Seaborn: statistical data visualization. Journal of Open Source Software, 6
 (60):3021, 2021.
Keyulu Xu, Jingling Li, Mozhi Zhang, Simon S. Du, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie Jegelka.
  What can neural networks reason about? In ICLR, 2020.
Zhiyuan Xu, Jian Tang, Jingsong Meng, Weiyi Zhang, Yanzhi Wang, Chi Harold Liu, and Dejun
  Yang. Experience-driven networking: A deep reinforcement learning based approach. In IEEE
  INFOCOM, 2018.
Junjie Zhang, Minghao Ye, Zehua Guo, Chen-Yu Yen, and H. Jonathan Chao. CFR-RL: Traffic
  engineering with reinforcement learning in SDN. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
  cations, 38(10):2249–2259, 2020.


A    I MPLEMENTATION AND RUNTIME DETAILS
Implementation. Please consult the README.md file for instructions on how to run the provided
code. In the case of acceptance, our implementation will be made publicly available as Docker
containers together with instructions that enable reproducing (up to hardware differences) all the re-
sults reported in the paper, including tables and figures. We implement all approaches and baselines
in Python using a variety of numerical and scientific computing packages (Hunter, 2007; Hagberg
et al., 2008; McKinney, 2011; Paszke et al., 2019; Waskom, 2021). For implementations of the
graph learning methods, we make use of PyTorch Geometric (Fey & Lenssen, 2019). Due to the
relationship between the RGAT and PEW architectures, we are able to leverage the existing RGAT
implementation in this library.
Data availability. The network topology data used in this paper is part of the Repetita suite (Gay
et al., 2017) and it is publicly available at https://github.com/svissicchio/Repetita
without any licensing restrictions. We also use the synthetic traffic generator from (Gvozdiev et al.,
2018), available at https://github.com/ngvozdiev/tm-gen.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Infrastructure and runtimes. Experiments were carried out on a cluster of 8 machines, each
equipped with 2 Intel Xeon E5-2630 v3 processors and 128GB RAM. On this infrastructure, all
the experiments reported in this paper took approximately 35 days to complete. The training and
evaluation of models were performed exclusively on CPUs.

B      H YPERPARAMETER DETAILS

                                                     Table 2: Hyperparameters used.

                          PEW (ours)                     GAT                             MLP                     GraphSAGE                       GCN
 Learning rates α   {10−2 , 5 ∗ 10−3 , 10−3 }   {10−2 , 5 ∗ 10−3 , 10−3 }       {10−2 , 5 ∗ 10−3 , 10−3 }   {10−2 , 5 ∗ 10−3 , 10−3 }   {10−2 , 5 ∗ 10−3 , 10−3 }
 Demand input             {raw, sum}                  {raw, sum}                      {raw, sum}                  {raw, sum}                  {raw, sum}
 representations
 Dimension of               {4, 16}                     {8, 32}                           n/a                       {8, 32}                     {8, 32}
 feature vector h
 First hidden                 n/a                         n/a               {64, 256} sum / {64, 128} raw             n/a                         n/a
 layer size



All methods are given an equal grid search budget of 12 hyperparameter configurations consisting of
the two choices of demand input representations, three choices of learning rate α, and two choices
of model complexity as detailed in Table 2. For the MLP, subsequent hidden layers contain half
the units of the first hidden layer. For the GNN-based methods, sum pooling is used to compute
a graph-level embedding from the node-level features. Despite potential over-smoothing issues of
GNNs in graph classification (e.g., as described in (Chen et al., 2020)), for the flow routing problem,
we set the number of layers equal to the diameter so that all traffic entering the network can also
exit, including traffic between pairs of points that are the furthest away in the graph.

C      A DDITIONAL RESULTS

                                                 Table 3: Properties of the topologies.
                                                                                                     m
                                 Graph                          N           m     Diam.              N
                                                                                                            Flows in D
                                 Aconet                      23         62               4       2.70         1587000
                                 Agis                        25         60               7       2.40         1875000
                                 Arnes                       34         92               7       2.71         3468000
                                 Cernet                      41        116               5       2.83         5043000
                                 Cesnet201006                52        126               6       2.42         8112000
                                 Grnet                       37         84               8       2.27         4107000
                                 Iij                         37        130               5       3.51         4107000
                                 Internode                   66        154               6       2.33        13068000
                                 Janetlense                  20         68               4       3.40         1200000
                                 Karen                       25         56               7       2.24         1875000
                                 Marnet                      20         54               3       2.70         1200000
                                 Niif                        36         82               7       2.28         3888000
                                 PionierL3                   38         90              10       2.37         4332000
                                 Sinet                       74        152               7       2.05        16428000
                                 SwitchL3                    42        126               6       3.00         5292000
                                 Ulaknet                     82        164               4       2.00        20172000
                                 Uninett2011                 69        192               9       2.78        14283000


Topologies used. High-level statistics about the considered topologies are shown in Table 3.
Impact of topological characteristics on PEW relative performance. Figures 6 to 9 compare
the percentage changes in NMSE between PEW and the other learning architectures. The results are
consistent with the standalone analysis presented in the main text: namely, given the same number of
observed traffic matrices, the performance of PEW deteriorates as graph size increases, but improves
with higher levels of heterogeneity in node and link-level properties.


                                                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Aconet       Cernet             Iij                   Karen          PionierL3              Ulaknet
                                   Agis         Cesnet201006       Internode             Marnet         Sinet                  Uninett2011
                                   Arnes        Grnet              Janetlense            Niif           SwitchL3
                 50


                                                                                                                                                     better
                                                                                                                                                     GAT
SSP % change
GAT to PEW


                  0


            −50


                                                                                                                                                     better
                                                                                                                                                     PEW
                      25      50       75   5              10 2          3         0.0            0.1     0.0         0.1          0.2       0.02     0.04
                 50


                                                                                                                                                     better
ECMP % change


                                                                                                                                                     GAT
 GAT to PEW


                  0


            −50


                                                                                                                                                     better
                                                                                                                                                     PEW
                      25      50       75   5              10 2          3         0.0            0.1     0.0         0.1          0.2       0.02     0.04
                           number of        diameter                edge                    capacity                 degree              weighted betweenness
                                                                          m
                            nodes N                               density N                 variance                variance                   variance


Figure 6: Relationship between the percentage changes in NMSE from GAT to PEW and the topo-
logical characteristics of the considered graphs.


                                   Aconet       Cernet             Iij                   Karen          PionierL3              Ulaknet
                                   Agis         Cesnet201006       Internode             Marnet         Sinet                  Uninett2011
                                   Arnes        Grnet              Janetlense            Niif           SwitchL3
SSP % change
MLP to PEW


                100
                                                                                                                                                     better
                                                                                                                                                     MLP


                  0
                                                                                                                                                     better
                                                                                                                                                     PEW


                      25      50       75   5              10 2          3         0.0        0.1         0.0         0.1         0.2        0.02     0.04
ECMP % change
 MLP to PEW


                100
                                                                                                                                                     better
                                                                                                                                                     MLP


                  0
                                                                                                                                                     better
                                                                                                                                                     PEW


                      25      50       75   5              10 2          3         0.0        0.1         0.0         0.1         0.2        0.02     0.04
                           number of        diameter                edge                   capacity                  degree              weighted betweenness
                                                                          m
                            nodes N                               density N                variance                 variance                   variance


Figure 7: Relationship between the percentage changes in NMSE from MLP to PEW and the topo-
logical characteristics of the considered graphs.


                                                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Aconet       Cernet             Iij                   Karen          PionierL3              Ulaknet
                                     Agis         Cesnet201006       Internode             Marnet         Sinet                  Uninett2011
                                     Arnes        Grnet              Janetlense            Niif           SwitchL3
GraphSAGE to PEW


                                                                                                                                                       SAGE
                                                                                                                                                       better
   SSP % change


                    0


               −50


                                                                                                                                                       better
                                                                                                                                                       PEW
                        25      50       75   5              10 2          3         0.0            0.1     0.0         0.1          0.2       0.02     0.04
GraphSAGE to PEW


                                                                                                                                                       SAGE
                                                                                                                                                       better
  ECMP % change


                    0


               −50


                                                                                                                                                       better
                                                                                                                                                       PEW
                        25      50       75   5              10 2          3         0.0            0.1     0.0         0.1          0.2       0.02     0.04
                             number of        diameter                edge                    capacity                 degree              weighted betweenness
                                                                            m
                              nodes N                               density N                 variance                variance                   variance


Figure 8: Relationship between the percentage changes in NMSE from GraphSAGE to PEW and
the topological characteristics of the considered graphs.


                                     Aconet       Cernet             Iij                   Karen          PionierL3              Ulaknet
                                     Agis         Cesnet201006       Internode             Marnet         Sinet                  Uninett2011
                                     Arnes        Grnet              Janetlense            Niif           SwitchL3
SSP % change
GCN to PEW


                   50                                                                                                                                  better
                                                                                                                                                       GCN



                    0

               −50
                                                                                                                                                       better
                                                                                                                                                       PEW


                        25      50       75   5              10 2          3         0.0            0.1     0.0         0.1          0.2       0.02     0.04
ECMP % change
 GCN to PEW


                   50
                                                                                                                                                       better
                                                                                                                                                       GCN


                    0

               −50
                                                                                                                                                       better
                                                                                                                                                       PEW


                        25      50       75   5              10 2          3         0.0            0.1     0.0         0.1          0.2       0.02     0.04
                             number of        diameter                edge                    capacity                 degree              weighted betweenness
                                                                            m
                              nodes N                               density N                 variance                variance                   variance


Figure 9: Relationship between the percentage changes in NMSE from GCN to PEW and the topo-
logical characteristics of the considered graphs.


                                                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Learning curves. Representative learning curves are shown in the remainder of this Appendix.
For their generation, we report the MSE on the held-out validation set of the best-performing hy-
perparameter combination for each architecture and demand input representation. To smoothen the
curves, we apply exponential weighting with an αEW = 0.92. This value is chosen such that a suffi-
cient amount of noise is removed and the overall trends in validation losses can be observed. We also
skip the validation losses for the first 5 epochs since their values are on a significantly larger scale
and would distort the plots. As large spikes sometimes arise, validation losses are truncated to be at
most the value obtained after the first 5 epochs. An interesting trend shown by the learning curves
is that the models consistently require more epochs to reach a low validation loss in the ECMP case
compared to SSP, reflecting its increased complexity.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Graph Aconet
                                SSP                                                   ECMP
             0.03
                                                              0.04
PEW (ours)


             0.02
                                                              0.02
             0.01

                                                              0.00
                    0    1000           2000          3000           0         1000            2000             3000
             0.08
                                                              0.04
             0.06
GAT


                                                              0.03
             0.04
                                                              0.02
             0.02
                    0   500         1000        1500                 0     500           1000            1500
             0.08

             0.06                                             0.04
MLP


             0.04
                                                              0.02
             0.02

                    0    1000           2000          3000           0    500           1000            1500

                                                              0.04
             0.06
GraphSAGE


             0.04
                                                              0.02
             0.02

             0.00
                    0    1000           2000          3000           0   500          1000       1500          2000
             0.08

             0.06                                             0.04
GCN


             0.04
                                                              0.02
             0.02
                    0   500        1000        1500                  0    500           1000            1500
                                epoch                                                 epoch


                                      Figure 10: Learning curves for Aconet.


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              Graph Agis
                                         SSP                                                    ECMP

                0.03                                                   0.030
   PEW (ours)


                                                                       0.025
                0.02
                                                                       0.020

                                                                       0.015
                       0   500          1000       1500    2000                0   500          1000     1500   2000


                0.04                                                    0.03
   GAT


                                                                        0.02
                0.02

                       0         1000             2000        3000             0         1000           2000      3000

            0.025                                                       0.03

            0.020
MLP


                                                                        0.02
            0.015

            0.010                                                       0.01
                       0         1000             2000        3000             0         1000           2000      3000


            0.025                                                       0.03
GraphSAGE


            0.020
                                                                        0.02
            0.015

                       0         1000             2000        3000             0         1000           2000      3000
                0.03

                                                                        0.03
   GCN


                0.02
                                                                        0.02


                0.01                                                    0.01
                       0          1000              2000                       0         1000           2000      3000
                                         epoch                                                  epoch


                                                 Figure 11: Learning curves for Agis.


                                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                Graph Arnes
                                          SSP                                                    ECMP
             0.040
                                                                        0.035
PEW (ours)


             0.035
                                                                        0.030

             0.030
                                                                        0.025
                       0          1000              2000                        0   500     1000    1500        2000   2500

                0.06
                                                                         0.06
    GAT


                0.05                                                     0.05

                                                                         0.04
                0.04
                       0   500     1000     1500         2000   2500            0         1000           2000          3000

             0.045
                                                                        0.040
MLP


             0.040
                                                                        0.035


             0.035                                                      0.030

                       0         1000            2000           3000            0         1000           2000           3000
                0.06
                                                                         0.05
    GraphSAGE


                0.05
                                                                         0.04
                0.04

                                                                         0.03
                       0         1000             2000          3000            0         1000           2000          3000

                0.06
    GCN


                0.05                                                     0.04


                0.04
                                                                         0.03
                       0   500     1000     1500         2000   2500            0         1000           2000          3000
                                         epoch                                                   epoch


                                                Figure 12: Learning curves for Arnes.


                                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       Graph Cernet
                                 SSP                                                        ECMP
             0.06
                                                                    0.06
PEW (ours)


             0.04                                                   0.04


                                                                    0.02
                    0   500       1000          1500                       0    500         1000        1500          2000


             0.08                                                   0.08
GAT


             0.06                                                   0.06

             0.04                                                   0.04

                    0     1000           2000           3000               0         1000             2000            3000
             0.12
                                                                   0.060
             0.10
MLP


                                                                   0.055
             0.08

             0.06                                                  0.050
                    0     500            1000          1500                0         1000             2000            3000
             0.10                                                  0.100
GraphSAGE


             0.08                                                  0.075
             0.06
                                                                   0.050
             0.04
                                                                   0.025
                    0     1000           2000           3000               0   500      1000        1500       2000

             0.08                                                   0.08

             0.07                                                   0.07
GCN


             0.06                                                   0.06

             0.05                                                   0.05
                    0   500       1000          1500                       0     500           1000          1500
                                 epoch                                                      epoch


                                       Figure 13: Learning curves for Cernet.


                                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      Graph Cesnet201006
             0.015                  SSP                                                              ECMP
                                                                         0.0125
PEW (ours)


             0.010                                                       0.0100

                                                                         0.0075
             0.005
                       0   500      1000      1500           2000                 0     500              1000           1500

                                                                           0.04
                0.04
    GAT


                                                                           0.03

                0.02                                                       0.02

                                                                           0.01
                       0    500        1000           1500                        0          500                1000           1500
                                                                          0.025
             0.025

                                                                          0.020
MLP


             0.020


             0.015                                                        0.015


                       0    500        1000           1500                        0   500         1000     1500        2000      2500

                0.04                                                      0.020
    GraphSAGE


                0.03

                                                                          0.015
                0.02

                0.01
                       0     1000           2000             3000                 0         500           1000            1500


                0.04
                                                                           0.03
    GCN


                                                                           0.02
                0.02

                                                                           0.01
                       0   500      1000       1500          2000                 0     500              1000          1500        2000
                                    epoch                                                            epoch


                                    Figure 14: Learning curves for Cesnet201006.


                                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Graph Grnet
                                  SSP                                                  ECMP
              0.007
                                                                  0.004
 PEW (ours)


              0.006
                                                                  0.003
              0.005
                                                                  0.002
              0.004
                                                                  0.001
                      0   500         1000          1500                  0    500         1000          1500
                                                                  0.006
              0.012

                                                                  0.005
 GAT


              0.010

              0.008                                               0.004

                      0   500        1000          1500                   0   500      1000       1500      2000
              0.012
                                                                  0.006

              0.010
 MLP


                                                                  0.005

              0.008
                                                                  0.004
                      0   500       1000          1500                    0    500         1000          1500


              0.012                                              0.0100
 GraphSAGE


                                                                 0.0075
              0.010
                                                                 0.0050
              0.008
                                                                 0.0025
                      0    1000            2000           3000            0     1000           2000         3000
        0.0150                                                    0.006

        0.0125
                                                                  0.005
GCN


        0.0100
                                                                  0.004
        0.0075
                                                                  0.003
                      0    1000            2000           3000            0     1000           2000         3000
                                  epoch                                                epoch


                                      Figure 15: Learning curves for Grnet.


                                                            22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               Graph Iij
                                          SSP                                                    ECMP
             0.100                                                      0.06
PEW (ours)


             0.075
                                                                        0.04
             0.050

             0.025                                                      0.02
                       0     500          1000      1500     2000              0         500          1000        1500
             0.150

             0.125                                                      0.06
GAT


             0.100

             0.075                                                      0.04

                       0   500     1000     1500    2000   2500                0   500         1000    1500     2000      2500
                0.10

                0.09                                                     1.0
    MLP


                0.08                                                     0.5

                0.07
                                                                         0.0
                       0         1000            2000        3000              0         1000            2000            3000

                0.10
                                                                       0.045
    GraphSAGE


                                                                       0.040
                0.08
                                                                       0.035

                       0         1000            2000        3000              0         1000            2000            3000
                                                                        0.05

                0.08
    GCN


                                                                        0.04


                0.06
                                                                        0.03
                       0         1000            2000        3000              0         1000            2000            3000
                                        epoch                                                    epoch


                                                 Figure 16: Learning curves for Iij.


                                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       Graph Internode
                                   SSP                                                         ECMP
             0.055
PEW (ours)


                                                                     0.045
             0.050
                                                                     0.040

             0.045
                       0    1000                2000                         0   500         1000   1500      2000     2500


                0.08
                                                                      0.05
    GAT


                0.06
                                                                      0.04

                0.04
                                                                      0.03
                       0   500             1000         1500                 0         1000            2000           3000


             0.050                                                   0.040
MLP


             0.045
                                                                     0.035
             0.040

                       0   500           1000          1500                  0         500             1000          1500

                0.08
                                                                      0.06
    GraphSAGE


                0.07
                                                                      0.05
                0.06
                                                                      0.04
                0.05
                       0   500             1000          1500                0         500             1000          1500

                0.08                                                  0.06
    GCN


                                                                      0.05
                0.06
                                                                      0.04

                0.04                                                  0.03
                       0   500             1000         1500                 0         500             1000          1500
                                   epoch                                                       epoch


                                     Figure 17: Learning curves for Internode.


                                                                24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Graph Janetlense
                                       SSP                                                          ECMP
             0.06
                                                                           0.008
PEW (ours)


             0.04                                                          0.006


                                                                           0.004

                    0   500         1000      1500     2000                        0         1000             2000            3000

                                                                           0.015
             0.07
GAT


             0.06                                                          0.010


             0.05
                                                                           0.005
                    0         500              1000           1500                 0         1000             2000            3000
                                                                            0.15
              0.6
                                                                            0.10
    MLP


              0.4

                                                                            0.05
              0.2


                    0         1000             2000            3000                0          1000              2000

                                                                           0.015
GraphSAGE


             0.10
                                                                           0.010


             0.05                                                          0.005

                    0         1000             2000            3000                0   500      1000         1500      2000

             0.10
                                                                          0.0100
             0.08
GCN


                                                                          0.0075
             0.06

             0.04                                                         0.0050

                    0   500          1000      1500     2000                       0         1000             2000            3000
                                      epoch                                                          epoch


                                            Figure 18: Learning curves for Janetlense.


                                                                     25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   Graph Karen
                                           SSP                                                         ECMP
                                                                              0.075
PEW (ours)


                                                                              0.050
             0.05
                                                                              0.025

             0.00                                                             0.000
                    0   500         1000    1500      2000        2500                0         1000            2000          3000


             0.10                                                             0.075
GAT


                                                                              0.050
             0.05
                                                                              0.025

                    0         500           1000           1500                       0   500          1000     1500   2000
             0.10
                                                                              0.075

                                                                              0.050
MLP


             0.05
                                                                              0.025

             0.00                                                             0.000
                    0          1000                2000             3000              0         1000            2000      3000


                                                                               0.06
GraphSAGE


             0.10
                                                                               0.04
             0.05
                                                                               0.02

             0.00
                    0          1000                2000             3000              0         1000            2000      3000
             0.10
                                                                               0.06
GCN


                                                                               0.04
             0.05
                                                                               0.02

             0.00                                                              0.00
                    0    500           1000         1500          2000                0   500          1000     1500   2000
                                       epoch                                                            epoch


                                                 Figure 19: Learning curves for Karen.


                                                                         26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 Graph Marnet
             0.04
                               SSP                                                        ECMP
                                                                 0.150
PEW (ours)


                                                                 0.125
             0.03
                                                                 0.100

             0.02                                                0.075
                    0   1000           2000          3000                0         1000           2000             3000


             0.06                                                  0.3
GAT


                                                                   0.2
             0.04

                    0   1000           2000          3000                0   500          1000     1500         2000

             0.05

                                                                  0.15
MLP


             0.04


             0.03
                                                                  0.10

                    0   1000           2000          3000                0         1000           2000           3000
GraphSAGE


             0.10                                                 0.20

                                                                  0.15
             0.05
                                                                  0.10
                    0   500       1000        1500                       0         1000           2000           3000
             0.05

                                                                  0.20
             0.04
GCN


                                                                  0.15
             0.03
                                                                  0.10
             0.02
                    0   1000           2000          3000                0   500           1000          1500      2000
                               epoch                                                      epoch


                                     Figure 20: Learning curves for Marnet.


                                                            27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   Graph Niif
                                            SSP                                                     ECMP
              0.03                                                         0.025
 PEW (ours)


                                                                           0.020
              0.02
                                                                           0.015

              0.01                                                         0.010
                     0         500            1000          1500                   0       500             1000          1500

              0.04                                                          0.04
 GAT


              0.03                                                          0.03


              0.02                                                          0.02
                     0          1000                 2000          3000            0   500          1000      1500        2000

        0.035                                                               0.04
MLP


        0.030
                                                                            0.03

        0.025
                                                                            0.02
                     0          1000                 2000          3000            0   500          1000          1500     2000

              0.04
                                                                            0.06
 GraphSAGE


              0.03
                                                                            0.04

              0.02
                                                                            0.02

                     0          1000                 2000          3000            0         1000                 2000           3000

        0.035
                                                                           0.030
        0.030
GCN


                                                                           0.025
        0.025
                                                                           0.020
        0.020
                     0   500         1000     1500      2000   2500                0         1000                 2000           3000
                                            epoch                                                    epoch


                                                    Figure 21: Learning curves for Niif.


                                                                      28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     Graph PionierL3
                                    SSP                                                 ECMP
                0.014
   PEW (ours)


                                                              0.010

                0.012
                                                              0.009


                        0    1000             2000                    0      1000               2000      3000
            0.0225                                            0.016

            0.0200
GAT


                                                              0.014
            0.0175

            0.0150                                            0.012
                        0   1000            2000       3000           0          1000             2000

                0.025                                         0.016
   MLP


                0.020                                         0.014


                0.015                                         0.012

                        0   1000            2000       3000           0      500                1000     1500

                                                              0.018
            0.0200
GraphSAGE


                                                              0.016
            0.0175

            0.0150                                            0.014


                        0   1000            2000       3000           0      500                1000     1500

                0.018
                                                              0.014
   GCN


                0.016
                                                              0.012

                0.014
                        0   1000            2000       3000           0      1000               2000      3000
                                    epoch                                               epoch


                                     Figure 22: Learning curves for PionierL3.


                                                         29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              Graph Sinet
                                          SSP                                                  ECMP

                                                                        0.0125
   PEW (ours)


                0.015


                0.014                                                   0.0120


                0.013                                                   0.0115
                        0   500          1000      1500    2000                  0      1000           2000    3000
                0.022                                                    0.025

                0.020
   GAT


                                                                         0.020
                0.018
                                                                         0.015
                0.016
                        0         1000            2000        3000               0      500            1000   1500
                0.025


                0.020                                                    0.015
   MLP


                0.015
                                                                         0.010
                        0         500            1000         1500               0      1000           2000    3000


            0.0225
GraphSAGE


                                                                         0.016
            0.0200

            0.0175                                                       0.014


                        0         500           1000        1500                 0      500            1000   1500

                                                                         0.018
                0.020
                                                                         0.016
   GCN


                0.015                                                    0.014

                                                                         0.012
                        0   500          1000      1500     2000                 0      500            1000   1500
                                         epoch                                                 epoch


                                                Figure 23: Learning curves for Sinet.


                                                                   30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            Graph SwitchL3
                                          SSP                                                      ECMP
   PEW (ours)


                0.04
                                                                           0.03

                0.03

                                                                           0.02
                       0          1000              2000                          0         1000                 2000           3000


                0.08                                                       0.07
   GAT


                                                                           0.06
                0.06
                                                                           0.05

                0.04                                                       0.04
                       0         1000             2000            3000            0   500          1000          1500    2000

                0.07
                                                                          0.050
                0.06
   MLP


                                                                          0.045
                0.05

                                                                          0.040
                0.04
                       0         1000             2000            3000            0         1000             2000              3000
            0.125
GraphSAGE


            0.100                                                          0.08

            0.075                                                          0.06

            0.050
                                                                           0.04
                       0   500          1000      1500     2000                   0         1000             2000              3000

            0.125
                                                                           0.06
            0.100
GCN


                                                                           0.05
            0.075

            0.050                                                          0.04
                       0         1000             2000            3000            0     500               1000          1500
                                         epoch                                                      epoch


                                               Figure 24: Learning curves for SwitchL3.


                                                                     31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Graph Ulaknet
                                 SSP                                                  ECMP

             0.075
PEW (ours)


             0.050                                          0.05

             0.025

             0.000                                          0.00
                     0    1000             2000                    0           1000             2000


              0.06                                          0.06
    GAT


              0.04                                          0.04

              0.02                                          0.02

                                                            0.00
                     0   1000            2000      3000            0          1000            2000     3000

              0.04                                          0.04
    MLP


              0.02                                          0.02



              0.00                                          0.00
                     0   1000            2000      3000            0          1000            2000     3000


             0.075                                         0.075
GraphSAGE


             0.050                                         0.050

             0.025                                         0.025

                     0   1000            2000      3000            0          1000            2000     3000

             0.075                                         0.075

             0.050                                         0.050
GCN


             0.025                                         0.025

             0.000                                         0.000
                     0   1000            2000      3000            0          1000            2000     3000
                                 epoch                                                epoch


                                    Figure 25: Learning curves for Ulaknet.


                                                      32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Graph Uninett2011
                                 SSP                                                   ECMP
                                                               0.05
PEW (ours)


             0.05
                                                               0.04

             0.04
                                                               0.03
                    0   500       1000          1500                  0   500          1000       1500   2000
                                                               0.15

             0.08
GAT


                                                               0.10


             0.06
                                                               0.05
                    0     1000           2000          3000           0         500            1000      1500
                                                               0.07
MLP


             0.06                                              0.06



             0.05
                                                               0.05
                    0     1000           2000          3000           0         1000            2000      3000

                                                               0.15
             0.07
GraphSAGE


                                                               0.10
             0.06

                                                               0.05
                    0     1000           2000          3000           0   500          1000      1500    2000

                                                               0.15
             0.07
GCN


                                                               0.10
             0.06

                                                               0.05
                    0     1000           2000          3000           0         1000            2000      3000
                                 epoch                                                 epoch


                                  Figure 26: Learning curves for Uninett2011.


                                                          33
