Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



V EC -T OK S PEECH : SPEECH VECTORIZATION AND TO -
KENIZATION FOR NEURAL SPEECH GENERATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Language models (LMs) have recently flourished in natural language processing
         and computer vision, generating high-fidelity texts or images in various tasks. In
         contrast, the current speech generative models are still struggling regarding speech
         quality and task generalization. This paper presents Vec-Tok Speech, an extensible
         framework that resembles multiple speech generation tasks, generating expressive
         and high-fidelity speech. Specifically, we propose a novel speech codec based
         on speech vectors and semantic tokens. Speech vectors contain acoustic details
         contributing to high-fidelity speech reconstruction, while semantic tokens focus
         on the linguistic content of speech, facilitating language modeling. Based on the
         proposed speech codec, Vec-Tok Speech leverages LMs to undertake the core of
         speech generation. Moreover, Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) is introduced to reduce
         the token length and bit rate for lower exposure bias and longer context cover-
         age, improving the performance of LMs. Vec-Tok Speech can be used for intra-
         and cross-lingual zero-shot voice conversion (VC), zero-shot speaking style trans-
         fer text-to-speech (TTS), speech-to-speech translation (S2ST), speech denoising,
         and speaker de-identification and anonymization. Experiments show that Vec-Tok
         Speech, built on 50k hours of speech, performs better than other SOTA models.

1 I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Borsos et al., 2023a) have
demonstrated remarkable progress, especially for their excellent zero-shot performance on natural
language processing (NLP) tasks. The impressive advances have inspired substantial research ex-
tending LLMs to various speech generation tasks, such as text-to-speech (TTS), voice conversion
(VC), and speech-to-speech translation (S2ST). With the help of the incredible sequential genera-
tion ability of neural language models and unprecedented scale and coverage of audio data, speech
generation has been significantly advanced with remarkable zero-shot abilities.
Current large-scale speech generation models usually leverage speech hidden representations to
bridge an audio codec and an acoustic model (either an LM (Wang et al., 2023a; Kharitonov et al.,
2023) or a diffusion model (Shen et al., 2023)). Specifically, the speech hidden representations can
be divided into two categories: discrete tokens (Wang et al., 2023a; Kharitonov et al., 2023) and
continuous vectors (Shen et al., 2023). The discrete tokens are obtained by incorporating vector
quantization into the codec for capturing essential information at low bit rates to reconstruct the
waveform. However, compressing rich speech information into low-bit-rate representations may
degrade the reconstructed speech quality. Therefore, some studies (Zeghidour et al., 2022) propose
to utilize Residual Vector Quantizers (RVQ) to learn both linguistic and acoustic features of speech,
which contain speech aspects beyond linguistics and may surpass the modeling capacity of con-
ventional LMs. On the other hand, compared to the discrete tokens, the continuous vectors aim
to retain all information embedded in speech for high-fidelity speech reconstruction, which brings
much pressure to the acoustic model and can not fully utilize the advantages of LMs.
Apart from speech naturalness and quality, expressiveness (such as diverse prosody patterns, speak-
ing speed and style, emotions, etc.) is also a critical aspect of human verbal communication. Human
speech is a complex signal containing linguistic, non-linguistic, and para-linguistic information (Liu
et al., 2020). The linguistic information is the textual content of speech, and para-/non-linguistic
characteristics often refer to the speaking style, emphasis, phonation, speaker identity, etc (Nach-
mani et al., 2023). Previous speech LMs (Wang et al., 2023a; Borsos et al., 2023b) have demon-
strated state-of-the-art performance in zero-shot voice cloning by integrating all linguistic-irrelevant
acoustic details, including non- and para-linguistic information, from the same speech prompt. How-
ever, this paradigm has a limitation for the composition of para-linguistic (e.g., speaking style) and


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



non-linguistic (e.g., speaker timbre) from different speech prompts - a scenario that is more flexible
and practical in real-world speech applications. Specifically, separately adopting speaker prompt
and style prompt can enable powerful zero-shot style transfer ability, i.e., a speaker can speak in any
designated style given only a few seconds of style reference.
With the aforementioned considerations, we propose Vec-Tok Speech, a speech generation model
with a novel codec for both continuous Vector and discrete Token extraction, with the aim to benefit
from both granularities of speech representation. The proposed approach can be applied to multi-
ple downstream tasks, such as text-to-speech, voice conversion, speech-to-speech translation, and
Speech denoising. All the above tasks have the powerful adaptation ability in the synthetic speech
for arbitrary speakers, and the TTS procedure can simultaneously conduct zero-shot style transfer.
The novel codec, named Vec-Tok Codec, consists of an encoder and a decoder, with speech vectors
and semantic tokens as intermediate representations. Specifically, speech vectors aims to reconstruct
the high-fidelity speech, thus containing as many fine speech details as possible. Semantic tokens
filter out the non-linguistic aspects, i.e., speaker identity, from the speech vector while preserving
linguistic and para-linguistic information. An autoregressive LM is employed to produce semantic
tokens in downstream tasks. Moreover, we use Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) (Gage, 1994) to fur-
ther reduce the token length and the bit rate, thus benefiting the LM from lower exposure bias and
longer context coverage. With the semantic token, the target speech can be generated through the
codec decoder on the condition of a speech prompt to provide the target speaker identity. The main
contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
          • Vec-Tok Codec: A speech codec with high fidelity and low bit rate. We design a novel
            speech codec with speech vectorization and tokenization for LM-based speech generation
            with both high fidelity and low bit rate. Specifically, speech vectorization aims to extract
            a continuous vector containing as many fine speech details as possible to reconstruct the
            high-fidelity audio; speech tokenization is to learn the discrete semantic token, preserving
            linguistic content and style expressions at low bit rates.
          • Vec-Tok Speech: A speech generation framework easily applied to multiple speech gen-
            eration tasks. Based on the novel codec, we introduce Vec-Tok Speech, a large speech
            generation framework that leverages LMs to undertake the core of various downstream
            tasks, such as TTS and S2ST. Moreover, BPE is introduced to reduce the token length,
            further benefiting the LM from longer context coverage.
          • Expressive speech generation. We demonstrate the ability of the proposed Vec-Tok Speech
            to conduct multi-speaker, multi-style TTS in the zero-shot scenario. A style prompt and a
            speaker prompt are utilized respectively to provide the style expression for the LM and the
            speaker identity for the codec decoder, significantly improving the flexibility of a speech-
            LM in expressive speech generation.
We scale the proposed model to 600 million parameters and 50,000 hours of speech training data.
Experiments show that Vec-Tok Speech can generate speech with diverse speaker identities, prosody,
and styles in various tasks (VC, TTS, S2ST, etc.) in a zero-shot setup with only a few seconds of
speech prompts. Audio samples can be found on our demo page 1 .
2       R ELATED W ORK
2.1       N EURAL AUDIO CODEC
Neural audio codec (Wu et al., 2023b; Yang et al., 2023a) refers to a kind of neural network model
that converts audio waveform into discrete tokens with an encoder and reconstructs audio waveform
from these tokens with a decoder. Neural audio codec usually compresses all speech attributes into
discrete tokens, such as phase, timbre, prosody, and content. For example, SoundStream (Zeghidour
et al., 2022) and Encodec (Défossez et al., 2022) leverage vector-quantized variational auto-encoders
(VQ-VAE) with Residual Vector-Quantization (RVQ) technique to compress speech into multiple
layers of tokens and have been widely used as intermediate representation in speech and audio
generation tasks.
While RVQ-based codecs achieve higher reconstruction quality and lower bitrate than traditional
codecs, they are fundamentally tailored for compression and transmission purposes, which makes
them suboptimal for intermediate representations for flexible speech generation. Several concerns
substantiate this standpoint. First, these codec tokens usually contain as many speech attributes as
    1
        Demo:https://anonymous.4open.science/w/VecTok/


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



possible to high-fidelity reconstruction quality, which leads to information redundancy and increases
the difficulty of predicting the tokens in downstream tasks. Moreover, the sequence of discrete
tokens generated by residual quantizers is often very long, presenting challenges for generative
speech models to achieve accurate predictability. This paper proposes a novel speech codec that
leverages speech vectors to construct high-quality speech and extracts low-bitrate discrete tokens to
ease downstream tasks.
2.2      L ARGE SCALE G ENERATIVE SPEECH MODELS
A significant shift is observed for generative speech models, where conventional models are pre-
dominantly task-specific, trained on distinct datasets tailored to particular objectives. In contrast,
the emergence of large-scale generative speech models introduces a paradigm that transcends these
limitations, enabling them to tackle a diverse range of novel tasks without explicit training (Le
et al., 2023). With the advancement in neural speech codec reviewed in Section 2.1, many re-
cent studies have explored language and diffusion models for speech generation. Encodec stands
out for its capacity to extract acoustic tokens among these endeavours. Based on Encodec, VALL-
E (Wang et al., 2023a) and its multi-lingual variant VALL-E X (Zhang et al., 2023) achieve zero-shot
TTS capabilities by strategically applying autoregressive and non-autoregressive LMs. Meanwhile,
SPEAR-TTS (Kharitonov et al., 2023) leverages w2v-BERT (Chung et al., 2021) and SoundStream
to derive semantic and acoustic tokens. SPEAR-TTS achieves a multi-speaker TTS system with
minimal supervision, integrating multi-stage AR LMs. SoundStorm (Borsos et al., 2023b) extends
SPEAR-TTS to more efficient and stable speech generation through masked iterative parallel decod-
ing. On the other hand, models like NaturalSpeech2 (Shen et al., 2023) introduce a text-conditioned
diffusion model to generate the latent vectors of the neural audio codec model. TorToise-TTS is a
recent speech generation model that combines an autoregressive transformer and a denoising diffu-
sion probabilistic model (DDPM). The autoregressive transformer predicts speech tokens from text,
while the DDPM converts speech tokens back to MEL spectrograms. These spectrograms are then
sent to a vocoder that synthesizes the final speech. Additionally, a contrastive Language-Voice pre-
trained (CLVP) module is used to re-score the output of the autoregressive transformer, improving
the quality of the synthetic speech.
Beyond TTS, these large-scale generative speech models stretch their capabilities across various
tasks. For instance, SpeechGen (Wu et al., 2023a) harnesses a speech LM with diverse prompts
to facilitate speech translation, inpainting, and continuation. Similarly, Voicebox (Le et al., 2023)
takes a non-autoregressive flow-matching model as its cornerstone, enabling the model to address
denoising, zero-shot TTS, and even text-only sampling. This progress of the large-scale speech
language model accommodating multiple downstream tasks represents the powerful potential of
LM-based variants applying to diverse speech generation tasks. Following this line, we present Vec-
Tok Speech, a neural speech generation framework leveraging speech vectorization and tokenization
to facilitate various speech generation tasks.

3      M ETHOD

          Semantic Token                                                              Codec                                    VC
                                                                                     Encoder
                                                                                                                 Codec
          Speech Vector                                                  Target Speaker
                                                                                                                Decoder
                                                                                      Codec
                                                                                                                          Converted
                                                                                     Encoder
                                              Vectorization                                                                Speech
                                                                          Source
                            Codec    SSL Model
                                                            Vocoder
                           Encoder    (WavLM)                                         Codec               Codec                TTS
                                                                                     Encoder             Encoder
                                                                           Style               Speaker
                                      Codec                     Codec     Prompt               Prompt
                                                                                                                          Synthetic
       Language                      Encoder                   Decoder
                                                                                                                           Speech
         Model                                                                                                   Codec
                                                                          'Hello,
                                                                                       LM                       Decoder
                                                                          world!'
                                               Tokenization
      'Hello, world!'                                         Inverse
                                     K-means                                         Codec                                  S2ST
                            Codec                             K-means
                           Decoder                                                  Encoder
                                                                          Source
                                                                         Language                                         Translated
                                                                                                                           Speech
                                                                                                                Codec
                                                                                      LM                       Decoder
                                                              Prompt
    (a) Overview of Vec-Tok Speech    (b) Process of Vec-Tok Codec            (c) Typical downstream speech generation tasks

Figure 1: The architecture of Vec-Tok Speech (a) and Vec-Tok Codec (b) and downstream speech
generation tasks (c).

                                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



3.1   OVERVIEW
Figure 1 (a) illustrates the overall structure of our proposed Vec-Tok Speech, which comprises three
key components bridged by speech vectors and semantic tokens: a codec encoder, a language model
(LM), and a codec decoder. Specifically, the codec encoder is used to extract speech vectors and
semantic tokens from speech waveforms, where the semantic tokens are taken as the modeling target
of the LM. The codec decoder converts the above semantic tokens and speech vectors back into
waveforms. Given the speech waveforms wave, the process of the Vec-Tok Speech can be expressed
as follows:
                                   {vec, tok} = Encoder (wave) ,                                   (1)
                                           ˆ = LM (tok, text) ,
                                          tok                                                      (2)

                                       wave
                                          ˆ = Decoder vec, tok ˆ ,                                 (3)

where vec and tok are speech vectors and semantic tokens respectively extracted by the codec En-
        ˆ is the semantic tokens predicted by the LM; wave
coder. tok                                             ˆ is the reconstructed waveforms by the
codec Decoder.

3.2   V EC -T OK C ODEC
Figure 1 (b) describes the structure of the Vec-Tok Codec and the speech reconstruction process,
where the speech vectors contribute to high-fidelity speech reconstruction and the semantics tokens
facilitate language modeling. Specifically, the codec encoder consists of a WavLM model and a
K-means module, extracting speech vectors and semantic tokens, respectively. The codec decoder
consists of an inverse K-means module and a vocoder, reconstructing speech from semantic tokens
and prompt speech vectors.
3.2.1 S PEECH V ECTORIZATION
To improve the model’s high-fidelity speech reconstruction ability, the speech vector is designed to
contain as many speech details as possible. Specifically, WavLM (Chen et al., 2022) is adopted to
extract speech vectors from speech. It is a self-supervised learning (SSL) model pre-trained on large-
scale speech data and performs exceptionally in diverse speech-processing tasks. WavLM extracts
fine-grained speech vectors vec = {hi }N  i=1 from the input wave, where N is the number of frames.
Specifically, we take the 6th layer of WavLM as the output layer as this layer is proved to contain
much acoustic information enabling high-fidelity speech reconstruction (Baas et al., 2023). Then, a
neural vocoder is used to reconstruct speech waveforms based on the extracted speech vectors vec
since the vocoder can produce waveforms that are nearly indistinguishable from recorded waveforms
and are highly generalizable outside of the training set according to TorToise-TTS (Betker, 2023).
The process of speech vector extraction and waveform reconstruction is formulated as follows:
                                       vec = WavLM(wave),                                          (4)
                                       waveˆ = Vocoder(vec),                                       (5)
 where vec denotes speech vectors extracted by the WavLM, and wave   ˆ is the reconstructed wave-
forms by the vocoder. The loss functions of the vocoder are as follows:
                          K
                          X
                G
               LVocoder =    [LAdv (G; Dk ) + λf m LF M (G; Dk )] + λvec Lvec (G)
                            k=1
                                                                                                   (6)
                            K
                            X
               LD
                Vocoder =         LAdv (Dk ; G)
                            k=1

 where Dk denotes the k th Multi-Period Discriminator (MPD) (Kong et al., 2020) and Multi-Scale
Discriminator (MSD) (Kumar et al., 2019) in vocoder, LF M is the feature matching loss (Larsen
et al., 2016) and Lvec (G) is the reconstruction loss of mel-spectrogram.
3.2.2 S PEECH TOKENIZATION
Unlike speech vectors, semantic tokens are designed to capture the linguistic content of speech
at low bit rates, facilitating downstream language models. First, the speaker-related information is
disentangled from the speech vectors to reduce the acoustic information. Then, as the utterance level
vector averaged in the time axis strongly correlates with speaker identity (as shown in Appendix A
2), we use utterance level mean normalization on the speech vectors to disentangle speaker-related


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



information. Finally, we leverage the K-means algorithm to divide speech vectors into K clusters,
generating distinct tokens tok = {zi }N  i=1 . As the speech vectors extracted from the WavLM’s
6th layer are content clustering, tokens obtained from K-means are mainly linguistic-related, thus
named semantic tokens. Moreover, we keep the consecutive repeating tokens, which preserves para-
linguistic such as rhythm in duration as much as possible. The process of token extraction can be
formulated as:
                                  tok = K-means(Normalize(vec)).                                   (7)
Considering that the semantic tokens are extracted from the speech vectors by the K-means algo-
rithm, which inspires us to design an “inverse” K-means model to convert semantic tokens back to
speech vectors. Specifically, as the semantic tokens mainly contain linguistic information, we intro-
duce prompt learning during the reconstruction of speech vectors, where a slice of speech vectors
containing desired speaker information is used as a prompt to guide the inverse K-means process.
To this end, we design a decoder-only model consisting of a look-up table, conformer blocks, and a
projection layer, where the K-means table is taken as the look-up table, and the vector of the cluster
center is used as the token embedding. The prompt speech vectors are concatenated ahead of the to-
ken embeddings as the input of conformer blocks. The self-attention in the conformer blocks is used
to capture acoustic information, such as timbre from the prompt speech vectors, as the self-attention
module has a global receptive field enabling direct inter-token and token-to-vector interaction. Fi-
nally, the output of conformer blocks is sent to the projection layer, generating the final speech
vectors. During loss calculation, we mask the prompt part of the predicted speech vector. The above
process and the loss function of the inverse K-means model can be defined, respectively as
                                      vec
                                       ˆ = Inv K(tok, vecp ),                                      (8)
                                      LInv K = Lrecon + Lssim                                      (9)
where tok denotes semantic tokens extracted by the K-means algorithm, vecp denotes prompt speech
vectors containing target speaker information, and vec ˆ denotes the reconstructed speech vectors.
Lrecon is the MSE loss between the predicted speech vector and the ground-truth speech vector.
Besides, structural similarity Lssim (Wang et al., 2004) is adopted to measure the similarity between
predicted and ground-truth speech vectors. Furthermore, the mask prediction skill is utilized to
improve the linguistic comprehension ability of the inverse K-means module. We randomly mask
semantic tokens in α% or replace semantic tokens with another in β%, where α and β are empirically
set to 10.
3.3   L ANGUAGE M ODELS L EVERAGING S EMANTIC T OKENS
Based on the Vec-Tok Codec, an LM is introduced to model the semantic information embedded in
speech. Benefiting from the proposed codec, we can model the tokens with only one LM. Specif-
ically, we take two tasks, zero-shot TTS and S2ST, to showcase the effectiveness of our proposed
Vec-Tok Codec in a speech LM.
The WavLM extracts the speech vector, and inherently, we get 50 speech tokens per second, which
leads to the exposure bias problem and short context length. To alleviate this problem, we use Byte-
Pair Encoding (BPE) (Gage, 1994) to compress the length of semantic tokens. Specifically, the BPE
algorithm is used to get the vocabulary given the extracted semantic tokens. BPE iteratively merges
the most frequent token pairs in semantic tokens to create a vocabulary. With the BPE algorithm, we
can effectively compress the length of the token sequence and balance the trade-off between token
sequence length and vocabulary size. Thus, during the training and inference stage of LMs, we use
BPE-encoded tokens as our input and target.
For both zero-shot TTS and S2ST, we use an autoregressive LM to capture the relationship between
the input and output, and the training objective can be formulated as:
                                              YT
                                LTTS = − log      p(z t |c<t , u; θTTS )                     (10)
                                              t=0
                                              T
                                              Y
                              LS2ST = − log         p(z t |c<t , zsrc ; θS2ST )                  (11)
                                              t=0
 where u and zsrc denote the phoneme sequence and the semantic tokens of source speech, respec-
tively, and θTTS and θS2ST denote the LMs for TTS and S2ST, respectively.
For zero-shot TTS generation, we concat the prompt phonemes, target phonemes, and BPE-encoded
prompt semantic tokens as input. Additionally, we follow Tortoise-TTS (Betker, 2023) and train


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



a CLVP model to re-score the generated tokens. For S2ST, we use the source semantic tokens as
input. Conditioned on these, the LM generates the target BPE-encoded semantic tokens. Finally, the
codec decoder transforms the semantic tokens into the final waveform.
3.4   A PPLICATIONS OF V EC -T OK S PEECH
As shown in Figure 1 (c), we demonstrate the superiority of Vec-Tok Speech by presenting typical
examples of creating the context to perform downstream tasks, including VC, TTS, S2ST, Speech
denoising, and beyond.
Zero-shot VC. Zero-shot VC (Wang et al., 2023b) aims to convert the speaker timbre of any source
speech to that of any target speech while maintaining the content of the source speech. We achieve
this through the proposed Vec-Tok Codec. Specifically, the speech encoder extracts the semantic
token of the source speech and speech vectors of the target speech. Inputting the extracted semantic
tokens and speech vectors, the speech decoder generates speech with the speaker timbre of the target
speaker and the content of the source speech.
Zero-shot speaking style transfer TTS. Zero-shot TTS (Casanova et al., 2022) aims to synthesize
the speech with any target speaker’ timbre, while zero-shot speaking style transfer TTS refers to the
task that synthesizes the speech with not only the timbre of any target speaker but also the speaking
style of another speaker. Vec-Tok speech achieves zero-shot speaking style transfer TTS by the
following two stages: 1) An LM auto-regressively generates the semantic tokens from the input text
and conditions on the prompt semantic tokens. The speaking style of the generated semantic tokens
is consistent with the prompt semantic tokens. 2) We input the generated semantic tokens and the
speech vectors from another speech prompt representing style to the speech decoder to synthesize
the final speech. Thus, Vec-Tok Speech transfers the speaking style through prompt semantic tokens
and speaker timbre through prompt speech vectors, synthesizing speech with diverse speaking styles
and speaker timbre.
Speech-to-speech translation. S2ST (Baldridge, 2004) focuses on translating speech content from
a source language to another language. Conventional S2ST is usually based on cascade systems with
texts as intermediate representations, including automatic speech recognition, machine translation,
and text-to-speech systems, which ignore the transfer of speech prosody and speaker timbre (Song
et al., 2023). Ideally, the translated speech should keep the speaker’s timbre and even the speaking
style in the source language. Vec-Tok speech achieves this target through three stages. In the first
stage, we extract the input speech’s semantic tokens and speech vectors. In the second stage, a token-
to-token LM translates the semantic tokens, which is an implicit translation due to the language-
agnostic characteristic of semantic tokens. In the final stage, inputting the translated semantic tokens
and speech vectors from the first stage, the speech decoder generates the translated speech. With the
prompt speech vectors and the implicit translation, the translated speech maintains both the timbre
and speaking style of the source language speaker.
Speech denoising and bandwidth extension. Aiming to improve speech perceptual quality, speech
denoising refers to noise removal in a speech-noise mixture while bandwidth extension (Andreev
et al., 2022) transforms lower sample rate speech, such as 16k Hz speech, to higher sample rate
speech, such as 48k Hz speech. In Vec-Tok speech, WavLM performs well in speech denoising,
and semantic tokens mainly focus on linguistic contents while ignoring other acoustic aspects such
as noise. Therefore, the Vec-Tok Codec can generate clean speech when inputting noise speech.
Besides, although the WavLM is pre-trained on a 16k Hz speech corpus, the vocoder can be trained
on a 48k Hz speech corpus. Thus, inputting low sample rate speech, Vec-Tok Codec can generate
higher sample rate speech with better perceptual quality.
Speaker de-identification and anonymization. Speaker de-identification (Yuan et al., 2022) in-
volves removing unique speaker-dependent properties, and speaker anonymization (Srivastava et al.,
2022) aims to annoy the speaker to another speaker, which both prevent the speaker from being
identified. Vec-Tok Speech can achieve speaker de-identification and anonymization through simple
operations on the prompt speech vectors when conducting speech reconstruction. Specifically, we
extract speaker-specific speech vectors Vspe and corresponding semantic tokens from the speech.
Semantic tokens go through the K-means table to generate vectors Vagn , which is speaker-agnostic.
The speech decoder takes Vagn and semantic tokens as input to synthesize speaker-agnostic speech,
achieving speaker de-identification. Moreover, considering Vspe contains speaker-specific character-
istics and Vagn speaker-agnostic characteristics, we can interpolate between Vspe and Vagn to obtain
a speaker-anonymous speaker vector Vano . Thus, the speech decoder takes Vano and semantic tokens
as input to synthesize speaker-anonymous speech to accomplish speaker anonymization.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



4       E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

We demonstrate the effectiveness of Vec-Tok Speech through experiments on zero-shot VC, zero-
shot speaking style transfer TTS, and S2ST. It is worth noting that Vec-Tok Speech can be easily
applied to more tasks, such as Speech denoising, speaker de-identification and anonymization, and
demos on these tasks can be found from our online demo page 2 .
Datasets. The experiments are conducted on 50,000 hours of multi-domain English and Chinese
speech recordings. The spoken content is transcribed into International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)
sequences by an Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) (Yang et al., 2023b) model. The data distri-
bution and preprocessing details are presented in Appendix A.1.
Model Configuration. Speech vectors are extracted by a pre-trained WavLM-Large model 3 , which
produces a single vector for every 20 ms of 16 kHz audio. The number of K-means clusters is set to
300, and the inverse K-means neural module consists of 6 Conformer blocks with 8 attention heads,
an embedding dimension of 1024, a feed-forward layer dimension of 4096, and a dropout rate of
0.1. A HiFiGAN V1 model (Kong et al., 2020) is used as the vocoder. The average length of the
training waveform is 15 seconds, and the duration of prompt speech is 3 seconds.
The TTS and S2ST models adopt the LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) architecture with 12 layers
and 12 heads; the hidden and intermediate sizes are 1536 and 6144, respectively. For the BPE
encoding, the vocabulary size is 8192, and the token frequency is nearly 16 tokens per second. The
CLVP model adopts the BERT architecture with 6 layers, 8 heads, a hidden size of 512, and an
intermediate size of 2048 for both text and speech encoder. During inference, the LM generates 256
candidate token sequences and adopts the top 1 sequence as the decoder input based on the CLVP
score.
Model Training. We use AdamW as the default optimizer and β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.95 for all exper-
iments. The LMs for TTS and S2ST are trained by a cosine learning rate schedule on 8 NVIDIA
A800 80GB GPUs with a batch size of 64 for each GPU for 10 epochs. The training dataset of the
TTS model and the CLVP are the same. The inverse K-means model is trained by 8 NVIDIA 3090
24GB GPUs with a batch size of 12 per GPU for 500k steps. The HiFiGAN model is trained by 4
NVIDIA 3090 24G GPUs with a batch size of 4 per GPU for 2,000k steps.
Evaluation Metrics. Both subjective and objective experiments are conducted for a comprehensive
evaluation. For subjective evaluation, the mean opinion score (MOS) Zhu et al. (2023) is used to
evaluate speech naturalness, speaker similarity, and style similarity. During the scoring process, par-
ticipants were directed to focus on specific aspects while disregarding others, and thirty participants
with basic Chinese-English bilingual skills participated in the subjective experiments.
Speaker cosine similarity (SCS), character error rate (CER), and word error rate (WER) are adopted
for objective evaluation. Specifically, SCS is measured by an ECAPA-TDNN model (Desplanques
et al., 2020), trained on 3,300 hours of Mandarin speech and 2,700 hours of English speech, totaling
18,083 speakers. We use open-source ASR models provided by the WeNet community Yao et al.
(2021) to obtain WER and CER for English and Chinese, respectively. The ASR models are based
on the U2++ conformer architecture, trained on 10,000 hours of Gigaspeech English data (Chen
et al.) and 10,000 hours of WenetSpeech Mandarin data (Zhang et al., 2022), respectively.

5       E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
5.1       Z ERO - SHOT VOICE CONVERSION
To evaluate the performance of zero-shot VC, we randomly reserve 50 utterances as source speech
and 10 speakers as the target speakers, which are unseen in the training phase. The LM-VC (Wang
et al., 2023b) is utilized as the comparison model, which adopts a two-stage framework with three
LMs to achieve any-to-any VC. We conduct evaluations on both intra- and cross-lingual zero-shot
VC.
Table 1 shows the results of intra-lingual zero-shot VC. Compared to LM-VC, Vec-Tok Speech
achieves superior speech naturalness and better intelligibility with lower WER/CER. This indicates
that Vec-Tok Speech effectively preserves the linguistic content of source speech and produces nat-
    2
        Demo:https://anonymous.4open.science/w/VecTok/
    3
        WavLM:https://huggingface.co/microsoft/wavlm-large


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



ural speech. The speaker similarity MOS and SCS results verify the excellent ability to capture
the target speaker’s timbre in a zero-shot manner. Moreover, we validate the effectiveness of the
inverse K-means model by replacing semantic tokens with frame-level phoneme sequences. Specif-
ically, a TDNN-F (Peddinti et al., 2015) model trained on WenetSpeech (Zhang et al., 2022) and
GigaSpeech (Chen et al.) is adopted to provide the frame-level phoneme sequence from speech.
From the result, we can observe a sharp decline in speaker similarity MOS, demonstrating the ef-
fectiveness of the inverse K-means idea. In addition, we replace WavLM with XSLR 4 (Babu et al.,
2022), a wav2vec 2.0 model pre-trained on a multilingual dataset, to investigate the influence of
self-supervised learning models on performance. We observe the performance of XLSR is similar
to that of WavLM. Based on SUPERB (Yang et al., 2021), we conjecture that the shallow-layer
feature can generalize well to various speech inputs.

              Table 1: Results of inter-lingual zero-shot VC with 95% confidence interval.
Model                Naturalness MOS(↑)    Speaker Similartiy MOS(↑)   CER%(↓)   WER%(↓)     SCS(↑)
GroundTruth              4.42 ± 0.07                   -                 2.8         1.9       -
LM-VC                    3.78 ± 0.10              3.74 ± 0.08            3.2         2.7     0.892
Vec-Tok Speech           3.86 ± 0.10              3.93 ± 0.09            3.0         2.6     0.927
  w/o Inv k              3.88 ± 0.08              3.67 ± 0.08            2.9         2.4     0.878
  w XLSR                 3.85 ± 0.11              3.89 ± 0.07            3.0         2.7     0.928

Table 2 shows the results of cross-lingual zero-shot VC. Notably, “GroundTruth” represents the
source speech recording. We can see that there is an apparent decline in all evaluation metrics
compared to those in the intra-lingual zero-shot VC in Table 1, demonstrating the challenge of
cross-lingual zero-shot VC. However, Vec-Tok Speech obviously outperforms LM-VC, showing
its extraordinary ability to achieve native pronunciation while maintaining the speaker timbre for
foreign speakers in zero-shot VC.

              Table 2: Results of cross-lingual zero-shot VC with 95% confidence interval.
Model                Naturalness MOS(↑)    Speaker Similartiy MOS(↑)   CER%(↓)   WER%(↓)     SCS(↑)
GroundTruth              4.42 ± 0.07                   -                 2.8         1.9       -
LM-VC                    3.60 ± 0.11              3.66 ± 0.08            3.9         3.1     0.886
Vec-Tok Speech           3.81 ± 0.10              3.90 ± 0.09            3.2         2.9     0.919
  w/o Inv K              3.79 ± 0.09              3.63 ± 0.10            3.4         2.8     0.871
  w XLSR                 3.80 ± 0.08              3.87 ± 0.09            3.1         3.0     0.922


5.2      Z ERO - SHOT TEXT- TO - SPEECH
The proposed method can generate English and Chinese speech on the condition of an unseen
speaker prompt and an unseen style prompt, enabling stylistic speech generation for a speaker. But
to the best of our knowledge, the current LM-based zero-shot TTS models can only condition on
a single speech prompt representing both speaker and speaking style. Hence, we first experiment
on the zero-shot TTS task utilizing the speaker prompt as the style prompt simultaneously for a fair
comparison. Specifcially, the SOTA multilingual zero-shot TTS models, VALL-E X (Zhang et al.,
2023) and Bark 5 are involved in this evaluation. VALL-E X is trained on the same corpus as our
Vec-Tok Speech and the Bark model’s official checkpoint is directly used in the experiment.
Table 3 shows the evaluation results of zero-shot TTS. As we can see, there is a trade-off between
the naturalness and speaker similarity in VALL-E X and Bark. However, Vec-Tok Speech out-
performs them in terms of both naturalness and speaker similarity, demonstrating the effectiveness
of speech vectorization for natural speech generation and tokenization for linguistic information
capturing. Besides, Vec-Tok Speech obtains better intelligibility as well with lower CER/WER in
Chinese/English. Notably, VALL-E X and Bark obtain 5.3% and 5.8% CERs, respectively, on the
Chinese testing clips, which are much higher than those obtained by Vec-Tok Speech. Moreover,
Vec-Tok speech achieves the highest SCS score, consistent with speaker similarity MOS. These
results indicate the superior zero-shot TTS performance of the proposed method for unseen target
speakers.
   4
       XSLR:https://huggingface.co/facebook/wav2vec2-xls-r-300m
   5
       Bark:https://github.com/suno-ai/bark


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Further assessment of Vec-Tok Speech is conducted with the ablation of the BPE and CLVP. As
shown in Table 3, removing the BPE results in a sharp decline in naturalness MOS, WER, and CER.
Notably, the listeners argue that major problems for the model without BPE lie in the synthetic long
utterances. The results indicate that lower exposure bias and longer context benefit speech natural-
ness. This result shows lower exposure bias and longer context length benefit natural pronunciation.
In addition, when removing the CLVP, we found that the extremely poor samples would affect the
evaluation results to a large extent. Therefore, there is a decline in performance when the number
of candidate token sequences from the CLVP is reduced. To further validate the ability of zero-shot
style transfer, two different speech prompts, separately providing speaker timbre and style expres-
sions, are conditioned to Vec-Tok Speech for TTS. Specifically, we add 20 utterances of speech
with obvious speaking style as prompts in LM and evaluate the style similarity of the synthetic
speech. Both subjective and objective results indicate that Vec-Tok Speech has the zero-shot ability
to simultaneously transfer the speaking style and speaker timbre from different speech prompts.

                 Table 3: Results of zero-shot TTS with 95% confidence interval.
                    Naturalness  Speaker            Style
 Model                                                          CER%(↓) WER%(↓) SCS(↑)
                     MOS(↑) Similarity MOS(↑) Similarity MOS(↑)
 Ground Truth      4.40 ± 0.07           -                    -               2.8           1.9         -
 VALL-E X          3.72 ± 0.12      3.67 ± 0.10               -               5.3           3.9       0.852
 Bark              3.68 ± 0.11      3.73 ± 0.12               -               5.8           3.6       0.866
 Vec-Tok Speech    3.92 ± 0.08      3.87 ± 0.07               -               3.7           3.4       0.909
   w/ Style Prompt 3.88 ± 0.10      3.84 ± 0.08          3.87 ± 0.10          3.9           3.7       0.902
   w/o BPE         3.80 ± 0.10      3.88 ± 0.08               -               4.6           4.2       0.908
   w/ CLVP-64      3.84 ± 0.12      3.86 ± 0.07               -               4.4           4.1       0.907


5.3   S PEECH - TO - SPEECH TRANSLATION
We assess the performance of our model in the S2ST task on the test set of GigaST (Ye et al., 2022)
in terms of naturalness, speaker similarity, BLEU, and SCS. We utilize the constrained En-Zh speech
translation model, involving the same training data and similar parameter size in GigaST (Ye et al.,
2022) as the compared method.
As shown in Table 4, Vec-Tok Speech reaches a comparative BLEU score compared to the cascaded
translation model in GigaST that translates English speech into Chinese text. Speaker similarity
MOS and cosine similarity scores both indicate the generated speech preserves the speaker timbre of
the source speech during translation. Vec-Tok Speech achieves a naturalness MOS of 3.69, demon-
strating that the proposed method can effectively synthesize natural speech of the target language.
These results imply that the proposed method can conduct reasonable speech-to-speech translation
while preserving the speaker timbre of the source language.

                        Table 4: Results of S2ST with 95% confidence interval.
       Model              Naturalness MOS(↑)      Speaker Similarity MOS(↑)    BLEU(↑)        SCS(↑)
       GroundTruth            3.87 ± 0.08                     -                       -             -
       GigaST                      -                          -                     22.30           -
       Vec-Tok Speech         3.69 ± 0.12                3.85 ± 0.09                21.56         0.904



6     C ONCLUSION
This paper presents Vec-Tok Speech, a framework that resembles multiple speech generation tasks
and generates expressive and high-fidelity speech. Specifically, we propose a novel speech codec
based on speech vectors and semantic tokens, named Vec-Tok Codec. Specifically, speech vectors
contain acoustic details contributing to high-fidelity speech reconstruction, while semantic tokens
focus on the linguistic content of speech, serving effective language modeling. Based on the pro-
posed speech codec, Vec-Tok Speech leverages LMs to undertake the core of speech generation.
Moreover, Byte-Pair Encoding is further introduced to reduce the token length and the bit rate,
thus benefiting the LM from lower exposure bias and longer context coverage. Vec-Tok speech can
be used for various tasks, including intra- and cross-lingual zero-shot voice conversion, zero-shot
speaking style transfer text-to-speech, speech-to-speech translation, speech denoising and beyond.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the good design of Vec-Tok Codec and Vec-Tok Speech.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



7   R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

To help readers reproduce our experiments, we provided descriptions of our architectures in Section
3, and details of our models about hyperparameters in Section 4. We also provide details of our data
processing pipeline in Appendix A.1. Moreover, we plan to release our source code to ensure the
reproducibility of this paper.


R EFERENCES
Pavel Andreev, Aibek Alanov, Oleg Ivanov, and Dmitry P. Vetrov. Hifi++: a unified framework for
  neural vocoding, bandwidth extension and speech enhancement. CoRR, abs/2203.13086, 2022.

Matthew Baas, Benjamin van Niekerk, and Herman Kamper. Voice conversion with just nearest
 neighbors. CoRR, abs/2305.18975, 2023.

Arun Babu, Changhan Wang, Andros Tjandra, Kushal Lakhotia, Qiantong Xu, Naman Goyal, Kri-
  tika Singh, Patrick von Platen, Yatharth Saraf, Juan Pino, Alexei Baevski, Alexis Conneau, and
  Michael Auli. XLS-R: self-supervised cross-lingual speech representation learning at scale. In
  Hanseok Ko and John H. L. Hansen (eds.), Interspeech 2022, 23rd Annual Conference of the
  International Speech Communication Association, Incheon, Korea, 18-22 September 2022, pp.
  2278–2282. ISCA, 2022.

Jason Baldridge. Verbmobil: Foundations of Speech-to-Speech Translation, by wolfgang wahlster
  (editor). springer, 2000. ISBN 3-540-67783-6. price £44.50 (hardback). xii+679 pages. Nat. Lang.
  Eng., 10(2):200–204, 2004.

James Betker. Better speech synthesis through scaling. CoRR, abs/2305.07243, 2023.

Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Olivier Pietquin, Matthew
  Sharifi, Dominik Roblek, Olivier Teboul, David Grangier, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghi-
  dour. Audiolm: A language modeling approach to audio generation. IEEE ACM Trans. Audio
  Speech Lang. Process., 31:2523–2533, 2023a.

Zalán Borsos, Matthew Sharifi, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Neil Zeghidour, and Marco
  Tagliasacchi. Soundstorm: Efficient parallel audio generation. CoRR, abs/2305.09636, 2023b.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Hugo
  Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.

Bytedance. Gigas2s: Large scale english-to-x speech-to-speech translation. https://github.
  com/SpeechTranslation/GigaS2S, 2023.

Edresson Casanova, Julian Weber, Christopher Dane Shulby, Arnaldo Cândido Júnior, Eren Gölge,
  and Moacir A. Ponti. Yourtts: Towards zero-shot multi-speaker TTS and zero-shot voice con-
  version for everyone. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári,
  Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022,
  17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 2709–2720. PMLR, 2022.

Guoguo Chen, Shuzhou Chai, Guan-Bo Wang, Jiayu Du, Wei-Qiang Zhang, Chao Weng, Dan Su,
  Daniel Povey, Jan Trmal, Junbo Zhang, Mingjie Jin, Sanjeev Khudanpur, Shinji Watanabe, Shuai-
  jiang Zhao, Wei Zou, Xiangang Li, Xuchen Yao, Yongqing Wang, Zhao You, and Zhiyong Yan.
  Gigaspeech: An evolving, multi-domain ASR corpus with 10, 000 hours of transcribed audio. In
  Proc. Interspeech.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki
  Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, Jian Wu, Long Zhou, Shuo Ren, Yanmin Qian, Yao Qian,
  Jian Wu, Michael Zeng, Xiangzhan Yu, and Furu Wei. Wavlm: Large-scale self-supervised pre-
  training for full stack speech processing. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process., 16(6):1505–1518,
  2022.
Yu-An Chung, Yu Zhang, Wei Han, Chung-Cheng Chiu, James Qin, Ruoming Pang, and Yonghui
  Wu. w2v-bert: Combining contrastive learning and masked language modeling for self-
  supervised speech pre-training. In IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding
  Workshop, ASRU 2021, Cartagena, Colombia, December 13-17, 2021, pp. 244–250. IEEE, 2021.
Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. High fidelity neural audio
  compression. CoRR, abs/2210.13438, 2022.
Brecht Desplanques, Jenthe Thienpondt, and Kris Demuynck. ECAPA-TDNN: emphasized channel
  attention, propagation and aggregation in TDNN based speaker verification. In Proc. Interspeech,
  pp. 3830–3834. ISCA, 2020.
Philip Gage. A new algorithm for data compression. The C Users Journal archive, 12:23–38, 1994.
Eugene Kharitonov, Damien Vincent, Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Sertan Girgin, Olivier
  Pietquin, Matthew Sharifi, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour. Speak, read and prompt:
  High-fidelity text-to-speech with minimal supervision. CoRR, abs/2302.03540, 2023.
Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial networks for effi-
  cient and high fidelity speech synthesis. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell,
  Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020,
  December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
Kundan Kumar, Rithesh Kumar, Thibault de Boissiere, Lucas Gestin, Wei Zhen Teoh, Jose Sotelo,
  Alexandre de Brébisson, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron C. Courville. Melgan: Generative adver-
  sarial networks for conditional waveform synthesis. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle,
  Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp.
  14881–14892, 2019.
Anders Boesen Lindbo Larsen, Søren Kaae Sønderby, Hugo Larochelle, and Ole Winther. Au-
  toencoding beyond pixels using a learned similarity metric. In Maria-Florina Balcan and Kil-
  ian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of the 33nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML 2016, New York City, NY, USA, June 19-24, 2016, volume 48 of JMLR Workshop and
  Conference Proceedings, pp. 1558–1566. JMLR.org, 2016.
Matthew Le, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Brian Karrer, Leda Sari, Rashel Moritz, Mary Williamson,
 Vimal Manohar, Yossi Adi, Jay Mahadeokar, and Wei-Ning Hsu. Voicebox: Text-guided multi-
 lingual universal speech generation at scale. CoRR, abs/2306.15687, 2023.
Songxiang Liu, Yuewen Cao, and Helen Meng. Emotional voice conversion with cycle-consistent
  adversarial network, 2020.
Eliya Nachmani, Alon Levkovitch, Yifan Ding, Chulayuth Asawaroengchai, Heiga Zen, and
  Michelle Tadmor Ramanovich. Translatotron 3: Speech to speech translation with monolingual
  data. CoRR, abs/2305.17547, 2023.
Vijayaditya Peddinti, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. A time delay neural network architec-
  ture for efficient modeling of long temporal contexts. In Interspeech, 2015.
Chandan K. A. Reddy, Harishchandra Dubey, Kazuhito Koishida, Arun Asokan Nair, Vishak Gopal,
  Ross Cutler, Sebastian Braun, Hannes Gamper, Robert Aichner, and Sriram Srinivasan. INTER-
  SPEECH 2021 deep noise suppression challenge. In Hynek Hermansky, Honza Cernocký, Lukás
  Burget, Lori Lamel, Odette Scharenborg, and Petr Motlı́cek (eds.), Interspeech 2021, 22nd Annual
  Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, Brno, Czechia, 30 August
  - 3 September 2021, pp. 2796–2800. ISCA, 2021. doi: 10.21437/INTERSPEECH.2021-1609.
  URL https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2021-1609.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Hendrik Schröter, Andreas K. Maier, Alberto N. Escalante-B., and Tobias Rosenkranz. Deepfilter-
  net2: Towards real-time speech enhancement on embedded devices for full-band audio, 2022.
Kai Shen, Zeqian Ju, Xu Tan, Yanqing Liu, Yichong Leng, Lei He, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, and Jiang
  Bian. Naturalspeech 2: Latent diffusion models are natural and zero-shot speech and singing
  synthesizers. CoRR, abs/2304.09116, 2023.
Kun Song, Yi Ren, Yi Lei, Chunfeng Wang, Kun Wei, Lei Xie, Xiang Yin, and Zejun Ma. Styles2st:
  Zero-shot style transfer for direct speech-to-speech translation. CoRR, abs/2305.17732, 2023.
Brij Mohan Lal Srivastava, Mohamed Maouche, Md. Sahidullah, Emmanuel Vincent, Aurélien Bel-
  let, Marc Tommasi, Natalia A. Tomashenko, Xin Wang, and Junichi Yamagishi. Privacy and util-
  ity of x-vector based speaker anonymization. IEEE ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process.,
  30:2383–2395, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. CoRR, abs/2302.13971, 2023.
Christophe Veaux, Junichi Yamagishi, and Kirsten MacDonald. Superseded - cstr vctk corpus:
  English multi-speaker corpus for cstr voice cloning toolkit. 2016.
Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu Wu, Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing
  Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, and Furu Wei. Neural codec language models
  are zero-shot text to speech synthesizers. CoRR, abs/2301.02111, 2023a.
Zhichao Wang, Yuanzhe Chen, Lei Xie, Qiao Tian, and Yuping Wang. LM-VC: zero-shot voice
  conversion via speech generation based on language models. IEEE Signal Process. Lett., 30:
  1157–1161, 2023b.
Zhou Wang, Alan C. Bovik, Hamid R. Sheikh, and Eero P. Simoncelli. Image quality assessment:
  from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Trans. Image Process., 13(4):600–612, 2004.
Haibin Wu, Kai-Wei Chang, Yuan-Kuei Wu, and Hung-yi Lee. Speechgen: Unlocking the generative
  power of speech language models with prompts. CoRR, abs/2306.02207, 2023a.
Yi-Chiao Wu, Israel D. Gebru, Dejan Marković, and Alexander Richard. Audiodec: An open-
  source streaming high-fidelity neural audio codec. In ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5, 2023b.
Dongchao Yang, Songxiang Liu, Rongjie Huang, Jinchuan Tian, Chao Weng, and Yuexian Zou. Hifi-
  codec: Group-residual vector quantization for high fidelity audio codec. CoRR, abs/2305.02765,
  2023a.
Shu-Wen Yang, Po-Han Chi, Yung-Sung Chuang, Cheng-I Jeff Lai, Kushal Lakhotia, Yist Y. Lin,
  Andy T. Liu, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Guan-Ting Lin, Tzu-Hsien Huang, Wei-Cheng Tseng,
  Ko-tik Lee, Da-Rong Liu, Zili Huang, Shuyan Dong, Shang-Wen Li, Shinji Watanabe, Abdel-
  rahman Mohamed, and Hung-yi Lee. SUPERB: speech processing universal performance bench-
  mark. In Hynek Hermansky, Honza Cernocký, Lukás Burget, Lori Lamel, Odette Scharenborg,
  and Petr Motlı́cek (eds.), Interspeech 2021, 22nd Annual Conference of the International Speech
  Communication Association, Brno, Czechia, 30 August - 3 September 2021, pp. 1194–1198.
  ISCA, 2021.
Yuguang Yang, Yu Pan, Jingjing Yin, Jiangyu Han, Lei Ma, and Heng Lu. HYBRIDFORMER:
  improving squeezeformer with hybrid attention and NSR mechanism. CoRR, abs/2303.08636,
  2023b.
Zhuoyuan Yao, Di Wu, Xiong Wang, Binbin Zhang, Fan Yu, Chao Yang, Zhendong Peng, Xiaoyu
  Chen, Lei Xie, and Xin Lei. Wenet: Production oriented streaming and non-streaming end-to-end
  speech recognition toolkit. In Hynek Hermansky, Honza Cernocký, Lukás Burget, Lori Lamel,
  Odette Scharenborg, and Petr Motlı́cek (eds.), Interspeech 2021, 22nd Annual Conference of the
  International Speech Communication Association, Brno, Czechia, 30 August - 3 September 2021,
  pp. 4054–4058. ISCA, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Rong Ye, Chengqi Zhao, Tom Ko, Chutong Meng, Tao Wang, Mingxuan Wang, and Jun Cao. Gigast:
  A 10, 000-hour pseudo speech translation corpus. CoRR, abs/2204.03939, 2022.
Ruibin Yuan, Yuxuan Wu, Jacob Li, and Jaxter Kim. Deid-vc: Speaker de-identification via
  zero-shot pseudo voice conversion. In Hanseok Ko and John H. L. Hansen (eds.), Interspeech
  2022, 23rd Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, Incheon,
  Korea, 18-22 September 2022, pp. 2593–2597. ISCA, 2022.
Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. Sound-
  stream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. IEEE ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process., 30:
  495–507, 2022.
Heiga Zen, Viet Dang, Rob Clark, Yu Zhang, Ron J. Weiss, Ye Jia, Zhifeng Chen, and Yonghui
  Wu. Libritts: A corpus derived from librispeech for text-to-speech. In Gernot Kubin and
  Zdravko Kacic (eds.), Interspeech 2019, 20th Annual Conference of the International Speech
  Communication Association, Graz, Austria, 15-19 September 2019, pp. 1526–1530. ISCA, 2019.
Binbin Zhang, Hang Lv, Pengcheng Guo, Qijie Shao, Chao Yang, Lei Xie, Xin Xu, Hui Bu, Xiaoyu
  Chen, Chenchen Zeng, Di Wu, and Zhendong Peng. WENETSPEECH: A 10000+ hours multi-
  domain mandarin corpus for speech recognition. In Proc. ICASSP, pp. 6182–6186. IEEE, 2022.
Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing
  Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, and Furu Wei. Speak foreign languages with
  your own voice: Cross-lingual neural codec language modeling. CoRR, abs/2303.03926, 2023.
Xinfa Zhu, Yi Lei, Kun Song, Yongmao Zhang, Tao Li, and Lei Xie. Multi-speaker expressive
  speech synthesis via multiple factors decoupling. In ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5, 2023.


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



A     A PPENDIX
A.1   DATA DISTRIBUTION AND PROCESSING

Table 5 shows detailed data distribution, where WenetSpeech (Zhang et al., 2022), Gi-
gaSpeech (Chen et al.), LibriTTS (Zen et al., 2019), GigaST (Ye et al., 2022) and Gi-
gaS2S (Bytedance, 2023) are all open-source datasets downloaded from the Internet. Furthermore, a
20k-hour expressive audiobook dataset XBook is collected from internal resources, and a clean sub-
set named XBook-clean is selected. Specifically, we select 1,500 hours of speech from XBook-clean
and GigaSpeech to train the K-means model and the vocoder, while the inverse K-means model is
trained on the whole XBook dataset.
Data processing consists of three main modules: speech recognition, speech denoising, and text-
to-IPA. Specifically, the voice activity detection (VAD) result, timestamp, and text transcription are
obtained from waveforms by an ASR model (Yang et al., 2023b), where the text transcription is
processed to obtain the corresponding IPA-level transcription by a text front-end, including text
normalization, word segmentation, prosody prediction, polyphone disambiguation, g2p, etc. On the
other hand, denoised waveforms are acquired by the DeepfilterNet2 (Schröter et al., 2022) network.
All denoised waveforms are downsampled to 16k Hz.


                          Table 5: Datasets used to train Vec-Tok Speech.
                  Datasets                     Language Duration (hours)                Usage
    WeNetSpeech (Zhang et al., 2022)            Chinese            10k                 VC
        GigaSpeech (Chen et al.)                English             9k           VC & S2ST & TTS
GigaS2S (Ye et al., 2022; Bytedance, 2023)      Chinese             9k                S2ST
      LibriTTS (Zen et al., 2019)               English            580                 TTS
                  XBook                         Chinese            20k                 VC
              XBook-clean                       Chinese             8k                 TTS


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



A.2   C ORRELATION BETWEEN SPEAKER ID AND WAV LM FEATURE

We randomly select 30 speakers from VCTK (Veaux et al., 2016), 100 utterances per speaker, to
verify the relationship between the speaker identity and the WavLM features. First, the VAD detects
the vocal segments sent to WavLM to extract the speech vectors. Then, we calculate the averaged
vectors in the time axis for each utterance and visualize them through t-SNE. As shown in Figure 2,
averaged vectors are well clustered by speaker identity, demonstrating the strong correlation between
the averaged vectors and the speaker identities.
             228   262   303
             231   264   305
             233   266   312
             237   270   329
             239   274   330
             241   275   333
             252   280   341
             253   292   343
             256   299   347
             260   300   364


Figure 2: T-SNE visualization of the averaged WavLM features for 30 speakers in the VCTK dataset.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



A.3     Q UANTITATIVE STUDY OF SPEECH DENOISING

We evaluate the proposed framework in speech denoising task. We use the synthetic test set with
reverberation of DNS challenge-Interspeech 2021 as our test set, and we follow the evaluation metric
of DNS challenge 2021 Reddy et al. (2021). Additionally, we compare our result with some models
trained explicitly with denoising objectives. The results are shown in Table.6.


                    Table 6: The DNSMOS result of tested denoising systems
                                                 DNSMOS
                           Model
                                           SIG      BAK OVL
                           Noisy [2]           1.760     1.497   1.392
                           Conv-TasNet [3]     2.415     2.710   2.010
                           Demucs [4]          2.510     2.641   2.215
                           Inter-SubNet [5]    2.651     2.581   2.362
                           CDiffuSE [6]        2.541     2.300   2.190
                           Vec-Tok Speech      2.681     2.912   2.235


A.4     Q UANTITATIVE STUDY OF CODEC RECONSTRUCTION QUALITY

We test the PESQ and STOI metrics in 100 speech clips from our test set, and compare the recon-
struction performence with Encodec 6 Défossez et al. (2022). The results are shown in Table.7.


              Table 7: Speech reconstruction performance of Vec-Tok Speech codec
                Model                              bitrate      PESQ STOI
                 Encodec                             1.5kbps      1.42      0.84
                 Encodec                             3kbps        1.87      0.90
                 WavLM feature
                                                     -            2.50      0.95
                 +Vocoder
                 WavLM feature
                 +KMeans300 +Inverse k-means         ∼0.41kbps    1.93      0.92
                 +Vocoder

The results indicate that our codec is capable of reconstructing speech with a low bitrate and minor
loss of sound quality.


   6
       https://github.com/facebookresearch/encodec


                                                16
