Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


METRA: S CALABLE U NSUPERVISED RL
WITH M ETRIC -AWARE A BSTRACTION

 Seohong Park1 Oleh Rybkin1 Sergey Levine1
 1
   University of California, Berkeley
 seohong@berkeley.edu

                                           A BSTRACT
         Unsupervised pre-training strategies have proven to be highly effective in natural
         language processing and computer vision. Likewise, unsupervised reinforcement
         learning (RL) holds the promise of discovering a variety of potentially useful be-
         haviors that can accelerate the learning of a wide array of downstream tasks. Pre-
         vious unsupervised RL approaches have mainly focused on pure exploration and
         mutual information skill learning. However, despite the previous attempts, mak-
         ing unsupervised RL truly scalable still remains a major open challenge: pure
         exploration approaches might struggle in complex environments with large state
         spaces, where covering every possible transition is infeasible, and mutual infor-
         mation skill learning approaches might completely fail to explore the environ-
         ment due to the lack of incentives. To make unsupervised RL scalable to com-
         plex, high-dimensional environments, we propose a novel unsupervised RL ob-
         jective, which we call Metric-Aware Abstraction (METRA). Our main idea is,
         instead of directly covering the entire state space, to only cover a compact latent
         space Z that is metrically connected to the state space S by temporal distances.
         By learning to move in every direction in the latent space, METRA obtains a
         tractable set of diverse behaviors that approximately cover the state space, being
         scalable to high-dimensional environments. Through our experiments in five lo-
         comotion and manipulation environments, we demonstrate that METRA can dis-
         cover a variety of useful behaviors even in complex, pixel-based environments,
         being the first unsupervised RL method that discovers diverse locomotion behav-
         iors in pixel-based Quadruped and Humanoid. Our code and videos are available
         at https://seohong.me/projects/metra/

1   I NTRODUCTION
Unsupervised pre-training has proven transformative in domains from natural language processing
to computer vision: contrastive representation learning (Chen et al., 2020) can acquire effective
features from unlabeled images, and generative autoregressive pre-training (Brown et al., 2020)
can enable language models that can be adapted to a plethora of downstream applications. If we
could derive an equally scalable framework for unsupervised reinforcement learning (RL) that au-
tonomously explores the space of possible behaviors, then we could enable general-purpose unsu-
pervised pre-trained agents to serve as an effective foundation for efficiently learning a broad range
of downstream tasks. Hence, our goal in this work is to propose a scalable unsupervised RL ob-
jective that encourages an agent to explore its environment and learn a breadth of potentially useful
behaviors without any supervision.
While this formulation of unsupervised RL has been explored in a number of prior works, making
fully unsupervised RL truly scalable still remains a major open challenge. Prior approaches to un-
supervised RL can be categorized into two main groups: pure exploration methods (Burda et al.,
2019; Pathak et al., 2019; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Mendonca et al., 2021; Rajeswar et al., 2023)
and unsupervised skill discovery methods (Eysenbach et al., 2019a; Sharma et al., 2020; Laskin
et al., 2022; Park et al., 2022). While these approaches have been shown to be effective in several
unsupervised RL benchmarks (Mendonca et al., 2021; Laskin et al., 2021), it is not entirely clear
whether such methods can indeed be scalable to complex environments with high intrinsic dimen-
sionality. Pure exploration-based unsupervised RL approaches aim to either completely cover the
entire state space (Burda et al., 2019; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b) or fully capture the transition dynamics
of the Markov decision process (MDP) (Pathak et al., 2019; Sekar et al., 2020; Mendonca et al.,
2021; Rajeswar et al., 2023). However, in complex environments with a large state space, it may be


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                      S = R64×64×3 (Pixels)
                                                                                      Z = R2

                                Temporally close

                            Temporally distant


                                                                 METRA covers the most
                                                             “temporally spread-out” manifold
Figure 1: Illustration of METRA. Our main idea for scalable unsupervised RL is to cover only the most
“important” low-dimensional subset of the state space, analogously to PCA. Specifically, METRA covers the
most “temporally spread-out” (non-linear) manifold, which would lead to approximate coverage of the state
space S. In the example above, the two-dimensional Z space captures behaviors running in all directions, not
necessarily covering every possible leg pose.

infeasible to attain either of these aims. In fact, we will show that these methods fail to cover the
state space even in the state-based 29-dimensional MuJoCo Ant environment. On the other hand,
unsupervised skill discovery methods aim to discover diverse, distinguishable behaviors, e.g., by
maximizing the mutual information between skills and states (Gregor et al., 2016; Eysenbach et al.,
2019a). While these methods do learn behaviors that are mutually different, they either do not nec-
essarily encourage exploration and thus often have limited state coverage in the complete absence of
supervision (Eysenbach et al., 2019a; Sharma et al., 2020), or are not directly scalable to pixel-based
control environments (Park et al., 2022; 2023b).
In this work, we aim to address these challenges and develop an unsupervised RL objective, which
we call Metric-Aware Abstraction (METRA), that scales to complex, image-based environments
with high intrinsic dimensionality. Our first main idea is to learn diverse behaviors that maximally
cover not the original state space but a compact latent metric space defined by a mapping function
ϕ : S → Z with a metric d. Here, the latent state is connected by the state space by the metric
d, which ensures that covering latent space leads to coverage of the state space. Now, the question
becomes which metric to use. Previous metric-based skill learning methods mostly used the Eu-
clidean distance (or its scaled variant) between two states (He et al., 2022; Park et al., 2022; 2023b).
However, such state-based metrics are not directly applicable to complex, high-dimensional state
space (e.g., images). Our second main idea is therefore to use temporal distances (i.e., the num-
ber of minimum environment steps between two states) as a metric for the latent space. Temporal
distances are invariant to state representations and thus applicable to pixel-based environments as
well. As a result, by maximizing coverage in the compact latent space, we can acquire diverse be-
haviors that approximately cover the entire state space, being scalable to high-dimensional, complex
environments (Figure 1).
Through our experiments on five state-based and pixel-based continuous control environments, we
demonstrate that our method learns diverse, useful behaviors, as well as a compact latent space
that can be used to solve various downstream tasks in a zero-shot manner, outperforming previous
unsupervised RL methods. To the best of our knowledge, METRA is the first unsupervised RL
method that demonstrates the discovery of diverse locomotion behaviors in pixel-based Quadruped
and Humanoid environments.

2    W HY M IGHT P REVIOUS U NSUPERVISED RL M ETHODS FAIL T O S CALE ?
The goal of unsupervised RL is to acquire useful knowledge, such as policies, world models, or
exploratory data, by interacting with the environment in an unsupervised manner (i.e., without tasks
or reward functions). Typically, this knowledge is then leveraged to solve downstream tasks more
efficiently. Prior work in unsupervised RL can be categorized into two main groups: pure explo-
ration methods and unsupervised skill discovery methods. Pure exploration methods aim to cover
the entire state space or fully capture the environment dynamics. They encourage exploration by
maximizing uncertainty (Pathak et al., 2017; Shyam et al., 2019; Burda et al., 2019; Pathak et al.,
2019; Sekar et al., 2020; Mazzaglia et al., 2022) or state entropy (Lee et al., 2019; Pong et al.,
2020; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats et al., 2021). Based on the data collected by the exploration


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                        I(S; Z)            =


                                                                       IW (S; Z)           <

         Pure Exploration         I(S; Z)            IW (S; Z)
         RND, Disag., APT, …   DIAYN, DADS, …      METRA (ours)                MI vs. WDM
Figure 2: Sketch comparing different unsupervised RL objectives. Pure exploration approaches try to
cover every possible state, which is infeasible in complex environments (e.g., such methods might be “stuck”
at forever finding novel joint angle configurations of a robot, without fully exploring the environment; see
Figure 3). The mutual information I(S; Z) has no underlying distance metrics, and thus does not prioritize
coverage enough, only focusing on skills that are discriminable. In contrast, our proposed Wasserstein de-
pendency measure IW (S; Z) maximizes the distance metric d, which we choose to be the temporal distance,
forcing the learned skills to span the “longest” subspaces of the state space, analogously to (temporal, non-
linear) PCA.

policy, these methods learn a world model (Rajeswar et al., 2023), train a goal-conditioned pol-
icy (Pong et al., 2020; Pitis et al., 2020; Mendonca et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2023), learn skills via
trajectory autoencoders (Campos Camúñez et al., 2020; Mazzaglia et al., 2023), or directly fine-
tune the learned exploration policy (Laskin et al., 2021) to accelerate downstream task learning.
While these pure exploration-based approaches are currently the leading methods in unsupervised
RL benchmarks (Mendonca et al., 2021; Laskin et al., 2021; Mazzaglia et al., 2023; Rajeswar et al.,
2023), their scalability may be limited in complex environments with large state spaces because it
is often computationally infeasible to completely cover every possible state or fully capture the dy-
namics. In Section 5, we empirically demonstrate that these approaches even fail to cover the state
space of the state-based 29-dimensional Ant environment.
Another line of research in unsupervised RL aims to learn diverse behaviors (or skills) that are
distinguishable from one another, and our method also falls into this category. The most common
approach to unsupervised skill discovery is to maximize the mutual information (MI) between states
and skills (Gregor et al., 2016; Eysenbach et al., 2019a; Sharma et al., 2020; Hansen et al., 2020):
                                  I(S; Z) = DKL (p(s, z)∥p(s)p(z)).                                      (1)
By associating different skill latent vectors z with different states s, these methods learn diverse
skills that are mutually distinct. However, they share the limitation that they often end up discover-
ing simple, static behaviors with limited state coverage (Campos Camúñez et al., 2020; Park et al.,
2022). This is because MI is defined by a KL divergence (Equation (1)), which is a metric-agnostic
quantity (e.g., MI is invariant to scaling; see Figure 2). As a result, the MI objective only focuses
on the distinguishability of behaviors, regardless of “how different” they are, resulting in limited
state coverage (Campos Camúñez et al., 2020; Park et al., 2022). To address this limitation, prior
works combine the MI objective with exploration bonuses (Campos Camúñez et al., 2020; Strouse
et al., 2022; Park & Levine, 2023) or propose different objectives that encourage maximizing dis-
tances in the state space (He et al., 2022; Park et al., 2022; 2023b). Yet, it remains unclear whether
these methods can scale to complex, high-dimensional environments, because they either attempt
to completely capture the entire MDP (Campos Camúñez et al., 2020; Strouse et al., 2022; Park &
Levine, 2023) or assume a compact, structured state space (He et al., 2022; Park et al., 2022; 2023b).
Indeed, to the best of our knowledge, no previous unsupervised skill discovery methods have suc-
ceeded in discovering locomotion behaviors on pixel-based locomotion environments. Unlike these
approaches, our method learns a compact set of diverse behaviors that are maximally different in
terms of the temporal distance. As a result, they can approximately cover the state space, even in a
complex, high-dimensional environment. We discuss further related work in Appendix B.

3    P RELIMINARIES AND P ROBLEM S ETTING
We consider a controlled Markov process, an MDP without a reward function, defined as M =
(S, A, µ, p). S denotes the state space, A denotes the action space, µ : ∆(S) denotes the initial
state distribution, and p : S × A → ∆(A) denotes the transition dynamics kernel. We consider a set
of latent vectors z ∈ Z, which can be either discrete or continuous, and a latent-conditioned policy
π(a|s, z). Following the terminology in unsupervised skill discovery, we refer to latent vectors z
(and their corresponding policies π(a|s, z)) as skills. When sampling a trajectory, we first sample
a skill from the prior distribution, z ∼ p(z), and then roll out a trajectory with π(a|s, z), where
z is fixed for the entire episode. Hence, the joint skill-trajectory distribution is given as p(τ, z) =


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



          QT −1
p(z)p(s0 ) t=0 π(at |st , z)p(st+1 |st , at ), where τ denotes (s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , . . . , sT ). Our goal in this
work is to learn a set of diverse, useful behaviors π(a|s, z), without using any supervision, data, or
prior knowledge.

4    A S CALABLE O BJECTIVE FOR U NSUPERVISED RL
Desiderata. We first state our two desiderata for a scalable unsupervised RL objective. First, instead
of covering every possible state in a given MDP, which is infeasible in complex environments, we
want to have a compact latent space Z of a tractable size and a latent-conditioned policy π(a|s, z)
that translates latent vectors into actual behaviors. Second, we want the behaviors from different
latent vectors to be different, collectively covering as much of the state space as possible. In other
words, we want to maximize state coverage under the given capacity of Z. An algorithm that
satisfies these two desiderata would be scalable to complex environments, because we only need to
learn a compact set of behaviors that approximately cover the MDP.
Objective. Based on the above, we propose the following novel objective for unsupervised RL:
                                      IW (S; Z) = W(p(s, z), p(s)p(z)),                                            (2)
where IW (S; Z) is the Wasserstein dependency measure (WDM) (Ozair et al., 2019) between states
and skills, and W is the 1-Wasserstein distance on the metric space (S × Z, d) with a distance
metric d. Intuitively, the WDM objective in Equation (2) can be viewed as a “Wasserstein variant”
of the previous MI objective (Equation (1)), where the KL divergence in MI is replaced with the
Wasserstein distance. However, despite the apparent similarity, there exists a significant difference
between the two objectives: MI is completely agnostic to the underlying distance metric, while
WDM is a metric-aware quantity. As a result, the WDM objective (Equation (2)) not only discovers
diverse skills that are different from one another, as in the MI objective, but also actively maximizes
distances d between different skill trajectories (Figure 2). This makes them collectively cover the
state space as much as possible (in terms of the given metric d). The choice of metric for d is
critical for effective skill discovery, and simple choices like Euclidean metrics on the state space
would generally not be effective for non-metric state representations, such as images. Therefore,
instantiating this approach with the right metric is an important part of our contribution, as we will
discuss in Section 4.2. Until then, we assume that we have a given metric d.
4.1 T RACTABLE O PTIMIZATION
While our objective IW (S; Z) has several desirable properties, it is not immediately straightforward
to maximize this quantity in practice. In this section, we describe a simple, tractable objective
that can be used to maximize IW (S; Z) in practice. We begin with the Kantorovich-Rubenstein
duality (Villani et al., 2009; Ozair et al., 2019), which provides a tractable way to maximize the
Wasserstein dependency measure:
                         IW (S; Z) = sup Ep(s,z) [f (s, z)] − Ep(s)p(z) [f (s, z)],                                (3)
                                          ∥f ∥L ≤1

where ∥f ∥L denotes the Lipschitz constant for the function f : S × Z → R under the given distance
metric d, i.e., ∥f ∥L = sup(s1 ,z1 )̸=(s2 ,z2 ) |f (s1 , z1 ) − f (s2 , z2 )|/d((s1 , z1 ), (s2 , z2 )). Intuitively, f
is a score function that assigns larger values to (s, z) tuples sampled from the joint distribution and
smaller values to (s, z) tuples sampled independently from their marginal distributions. We note
that Equation (3) is already a tractable objective, as we can jointly train a 1-Lipschitz-constrained
score function f (s, z) using gradient descent and a skill policy π(a|s, z) using RL, with the reward
                                                                                              PN
function being an empirical estimate of Equation (3), r(s, z) = f (s, z) − N −1 i=1 f (s, zi ), where
z1 , z2 , . . . , zN are N independent random samples from the prior distribution p(z).
However, since sampling N additional zs for each data point is computationally demanding, we will
further simplify the objective to enable more efficient learning. First, we consider the parameteri-
zation f (s, z) = ϕ(s)⊤ ψ(z) with ϕ : S → RD and ψ : Z → RD with independent 1-Lipschitz
constraints1 , which yields the following objective:
             IW (S; Z) ≈            sup         Ep(s,z) [ϕ(s)⊤ ψ(z)] − Ep(s) [ϕ(s)]⊤ Ep(z) [ψ(z)].                 (4)
                             ∥ϕ∥L ≤1,∥ψ∥L ≤1

   1
     While ∥ϕ∥L ≤ 1, ∥ψ∥L ≤ 1 is not technically equivalent to ∥f ∥L ≤ 1, we use the former as it is
more tractable. Also, we note that ∥f ∥L can be upper-bounded in terms of ∥ϕ∥L , ∥ψ∥L , sups ∥ϕ(s)∥2 , and
supz ∥ψ(z)∥2 under d((s1 , z1 ), (s2 , z2 )) = (sups ∥ϕ(s)∥2 )∥ψ∥L d(z1 , z2 ) + (supz ∥ψ(z)∥2 )∥ϕ∥L d(s1 , s2 ).


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here, we note that the decomposition f (s, z) = ϕ(s)⊤ ψ(z) is universal; i.e., the expressiveness of
f (s, z) is equivalent to that of ϕ(s)⊤ ψ(z) when D → ∞. The proof can be found in Appendix C.
Next, we consider a variant of the Wasserstein dependency measure that only depends on the last
state: IW (ST ; Z), similarly to VIC (Gregor et al., 2016). This allows us to further decompose the
objective with a telescoping sum as follows:
   IW (ST ; Z) ≈           sup         Ep(τ,z) [ϕ(sT )⊤ ψ(z)] − Ep(τ ) [ϕ(sT )]⊤ Ep(z) [ψ(z)]          (5)
                     ∥ϕ∥L ≤1,∥ψ∥L ≤1
             T
             X −1
                    Ep(τ,z) [(ϕ(st+1 ) − ϕ(st ))⊤ ψ(z)] − Ep(τ ) [ϕ(st+1 ) − ϕ(st )]⊤ Ep(z) [ψ(z)] ,

    = sup                                                                                              (6)
       ϕ,ψ t=0

where we also use the fact that p(s0 ) and p(z) are independent. Finally, we set ψ(z) to z. While this
makes ψ less expressive, it allows us to derive the following concise objective:
                                                "T −1                             #
                                                  X
                                                                         ⊤
                IW (ST ; Z) ≈ sup Ep(τ,z)             (ϕ(st+1 ) − ϕ(st )) (z − z̄) ,               (7)
                                   ∥ϕ∥L ≤1            t=0
where z̄ = Ep(z) [z]. Here, since we can always shift the prior distribution p(z) to have a zero
mean, we can assume z̄ = 0 without loss of generality. This objective can now be easily maximized
by jointly training ϕ(s) and π(a|s, z) with r(s, z, s′ ) = (ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s))⊤ z under the constraint
∥ϕ∥L ≤ 1. Note that we do not need any additional random samples of z, unlike Equation (3).
4.2 F ULL O BJECTIVE : M ETRIC -AWARE A BSTRACTION (METRA)
So far, we have not specified the distance metric d for the Wasserstein distance in WDM (or equiv-
alently for the Lipschitz constraint ∥ϕ∥L ≤ 1). Choosing an appropriate distance metric is crucial
for learning a compact set of useful behaviors, because it determines the priority by which the be-
haviors are learned within the capacity of Z. Previous metric-based skill discovery methods mostly
employed the Euclidean distance (or its scaled variant) as a metric (He et al., 2022; Park et al., 2022;
2023b). However, they are not directly scalable to high-dimensional environments with pixel-based
observations, in which the Euclidean distance is not necessarily meaningful.
In this work, we propose to use the temporal distance (Kaelbling, 1993; Hartikainen et al., 2020; Du-
rugkar et al., 2021) between two states as a distance metric dtemp (s1 , s2 ), the minimum number of
environment steps to reach s2 from s1 . This provides a natural way to measure the distance between
two states, as it only depends on the inherent transition dynamics of the MDP, being invariant to
the state representation and thus scalable to pixel-based environments. Using the temporal distance
metric, we can rewrite Equation (7) as follows:
                    "T −1                       #
                      X
       sup Ep(τ,z)        (ϕ(st+1 ) − ϕ(st )) z s.t. ∥ϕ(s) − ϕ(s′ )∥2 ≤ 1, ∀(s, s′ ) ∈ Sadj , (8)
                                             ⊤
       π,ϕ              t=0
where Sadj denotes the set of adjacent state pairs in the MDP. Note that ∥ϕ∥L ≤ 1 is equivalently
converted into ∥ϕ(s) − ϕ(s′ )∥2 ≤ 1 under the temporal distance metric (see Theorem C.3).
Intuition and interpretation. We next describe how the constrained objective in Equation (8) may
be interpreted. Intuitively, a policy π(a|s, z) that maximizes our objective should learn to move as
far as possible along various directions in the latent space (specified by z). Since distances in the
latent space, ∥ϕ(s1 ) − ϕ(s2 )∥2 , are always upper-bounded by the corresponding temporal distances
in the MDP, given by dtemp (s1 , s2 ), the learned latent space should assign its (limited) dimensions
to the manifolds in the original state space that are maximally “spread out”, in the sense that shortest
paths within the set of represented states should be as long as possible. This conceptually resembles
“principal components” of the state space, but with respect to shortest paths rather than Euclidean
distances, and with non-linear ϕ rather than linear ϕ. Thus, we would expect ϕ to learn to abstract
the state space in a lossy manner, preserving temporal distances (Figure 9), and emphasizing those
degrees of freedom of the state that span the largest possible “temporal” (non-linear) manifolds
(Figure 1). Based on this intuition, we call our method Metric-Aware Abstraction (METRA). In
Appendix D, we derive a formal connection between METRA and principal component analysis
(PCA) under the temporal distance metric under several simplifying assumptions.
Theorem 4.1 (Informal statement of Theorem D.2). Under some simplifying assumptions, linear
squared METRA is equivalent to PCA under the temporal distance metric.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Algorithm 1 Metric-Aware Abstraction (METRA)
 1: Initialize skill policy π(a|s, z), representation function ϕ(s), Lagrange multiplier λ, replay buffer D
 2: for i ← 1 to (# epochs) do
 3:    for j ← 1 to (# episodes per epoch) do
 4:       Sample skill z ∼ p(z)
 5:       Sample trajectory τ with π(a|s, z) and add to replay buffer D
 6:    end for
 7:    Update ϕ(s) to maximize E(s,z,s′ )∼D [(ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s))⊤ z + λ · min(ε, 1 − ∥ϕ(s) − ϕ(s′ )∥22 )]
 8:    Update λ to minimize E(s,z,s′ )∼D [λ · min(ε, 1 − ∥ϕ(s) − ϕ(s′ )∥22 )]
 9:    Update π(a|s, z) using SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018a) with reward r(s, z, s′ ) = (ϕ(s′ ) − ϕ(s))⊤ z
10: end for

Connections to previous skill discovery methods. There exist several intriguing connections
between our WDM objective (Equation (2)) and previous skill discovery methods, including DI-
AYN (Eysenbach et al., 2019a), DADS (Sharma et al., 2020), CIC (Laskin et al., 2022), LSD (Park
et al., 2022), and CSD (Park et al., 2023b). Perhaps the most apparent connections are with LSD and
CSD, which also use similar constrained objectives to Equation (7). In fact, although not shown by
the original authors, the constrained inner product objectives of LSD and CSD are also equivalent
to IW (ST ; Z), but with the Euclidean distance (or its normalized variant), instead of the temporal
distance. Also, the connection between WDM and Equation (7) provides further theoretical insight
into the rather “ad-hoc” choice of zero-centered one-hot vectors used in discrete LSD (Park et al.,
2022); we must use a zero-mean prior distribution due to the z − z̄ term in Equation (7). There
exist several connections between our WDM objective and previous MI-based skill discovery meth-
ods as well. Specifically, by simplifying WDM (Equation (2)) in three different ways, we can obtain
“Wasserstein variants” of DIAYN, DADS, and CIC. We refer to Appendix E for detailed derivations.
Zero-shot goal-reaching with METRA. Thanks to the state abstraction function ϕ(s), METRA
provides a simple way to command the skill policy to reach a goal state in a zero-shot manner, as
in LSD (Park et al., 2022). Since ϕ abstracts the state space preserving temporal distances, the
difference vector ϕ(g) − ϕ(s) tells us the skill we need to select to reach the goal state g from the
current state s. As such, by simply setting z = (ϕ(g) − ϕ(s))/∥ϕ(g) − ϕ(s)∥2 (for continuous
skills) or z = arg maxdim (ϕ(g) − ϕ(s)) (for discrete skills), we can find the skill that leads to the
goal. With this technique, METRA can solve goal-conditioned tasks without learning a separate
goal-conditioned policy, as we will show in Section 5.3.
Implementation. We optimize the constrained objective in Equation (8) using dual gradient descent
with a Lagrange multiplier λ and a small relaxation constant ε > 0, similarly to Park et al. (2023b);
Wang et al. (2023). We provide a pseudocode for METRA in Algorithm 1.
Limitations. One potential issue with Equation (8) is that we embed the temporal distance into the
symmetric Euclidean distance in the latent space, where the temporal distance can be asymmetric.
This makes our temporal distance abstraction more “conservative” in the sense that it considers the
minimum of both temporal distances, i.e., ∥ϕ(s1 ) − ϕ(s2 )∥2 ≤ min(dtemp (s1 , s2 ), dtemp (s2 , s1 )).
While this conservatism is less problematic in our benchmark environments, in which transitions are
mostly “symmetric”, it might be overly restrictive in highly asymmetric environments. To resolve
this, we can replace the Euclidean distance ∥ϕ(s1 ) − ϕ(s2 )∥2 in Equation (8) with an asymmetric
quasimetric, as in Wang et al. (2023). We leave this extension for future work. Another limitation
is that the simplified WDM objective in Equation (7) only considers behaviors that move linearly
in the latent space. While this does not necessarily imply that the behaviors are also linear in the
original state space (because ϕ : S → Z is a nonlinear mapping), this simplification, which stems
from the fact that we set ψ(z) = z, might restrict the diversity of behaviors to some degree. We
believe this can be addressed by using the full WDM objective in Equation (4). Notably, the full
objective (Equation (4)) resembles contrastive learning, and we believe combining it with scalable
contrastive learning techniques is an exciting future research direction (see Appendix E.3). We refer
to Appendix A for practical limitations regarding our implementation of METRA.

5    E XPERIMENTS
Through our experiments in benchmark environments, we aim to answer the following questions:
(1) Can METRA scale to complex, high-dimensional environments, including domains with image
observations? (2) Does METRA discover meaningful behaviors in complex environments with no
supervision? (3) Are the behaviors discovered by METRA useful for downstream tasks?


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                 METRA   LSD    DIAYN DADS2        CIC     ICM      RND     APT      APS P2E/Disag LBS3

        Ant
      (States)


  HalfCheetah
   (States)


  Quadruped
   (Pixels)


  Humanoid
   (Pixels)


      Kitchen
      (Pixels)

Figure 3: Examples of behaviors learned by 11 unsupervised RL methods. For locomotion environments,
we plot the x-y (or x) trajectories sampled from learned policies. For Kitchen, we measure the coincidental
success rates for six predefined tasks. Different colors represent different skills z. METRA is the only method
that discovers diverse locomotion skills in pixel-based Quadruped and Humanoid. We refer to Figure 11 for the
complete qualitative results (8 seeds) of METRA and our project page for videos.

5.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
                                                       HalfCheetah    Ant    Quadruped Humanoid  Kitchen
We evaluate our method on five robotic lo-               (States)   (States)  (Pixels)  (Pixels) (Pixels)
comotion and manipulation environments (Fig-
ure 4): state-based Ant and HalfCheetah from
Gym (Todorov et al., 2012; Brockman et al.,
2016), pixel-based Quadruped and Humanoid
from the DeepMind Control (DMC) Suite (Tassa                  Figure 4: Benchmark environments.
et al., 2018), and a pixel-based version of Kitchen
from Gupta et al. (2019); Mendonca et al. (2021). For pixel-based DMC locomotion environments,
we use colored floors to allow the agent to infer its location from pixels, similarly to Hafner et al.
(2022); Park et al. (2023a) (Figure 10). Throughout the experiments, we do not use any prior knowl-
edge, data, or supervision (e.g., observation restriction, early termination, etc.). As such, in pixel-
based environments, the agent must learn diverse behaviors solely from 64 × 64 × 3 camera images.
We compare METRA against 11 previous methods in three groups: (1) unsupervised skill discov-
ery, (2) unsupervised exploration, and (3) unsupervised goal-reaching methods. For unsupervised
skill discovery methods, we compare against two MI-based approaches, DIAYN (Eysenbach et al.,
2019a) and DADS (Sharma et al., 2020), one hybrid method that combines MI and an exploration
bonus, CIC (Laskin et al., 2022), and one metric-based approach that maximizes Euclidean dis-
tances, LSD (Park et al., 2022). For unsupervised exploration methods, we consider five pure explo-
ration approaches, ICM (Pathak et al., 2017), RND (Burda et al., 2019), Plan2Explore (Sekar et al.,
2020) (or Disagreement (Pathak et al., 2019)), APT (Liu & Abbeel, 2021b), and LBS (Mazzaglia
et al., 2022), and one hybrid approach that combines exploration and successor features, APS (Liu &
Abbeel, 2021a). We note that the Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2020) variants of these methods (especially
LBS (Mazzaglia et al., 2022)) are currently the state-of-the-art methods in the pixel-based unsuper-
vised RL benchmark (Laskin et al., 2021; Rajeswar et al., 2023). For unsupervised goal-reaching
methods, we mainly compare with a state-of-the-art unsupervised RL approach, LEXA (Mendonca
et al., 2021), as well as two previous skill discovery methods that enable zero-shot goal-reaching,
DIAYN and LSD. We use 2-D skills for Ant and Humanoid, 4-D skills for Quadruped, 16 discrete
skills for HalfCheetah, and 24 discrete skills for Kitchen. For CIC, we use 64-D skill latent vectors
for all environments, following the original suggestion (Laskin et al., 2022).

5.2     Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON
We first demonstrate examples of behaviors (or skills) learned by our method and the 10 prior unsu-
pervised RL methods on each of the five benchmark environments in Figure 3. The figure illustrates
that METRA discovers diverse behaviors in both state-based and pixel-based domains. Notably,
METRA is the only method that successfully discovers locomotion skills in pixel-based Quadruped
and Humanoid, and shows qualitatively very different behaviors from previous unsupervised RL
methods across the environments. Pure exploration methods mostly exhibit chaotic, random behav-
iors (videos), and fail to fully explore the state space (in terms of x-y coordinates) even in state-based


                                                      7
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.04

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.02



                                                                                                                                                                                   0.00


                                                                                                                                                                          y
                               HalfCheetah (States)                                                            Ant (States)                                               Quadruped (Pixels)                                              Humanoid (Pixels)                                           Kitchen (Pixels)
                               200                                                                                                                                                                                                    100


       Policy State Coverage


                                                                          Policy State Coverage


                                                                                                                                              Policy State Coverage


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Policy State Coverage
                                                                                                                                                                            °0.02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Policy Task Coverage
                                                                                                                                                                      300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4                            METRA
                               150                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3                            LSD
                                                                                                                                                                      200
                               100                                                                                                                                                                                                     50                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CIC
                                                                                                  1000
                                50
                                                                                                                                                                      100         °0.04                                                                                                                                        DIAYN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       25                                                         1

                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DADS
                                   0                                                                                                                                      0                                                               0
                                       0.0   0.5           1.0      1.5                                  0.0     0.5           1.0      1.5                                   0       2         4     6                                       0.0      0.5        1.0                                 0.0      0.5      1.0
                                                   Steps          £107                                                 Steps          £107                                                             £106
                                                                                                                                                                                                    °0.04                                 °0.02       Steps0.00   £107           0.02                          0.04    £106
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.04 Steps                                                                                                                 Steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x
Figure 5: Quantitative comparison with unsupervised skill discovery methods (8 seeds). We measure the
state/task coverage of the policies learned by five skill discovery methods. METRA exhibits the best coverage
                                              0.02
across all environments, while previous methods completely fail to explore the state spaces of pixel-based
locomotion environments. Notably, METRA is the only method that discovers locomotion skills in pixel-based
                                              0.00


                                                                                                                                                                          y
Quadruped and Humanoid.
                                       AntMultiGoals                                                 HalfCheetahGoal                                                  HalfCheetahHurdle                                                       QuadrupedGoal                                            HumanoidGoal
                                                                                                                                                                        °0.02                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4                                    METRA
                                                                                              7.5
                                                                                                                                                                      4
                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3                                    LSD
       Return


                                                                         Return


                                                                                                                                                  Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Return
                                                                                              5.0                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2                                    CIC
                                                                                                                                                                      2
                               2                                                              2.5                                                                               °0.04                                                 2                                                                                        DIAYN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1

                                                                                              0.0                                                                     0                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DADS
                                   0.0             0.5             1.0                               0.0           0.5                1.0                                 0.0             0.5          1.0                                0.0          0.5         1.0                            0.0          0.5       1.0
                                             Episodes            £104                                            Episodes            £105                                             Episodes        £105
                                                                                                                                                                                                    °0.04                                 °0.02     Episodes0.00 £104          0.02                            0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Episodes   £104

                                                           x
Figure 6: Downstream task performance comparison of unsupervised skill discovery methods (4 seeds).
To verify whether learned skills are useful for downstream tasks, we train a hierarchical high-level controller
on top of the frozen skill policy to maximize task rewards. METRA exhibits the best or near-best performance
across the five tasks, which suggests that the behaviors learned by METRA are indeed useful for the tasks.

Ant and HalfCheetah. This is because it is practically infeasible to completely cover the infinitely
many combinations of joint angles and positions in these domains. MI-based skill discovery meth-
ods also fail to explore large portions of the state space due to the metric-agnosticity of the KL
divergence (Section 2), even when combined with an exploration bonus (i.e., CIC). LSD, a previous
metric-based skill discovery method that maximizes Euclidean distances, does discover locomotion
skills in state-based environments, but fails to scale to the pixel-based environments, where the Eu-
clidean distance on image pixels does not necessarily provide a meaningful metric. In contrast to
these methods, METRA learns various task-related behaviors by maximizing temporal distances
in diverse ways. On our project page, we show additional qualitative results of METRA with dif-
ferent skill spaces. We note that, when combined with a discrete latent space, METRA discovers
even more diverse behaviors, such as doing a backflip and taking a static posture, in addition to
locomotion skills. We refer to Appendix F for visualization of learned latent spaces of METRA.
5.3 Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON
Next, we quantitatively compare METRA against three groups of 11 previous unsupervised RL
approaches, using different metrics that are tailored to each group’s primary focus. For quantitative
results, we use 8 seeds and report 95% confidence intervals, unless otherwise stated.
Comparison with unsupervised skill discovery methods. We first compare METRA with other
methods that also aim to solve the skill discovery problem (i.e., learning a latent-conditioned policy
π(a|s, z) that performs different skills for different values of z). These include LSD, CIC, DIAYN,
and DADS2 . We implement these methods on the same codebase as METRA. For comparison,
we employ two metrics: policy coverage and downstream task performance. Figure 5 presents the
policy coverage results, where we evaluate the skill policy’s x coverage (HalfCheetah), x-y coverage
(Ant, Quadruped, and Humanoid), or task (Kitchen) coverage at each evaluation epoch. The results
show that METRA achieves the best performance in most of the domains, and is the only method
that successfully learns meaningful skills in the pixel-based settings, where previous skill discovery
methods generally fail. In Figure 6, we evaluate the applicability of the skills discovered by each
method to downstream tasks, where the downstream task is learned by a hierarchical controller
π h (z|s) that selects (frozen) learned skills to maximize the task reward (see Appendix G for details).
METRA again achieves the best performance on most of these tasks, suggesting that the behaviors
learned by METRA not only provide greater coverage, but also are more suitable for downstream
tasks in these domains.
Comparison with pure exploration methods. Next, we quantitatively compare METRA to five
unsupervised exploration methods, which do not aim to learn skills but only attempt to cover the
state space, ICM, LBS3 , RND, APT, and Plan2Explore (or Disagreement), and one hybrid method
   2
     We do not compare against DADS in pixel-based environments due to the computational cost of its skill
dynamics model p(s′ |s, z), which requires predicting the full next image.
   3
     Since LBS requires a world model, we only evaluate it on pixel-based environments, where we use the
Dreamer variants of pure exploration methods (Rajeswar et al., 2023).


                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.04



Published as a conference paper at0.02ICLR 2024

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.00


                                                                                                                                                                                                              y
                       HalfCheetah (States)                                                                        Ant (States)                                                                 Quadruped°0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Pixels)                                                                 Humanoid (Pixels)                                                        Kitchen (Pixels)                                                 Kitchen (Pixels)
                                                                                                                                                                                               600                                                                                                                                                      6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Queue Task Coverage


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Policy Task Coverage
                       200


Total State Coverage


                                                                              Total State Coverage


                                                                                                                                                                        Total State Coverage


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Total State Coverage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  150                                                                                                                                    4                                                         METRA       RND
                                                                                                     10000
                       150                                                                                                                                                                     400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4                                                                3                                                         LSD         APT
                       100
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.04°0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                      5000                                                                                     200                                                                                 50                                                                   2                                                                                                                          ICM         APS
                        50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LBS         P2E/Disag
                         0                                                                                 0                                                                                     0                                                                                  0                                                                   0                                                                0
                             0                              2                                                  0       1        2                         3                                          0           2                      4                                               0.0       2.5   5.0    7.5                                          0        1         2         3                                   0                          1      2    3
                                                                          4                                                                                         4
                                                 Time (s)           £10                                                    Time (s)                           £10                                             Time (s)                £104                                                                    £104                                                                       £104                                                                       £104
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    °0.04 Time (s) °0.02                                                          0.00Time (s)           0.02                                                            Time (s)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x
Figure 7: Quantitative comparison
                             0.02 with pure exploration methods (8 seeds). We compare METRA with
six unsupervised exploration methods in terms of state coverage. Since it is practically infeasible to completely
cover every possible state or transition, pure exploration methods struggle to explore the state space of complex
environments, such as pixel-based0.00


                                                                                                                                                                                                y
                                     Humanoid or state-based Ant.

                                                          HalfCheetah (States)                                                                                            °0.02
                                                                                                                                                                    Ant (States)                                                                      Quadruped (Pixels)                                                                                Humanoid (Pixels)                                                                               Kitchen (Pixels)
                                 Negative Goal Distance


                                                                                                                               Negative Goal Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Negative Goal Distance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Negative Goal Distance
                                                          °10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           METRA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # Achieved Tasks
                                                                                                                                                        °10                                                                                          °6                                                                                       °5
                                                          °20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                        °20                                                                                          °8                                                                                       °6                                                                                                                                           LSD
                                                          °30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                        °30
                                                                                                                                                                                                         °0.04                                       °10                                                                                      °7                                                                                                                                           LEXA
                                                          °40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                          °50                                                                                           °40                                                                                          °12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              °8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DIAYN
                                                                0    1                                 2           3                                          0                                          2                                                        0                           2          4                                                  0.0          2.5       5.0          7.5                                                      0          2      4
                                                                                £10
                                                                          Time (s)                                     £104                                                                     Time (s)             £104                                               £10                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                £104                                                                           4
                                                    0.00Time (s) 0.02  Time (s)
                                                                      0.04                                                                                                                                                                             °0.04 Time (s) °0.02
Figure 8: Downstream task performance comparison withxLEXA (8 seeds). We compare METRA against
LEXA, a state-of-the-art unsupervised goal-reaching method, on five goal-conditioned tasks. The skills learned
by METRA can be employed to solve these tasks in a zero-shot manner, achieving the best performance.

that combines exploration and successor features, APS. We use the original implementations by
Laskin et al. (2021) for state-based environments and the Dreamer versions by Rajeswar et al. (2023)
for pixel-based environments. As the underlying RL backbones are very different (e.g., Dreamer is
model-based, while METRA uses model-free SAC), we compare the methods based on wall clock
time. For the metric, instead of policy coverage (as in Figure 5), we measure total state coverage
(i.e., the number of bins covered by any training trajectories up to each evaluation epoch). This
metric is more generous toward the exploration methods, since such methods might not cover the
entire space on any single iteration, but rather visit different parts of the space on different iterations
(in contrast to our method, which aims to produce diverse skills). In Kitchen, we found that most
methods max out the total task coverage metric, and we instead use both the queue coverage and
policy coverage metrics (see Appendix G for details). Figure 7 presents the results, showing that
METRA achieves the best coverage in most of the environments. While pure exploration methods
also work decently in the pixel-based Kitchen, they fail to fully explore the state spaces of state-
based Ant and pixel-based Humanoid, which have complex dynamics with nearly infinite possible
combinations of positions, joint angles, and velocities.
Comparison with unsupervised goal-reaching methods. Finally, we compare METRA with
LEXA, a state-of-the-art unsupervised goal-reaching method. LEXA trains an exploration policy
with Plan2Explore (Sekar et al., 2020), which maximizes epistemic uncertainty in the transition
dynamics model, in parallel with a goal-conditioned policy π(a|s, g) on the data collected by the
exploration policy. We compare the performances of METRA, LEXA, and two previous skill dis-
covery methods (DIAYN and LSD) on five goal-reaching downstream tasks. We use the procedure
described in Section 4.2 to solve goal-conditioned tasks in a zero-shot manner with METRA. Fig-
ure 8 presents the comparison results, where METRA achieves the best performance on all of the
five downstream tasks. While LEXA also achieves non-trivial performances in three tasks, it strug-
gles with state-based Ant and pixel-based Humanoid, likely because it is practically challenging to
completely capture the transition dynamics of these complex environments.

6                                C ONCLUSION
In this work, we presented METRA, a scalable unsupervised RL method based on the idea of cover-
ing a compact latent skill space that is connected to the state space by a temporal distance metric. We
showed that METRA learns diverse useful behaviors in various locomotion and manipulation envi-
ronments, being the first unsupervised RL method that learns locomotion behaviors in pixel-based
Quadruped and Humanoid.
Final remarks. In unsupervised RL, many excellent prior works have explored pure exploration
or mutual information skill learning. However, given that these methods are not necessarily readily
scalable to complex environments with high intrinsic state dimensionality, as discussed in Section 2,
we may need a completely different approach to enable truly scalable unsupervised RL. We hope
that this work serves as a step toward broadly applicable unsupervised RL that enables large-scale
pre-training with minimal supervision.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Youngwoon Lee for an informative discussion, and RAIL members and
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. This work was partly supported by the Korea
Foundation for Advanced Studies (KFAS), ARO W911NF-21-1-0097, and the Office of Naval Re-
search. This research used the Savio computational cluster resource provided by the Berkeley Re-
search Computing program at UC Berkeley.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We provide our code at the following repository: https://github.com/seohongpark/
METRA. We provide the full experimental details in Appendix G.

R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam, Harrison Edwards, Dario Amodei, and Pieter Abbeel. Variational option discovery
  algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1807.10299, 2018.

Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Steven
  Kapturowski, Olivier Tieleman, Martı́n Arjovsky, Alexander Pritzel, Andew Bolt, and Charles
  Blundell. Never give up: Learning directed exploration strategies. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.

Richard F Bass. Real analysis for graduate students. Createspace Ind Pub, 2013.

Kate Baumli, David Warde-Farley, Steven Stenberg Hansen, and Volodymyr Mnih. Relative varia-
  tional intrinsic control. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2021.

Marc G. Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Rémi
 Munos. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Neural Information Pro-
 cessing Systems (NeurIPS), 2016.

Glen Berseth, Daniel Geng, Coline Devin, Nicholas Rhinehart, Chelsea Finn, Dinesh Jayaraman,
  and Sergey Levine. Smirl: Surprise minimizing reinforcement learning in unstable environments.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.

Rajendra Bhatia. Matrix analysis. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.

G. Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, J. Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  W. Zaremba. OpenAI Gym. ArXiv, abs/1606.01540, 2016.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, T. J. Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos J. Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

Vı́ctor Campos Camúñez, Alex Trott, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, Xavier Giró Nieto, and Jordi
   Torres Viñals. Explore, discover and learn: unsupervised discovery of state-covering skills. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wenze Chen, Shiyu Huang, Yuan Chiang, Tingling Chen, and Jun Zhu. Dgpo: Discovering multiple
 strategies with diversity-guided policy optimization. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 (AAAI), 2024.

Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith W. Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-
  learning: Learning fast without a model. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), 2021.

Jongwook Choi, Archit Sharma, Honglak Lee, Sergey Levine, and Shixiang Gu. Variational empow-
  erment as representation learning for goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.

John D. Co-Reyes, Yuxuan Liu, Abhishek Gupta, Benjamin Eysenbach, P. Abbeel, and Sergey
  Levine. Self-consistent trajectory autoencoder: Hierarchical reinforcement learning with trajec-
  tory embeddings. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.

Ishan Durugkar, Mauricio Tec, Scott Niekum, and Peter Stone. Adversarial intrinsic motivation for
   reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.

Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O. Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return, then
  explore. Nature, 590:580–586, 2020.

Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), 2019a.

Benjamin Eysenbach, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Search on the replay buffer: Bridg-
  ing planning and reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2019b.

Carlos Florensa, Yan Duan, and P. Abbeel. Stochastic neural networks for hierarchical reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.

Carlos Florensa, Jonas Degrave, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Jost Tobias Springenberg, and Mar-
  tin A. Riedmiller. Self-supervised learning of image embedding for continuous control. ArXiv,
  abs/1901.00943, 2019.

Justin Fu, John D. Co-Reyes, and Sergey Levine. Ex2: Exploration with exemplar models for deep
  reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.

Karol Gregor, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Variational intrinsic control. ArXiv,
  abs/1611.07507, 2016.

Abhishek Gupta, Vikash Kumar, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Relay policy
  learning: Solving long-horizon tasks via imitation and reinforcement learning. In Conference on
  Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019.

Michael U Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle
 for unnormalized statistical models. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics (AISTATS), 2010.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018a.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, G. Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash Ku-
  mar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic algorithms
  and applications. ArXiv, abs/1812.05905, 2018b.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learn-
  ing behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Danijar Hafner, Kuang-Huei Lee, Ian S. Fischer, and P. Abbeel. Deep hierarchical planning from
  pixels. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Nicklas Hansen, Xiaolong Wang, and Hao Su. Temporal difference learning for model predictive
  control. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
S. Hansen, Will Dabney, André Barreto, T. Wiele, David Warde-Farley, and V. Mnih. Fast task
   inference with variational intrinsic successor features. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Kristian Hartikainen, Xinyang Geng, Tuomas Haarnoja, and Sergey Levine. Dynamical distance
  learning for semi-supervised and unsupervised skill discovery. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Elad Hazan, Sham M. Kakade, Karan Singh, and Abby Van Soest. Provably efficient maximum
  entropy exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Shuncheng He, Yuhang Jiang, Hongchang Zhang, Jianzhun Shao, and Xiangyang Ji. Wasserstein
  unsupervised reinforcement learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2022.
Takuya Hiraoka, Takahisa Imagawa, Taisei Hashimoto, Takashi Onishi, and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka.
  Dropout q-functions for doubly efficient reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Rein Houthooft, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman, Filip De Turck, and P. Abbeel. Vime: Varia-
  tional information maximizing exploration. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2016.
Edward S. Hu, Richard Chang, Oleh Rybkin, and Dinesh Jayaraman. Planning goals for exploration.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Zheyuan Jiang, Jingyue Gao, and Jianyu Chen. Unsupervised skill discovery via recurrent skill
  training. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence (IJCAI), 1993.
Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Jean Tarbouriech, Alessandro Lazaric, and Ludovic Denoyer. Direct
  then diffuse: Incremental unsupervised skill discovery for state covering and goal reaching. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Jaekyeom Kim, Seohong Park, and Gunhee Kim. Unsupervised skill discovery with bottleneck
  option learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Seongun Kim, Kyowoon Lee, and Jaesik Choi. Variational curriculum reinforcement learning for
  unsupervised discovery of skills. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2023.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
Martin Klissarov and Marlos C. Machado. Deep laplacian-based options for temporally-extended
 exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Ilya Kostrikov, Denis Yarats, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing
   deep reinforcement learning from pixels. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
   tions (ICLR), 2021.
Saurabh Kumar, Aviral Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. One solution is not all you
  need: Few-shot extrapolation via structured maxent rl. In Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Michael Laskin, Denis Yarats, Hao Liu, Kimin Lee, Albert Zhan, Kevin Lu, Catherine Cang, Lerrel
 Pinto, and P. Abbeel. Urlb: Unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark. In Neural Informa-
 tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Michael Laskin, Hao Liu, Xue Bin Peng, Denis Yarats, Aravind Rajeswaran, and P. Abbeel. Un-
 supervised reinforcement learning with contrastive intrinsic control. In Neural Information Pro-
 cessing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Yann LeCun, Bernhard E. Boser, John S. Denker, Donnie Henderson, Richard E. Howard, Wayne E.
  Hubbard, and Lawrence D. Jackel. Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip code recognition.
  Neural Computation, 1:541–551, 1989.
Lisa Lee, Benjamin Eysenbach, Emilio Parisotto, Eric P. Xing, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhut-
  dinov. Efficient exploration via state marginal matching. ArXiv, abs/1906.05274, 2019.
Mengdi Li, Xufeng Zhao, Jae Hee Lee, Cornelius Weber, and Stefan Wermter. Internally rewarded
 reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. APS: Active pretraining with successor features. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021a.
Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Behavior from the void: Unsupervised active pre-training. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021b.
Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. A laplacian framework for option
 discovery in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
 2017.
Marlos C. Machado, Clemens Rosenbaum, Xiaoxiao Guo, Miao Liu, Gerald Tesauro, and Murray
 Campbell. Eigenoption discovery through the deep successor representation. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Pietro Mazzaglia, Ozan Çatal, Tim Verbelen, and B. Dhoedt. Curiosity-driven exploration via latent
  bayesian surprise. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2022.
Pietro Mazzaglia, Tim Verbelen, B. Dhoedt, Alexandre Lacoste, and Sai Rajeswar. Choreographer:
  Learning and adapting skills in imagination. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), 2023.
Russell Mendonca, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak. Discover-
  ing and achieving goals via world models. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2021.
Shakir Mohamed and Danilo J. Rezende. Variational information maximisation for intrinsically
  motivated reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2015.
Mirco Mutti, Lorenzo Pratissoli, and Marcello Restelli. Task-agnostic exploration via policy gra-
 dient of a non-parametric state entropy estimate. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 (AAAI), 2021.
OpenAI OpenAI, Matthias Plappert, Raul Sampedro, Tao Xu, Ilge Akkaya, Vineet Kosaraju, Peter
  Welinder, Ruben D’Sa, Arthur Petron, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Alex Paino, Hyeonwoo
  Noh, Lilian Weng, Qiming Yuan, Casey Chu, and Wojciech Zaremba. Asymmetric self-play for
  automatic goal discovery in robotic manipulation. ArXiv, abs/2101.04882, 2021.
Georg Ostrovski, Marc G. Bellemare, Aäron van den Oord, and Rémi Munos. Count-based explo-
  ration with neural density models. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2017.
Sherjil Ozair, Corey Lynch, Yoshua Bengio, Aäron van den Oord, Sergey Levine, and Pierre Ser-
  manet. Wasserstein dependency measure for representation learning. In Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Seohong Park and Sergey Levine. Predictable mdp abstraction for unsupervised model-based rl. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Seohong Park, Jongwook Choi, Jaekyeom Kim, Honglak Lee, and Gunhee Kim. Lipschitz-
  constrained unsupervised skill discovery. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Seohong Park, Dibya Ghosh, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Sergey Levine. Hiql: Offline goal-
  conditioned rl with latent states as actions. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2023a.
Seohong Park, Kimin Lee, Youngwoon Lee, and P. Abbeel. Controllability-aware unsupervised skill
  discovery. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023b.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Kumar Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via dis-
  agreement. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, S. Zhao, Bradly C. Stadie, and Jimmy Ba. Maximum entropy gain ex-
   ploration for long horizon multi-goal reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
   Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Vitchyr H. Pong, Murtaza Dalal, S. Lin, Ashvin Nair, Shikhar Bahl, and Sergey Levine. Skew-Fit:
  State-covering self-supervised reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2020.
Ben Poole, Sherjil Ozair, Aäron van den Oord, Alexander A. Alemi, and G. Tucker. On variational
  bounds of mutual information. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
A. H. Qureshi, Jacob J. Johnson, Yuzhe Qin, Taylor Henderson, Byron Boots, and Michael C. Yip.
  Composing task-agnostic policies with deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Sai Rajeswar, Pietro Mazzaglia, Tim Verbelen, Alexandre Pich’e, B. Dhoedt, Aaron C. Courville,
  and Alexandre Lacoste. Mastering the unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark from
  pixels. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Nick Rhinehart, Jenny Wang, Glen Berseth, John D. Co-Reyes, Danijar Hafner, Chelsea Finn, and
  Sergey Levine. Information is power: Intrinsic control via information capture. In Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Nikolay Savinov, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Semi-parametric topological memory
  for navigation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Tom Schaul, Dan Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approximators.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and P. Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, P. Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2020.
Younggyo Seo, Lili Chen, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, P. Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. State entropy
  maximization with random encoders for efficient exploration. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Nur Muhammad (Mahi) Shafiullah and Lerrel Pinto. One after another: Learning incremental skills
  for a changing world. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Archit Sharma, Shixiang Gu, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, and Karol Hausman. Dynamics-
  aware unsupervised discovery of skills. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Faustino J. Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
DJ Strouse, Kate Baumli, David Warde-Farley, Vlad Mnih, and Steven Stenberg Hansen. Learning
  more skills through optimistic exploration. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), 2022.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Ilya Kostrikov, Arthur D. Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Intrinsic motivation and
  automatic curricula via asymmetric self-play. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), 2018.
Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman,
  Filip De Turck, and P. Abbeel. #exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep rein-
  forcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy P. Lillicrap, and Martin A.
  Riedmiller. Deepmind control suite. ArXiv, abs/1801.00690, 2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012.
Ahmed Touati and Yann Ollivier. Learning one representation to optimize all rewards. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Ahmed Touati, Jérémy Rapin, and Yann Ollivier. Does zero-shot reinforcement learning exist? In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. ArXiv, abs/1807.03748, 2018.
Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new. Springer, 2009.
Tongzhou Wang, Antonio Torralba, Phillip Isola, and Amy Zhang. Optimal goal-reaching rein-
  forcement learning via quasimetric learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2023.
David Warde-Farley, Tom Van de Wiele, Tejas Kulkarni, Catalin Ionescu, Steven Hansen, and
  Volodymyr Mnih. Unsupervised control through non-parametric discriminative rewards. In In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Rushuai Yang, Chenjia Bai, Hongyi Guo, Siyuan Li, Bin Zhao, Zhen Wang, Peng Liu, and Xuelong
  Li. Behavior contrastive learning for unsupervised skill discovery. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Reinforcement learning with pro-
  totypical representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Tom Zahavy, Yannick Schroecker, Feryal M. P. Behbahani, Kate Baumli, Sebastian Flennerhag,
  Shaobo Hou, and Satinder Singh. Discovering policies with domino: Diversity optimization
  maintaining near optimality. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2023a.
Tom Zahavy, Vivek Veeriah, Shaobo Hou, Kevin Waugh, Matthew Lai, Edouard Leurent, Nenad
  Tomasev, Lisa Schut, Demis Hassabis, and Satinder Singh. Diversifying ai: Towards creative
  chess with alphazero. ArXiv, abs/2308.09175, 2023b.
Jesse Zhang, Haonan Yu, and Wei Xu. Hierarchical reinforcement learning by discovering intrinsic
  options. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Andrew Zhao, Matthieu Lin, Yangguang Li, Y. Liu, and Gao Huang. A mixture of surprises for
  unsupervised reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Zihan Zhou, Wei Fu, Bingliang Zhang, and Yi Wu. Continuously discovering novel strategies via
  reward-switching policy optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2022.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      φ preserves temporal distances                          Learn to move in every direction in Z,
      (     denotes adjacent states)                              which approximately covers S

                       φ


S = R64×64×3         Z = R2                                  S = R64×64×3         Z = R2
  ∀(s, s! ) "φ(s) − φ(s! )" ≤ 1                               maxπ(a|s,z) (φ(s! ) − φ(s))" z
Figure 9: Intuitive interpretation of METRA. Our main idea is to only cover a compact latent space Z
that is metrically connected to the state space S. Specifically, METRA learns a lossy, compact representation
function ϕ : S → Z, which preserves temporal distances (left), and learns to move in every direction in Z,
which leads to approximate coverage of the state space S (right).


     Observation                   Global view                   Observation                  Global view
                   (a) Quadruped                                               (b) Humanoid

Figure 10: Visualization of pixel-based DMC Quadruped and Humanoid. We use gradient-colored floors
to allow the agent to infer its location from pixel observations, similarly to Hafner et al. (2022); Park et al.
(2023a).



A     L IMITATIONS

Despite its state-of-the-art performance in several benchmark environments, METRA, in its current
form, has limitations. We refer to Section 4.2 for the limitations and future research directions
regarding the METRA objective. In terms of practical implementation, METRA, like other similar
unsupervised skill discovery methods (Sharma et al., 2020; Park et al., 2022; 2023b), uses a relatively
small update-to-data (UTD) ratio (i.e., the average number of gradient steps per environment step);
e.g., we use 1/4 for Kitchen and 1/16 for Quadruped and Humanoid. Although we demonstrate that
METRA learns efficiently in terms of wall clock time, we believe there is room for improvement
in terms of sample efficiency. This is mainly because we use vanilla SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018a)
as its RL backbone for simplicity, and we believe increasing the sample efficiency of METRA by
combining it with recent techniques in model-free RL (Kostrikov et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021;
Hiraoka et al., 2022) or model-based RL (Hafner et al., 2020; Hansen et al., 2022) is an interesting
direction for future work.
Another limitation of this work is that, while we evaluate METRA on various locomotion and ma-
nipulation environments, following prior work in unsupervised RL and unsuperivsed skill discov-
ery (Eysenbach et al., 2019a; Sharma et al., 2020; Mendonca et al., 2021; Laskin et al., 2021; He
et al., 2022; Park et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022; Shafiullah & Pinto, 2022; Laskin et al., 2022; Park
et al., 2023b; Yang et al., 2023), we have not evaluated METRA on other different types of environ-
ments, such as Atari games. Also, since we assume a fixed MDP (i.e., stationary, fully observable
dynamics, Section 3), METRA in its current form does not particularly deal with non-stationary or


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


non-Markovian dynamics. We leave applying METRA to more diverse environments or extending
the idea behind METRA to non-stationary or non-Markovian environments for future work.

B     E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK
In addition to unsupervised skill discovery (Mohamed & Rezende, 2015; Gregor et al., 2016; Flo-
rensa et al., 2017; Co-Reyes et al., 2018; Achiam et al., 2018; Eysenbach et al., 2019a; Warde-Farley
et al., 2019; Shyam et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019; Sharma et al., 2020; Campos Camúñez et al., 2020;
Hansen et al., 2020; Pong et al., 2020; Baumli et al., 2021; Choi et al., 2021; Yarats et al., 2021;
Kim et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; He et al., 2022; Strouse et al., 2022; Laskin et al., 2022; Park
et al., 2022; Shafiullah & Pinto, 2022; Jiang et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022; Kamienny et al., 2022;
Park & Levine, 2023; Park et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023) and pure exploration (or
unsupervised goal-conditioned RL) methods (Houthooft et al., 2016; Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang
et al., 2017; Ostrovski et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2017; Pathak et al., 2017; Hazan et al., 2019; Shyam
et al., 2019; Burda et al., 2019; Pathak et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019; Ecoffet et al., 2020; Pitis et al.,
2020; Badia et al., 2020; Mutti et al., 2021; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Mendonca et al., 2021; Yarats
et al., 2021; Seo et al., 2021; Mazzaglia et al., 2022; 2023; Hu et al., 2023; Rajeswar et al., 2023),
there have also been proposed other types of unsupervised RL approaches, such as ones based on
asymmetric self-play (Sukhbaatar et al., 2018; OpenAI et al., 2021), surprise minimization (Berseth
et al., 2021; Rhinehart et al., 2021), and forward-backward representations (Touati & Ollivier, 2021;
Touati et al., 2023). One potentially closely related line of work is graph Laplacian-based option
discovery methods (Machado et al., 2017; 2018; Klissarov & Machado, 2023). These methods learn
a set of diverse behaviors based on the eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian of the MDP’s adjacency
matrix. Although we have not found a formal connection to these methods, we suspect there might
exist a deep, intriguing connection between METRA and graph Laplacian-based methods, given that
they both discover behaviors based on the temporal dynamics of the MDP. METRA is also related
to several works in goal-conditioned RL that consider temporal distances (Kaelbling, 1993; Schaul
et al., 2015; Savinov et al., 2018; Eysenbach et al., 2019b; Florensa et al., 2019; Hartikainen et al.,
2020; Durugkar et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023). In particular, Durugkar et al. (2021); Wang et al.
(2023) use similar temporal distance constraints to ours for goal-conditioned RL.

C     T HEORETICAL RESULTS
C.1    U NIVERSALITY OF I NNER P RODUCT D ECOMPOSITION

Lemma C.1. Let X and Y be compact Hausdorff spaces (e.g., compact subsets in RN ) and C(A)
be the set of real-valued continuous functions on A. For any function f (x, y) ∈ C(X × Y) and
ϵ > 0, there exist continuous functions ϕ(x) : X → RD and ϕ(y) : Y → RD with D ≥ 1 such that
supx∈X ,y∈Y |f (x, y) − ϕ(x)⊤ ψ(y)| < ε.

Proof. We invoke the Stone-Weierstrass theorem (Bass (2013), Theorem 20.44), which implies
                                      PD
that the set of functions T := { i=1 ϕi (x)ψi (y) : D ∈ N, ∀1 ≤ i ≤ D, ϕi ∈ C(X ), ψi ∈
C(Y)} is dense in C(X × Y) if T is an algebra that separates points and vanishes at no
point. The only non-trivial part is to show that T is closed under multiplication. Consider
                  PD1 (1)       (1)                             PD2 (2)        (2)
g (1) (x, y) =       i=1 ϕi (x)ψi (y) ∈ T and g
                                                   (2)
                                                       (x, y) =     i=1 ϕi (x)ψi (y) ∈ T . We have
                             D1     D2   (1)   (2)       (1)    (2)            (1)   (2)
g (1) (x, y)g (2) (x, y) = i=1
                           P    P
                                    j=1 ϕi (x)ϕj (x)ψi (y)ψj (y), where ϕi (x)ϕj (x) ∈ C(X )
      (1)     (2)
and ψi (y)ψj (y) ∈ C(Y) for all i, j. Hence, g (1) (x, y)g (2) (x, y) ∈ T .

Theorem C.2 (ϕ(x)⊤ ψ(y) is a universal approximator of f (x, y)). Let X and Y be compact Haus-
dorff spaces and Φ ⊂ C(X ) and Ψ ⊂ C(Y) be dense sets in C(X ) and C(Y), respectively. Then,
        PD
T := { i=1 ϕi (x)ψi (y) : D ∈ N, ∀1 ≤ i ≤ D, ϕi ∈ Φ, ψi ∈ Ψ} is also dense in C(X × Y).
In other words, ϕ(x)⊤ ψ(y) can approximate f (x, y) to arbitrary accuracy if ϕ and ψ are modeled
with universal approximators (e.g., neural networks) and D → ∞.

Proof. By Lemma C.1, for any f ∈ C(X × Y) and ε > 0, there exist D ∈ N, ϕi ∈ C(X ), and
                                                         PD
ψi ∈ C(Y) for 1 ≤ i ≤ D such that supx∈X ,y∈Y |f (x, y) − i=1 ϕi (x)ψi (y)| < ε/3. Define


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


My := sup1≤i≤D,y∈Y |ψi (y)|. Since Φ is dense, for each 1 ≤ i ≤ D, there exists ϕ̃i ∈ Φ such that
supx∈X |ϕi (x) − ϕ̃i (x)| < ε/(3DMy ). Define Mx := sup1≤i≤D,x∈X |ϕ̃i (x)|. Similarly, for each
1 ≤ i ≤ D, there exists ψ̃i ∈ Ψ such that supy∈Y |ψi (y) − ψ̃i (y)| < ε/(3DMx ). Now, we have
                 D
                 X                                   D
                                                     X                      D
                                                                            X
    f (x, y) −         ϕ̃i (x)ψ̃i (y) ≤ f (x, y) −         ϕi (x)ψi (y) +         ϕ̃i (x)ψ̃i (y) − ϕi (x)ψi (y)    (9)
                 i=1                                 i=1                    i=1
                                           D                                D
                                      ε X                                  X
                                    <    +   |ϕ̃i (x)(ψ̃i (y) − ψi (y))| +     |(ϕ̃i (x) − ϕi (x))ψi (y)|
                                      3 i=1                                i=1
                                                                                                        (10)
                                      ε ε ε
                                    < + +                                                               (11)
                                      3 3 3
                                    = ε,                                                                (12)
for any x ∈ X and y ∈ Y. Hence, T is dense in C(X × Y).

C.2    L IPSCHITZ C ONSTRAINT UNDER THE T EMPORAL D ISTANCE M ETRIC

Theorem C.3. The following two conditions are equivalent:

      (a) ∥ϕ(u) − ϕ(v)∥2 ≤ dtemp (u, v) for all u, v ∈ S.
      (b) ∥ϕ(s) − ϕ(s′ )∥2 ≤ 1 for all (s, s′ ) ∈ Sadj .

Proof. We first show (a) implies (b). Assume (a) holds. Consider (s, s′ ) ∈ Sadj . If s ̸= s′ , by (a),
we have ∥ϕ(s) − ϕ(s′ )∥2 ≤ dtemp (s, s′ ) = 1. Otherwise, i.e., s = s′ , ∥ϕ(s) − ϕ(s′ )∥2 = 0 ≤ 1.
Hence, (a) implies (b).
Next, we show (b) implies (a). Assume (b) holds. Consider u, v ∈ S. If dtemp (u, v) = ∞ (i.e., v is
not reachable from u), (a) holds trivially. Otherwise, let k be dtemp (u, v). By definition, there exists
(s0 = u, s1 , . . . , sk−1 , sk = v) such that (si , si+1 ) ∈ Sadj for all 0 ≤ i ≤ k − 1. Due to the triangle
                                                          Pk−1
inequality and (b), we have ∥ϕ(u) − ϕ(v)∥2 ≤                 i=0 ∥ϕ(si ) − ϕ(si+1 )∥2 ≤ k = dtemp (u, v).
Hence, (b) implies (a).

D     A C ONNECTION BETWEEN METRA AND PCA
In this section, we derive a theoretical connection between METRA and principal component anal-
ysis (PCA). Recall that the METRA objective can be written as follows:
                                "T −1                      #
                                  X
                   sup Ep(τ,z)        (ϕ(st+1 ) − ϕ(st )) z = Ep(τ,z) ϕ(sT )⊤ z
                                                         ⊤

                                                                                           (13)
                        π,ϕ             t=0
                              s.t. ∥ϕ(u) − ϕ(v)∥2 ≤ dtemp (u, v), ∀u, v ∈ S,                                      (14)
where dtemp denotes the temporal distance between two states. To make a formal connection be-
tween METRA and PCA, we consider the following squared variant of the METRA objective in this
section.
          sup Ep(τ,z) (ϕ(sT )⊤ z)2 s.t. ∥ϕ(u) − ϕ(v)∥2 ≤ dtemp (u, v), ∀u, v ∈ S,

                                                                                         (15)
            π,ϕ

which is almost the same as Equation (13) but the objective is now squared. The reason we consider
this variant is simply for mathematical convenience.
Next, we introduce the notion of a temporally consistent embedding.
Definition D.1 (Temporally consistent embedding). We call that an MDP M admits a temporally
consistent embedding if there exists ψ(s) : S → Rm such that
                                 dtemp (u, v) = ∥ψ(u) − ψ(v)∥2 , ∀u, v ∈ S.                                       (16)


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Intuitively, this states that the temporal distance metric can be embedded into a (potentially very
high-dimensional) Euclidean space. We note that ψ is different from ϕ in Equation (13), and Rm
can be much higher-dimensional than Z. An example of an MDP that admits a temporally consistent
embedding is the PointMass environment: if an agent in Rn can move in any direction up to a unit
speed, ψ(x) = x satisfies dtemp (u, v) = ∥u − v∥2 for all u, v ∈ Rn (with a slightly generalized
notion of temporal distances in continuous time) and thus the MDP admits the temporally consistent
embedding of ψ. A pixel-based PointMass environment is another example of such an MDP.
Now, we formally derive a connection between squared METRA and PCA. For simplicity, we as-
sume Z = Rd and p(z) = N (0, Id ), where N (0, Id ) denotes the d-dimensional isotropic Gaussian
distribution. We also assume that M has a deterministic initial distribution and transition dynamics
function, and every state is reachable from the initial state within T steps. We denote the set of n × n
positive definite matrices as Sn++ , the operator norm of a matrix A as ∥A∥op , and the m-dimensional
unit ℓ2 ball as Bm .
Theorem D.2 (Linear squared METRA is PCA in the temporal embedding space). Let M be an
MDP that admits a temporally consistent embedding ψ : S → Rm . If ϕ : S → Z is a linear
mapping from the embedding space, i.e., ϕ(s) = W ⊤ ψ(s) with W ∈ Rm×d , and the embedding
space Ψ = {ψ(s) : s ∈ S} forms an ellipse, i.e., ∃A ∈ Sm      ++ s.t. Ψ = {x ∈ R
                                                                                   m
                                                                                      : x⊤ A−1 x ≤ 1},
then W = [a1 a2 · · · ad ] maximizes the squared METRA objective in Equation (15), where a1 , . . . ,
ad are the top-d eigenvectors of A.

Proof. Since M admits a temporally consistent embedding, we have
                               ∥ϕ(u) − ϕ(v)∥2 ≤ dtemp (u, v) ∀u, v ∈ S                               (17)
                                     ⊤
                         ⇐⇒ ∥W (ψ(u) − ψ(v))∥2 ≤ ∥ψ(u) − ψ(v)∥2 ∀u, v ∈ S                            (18)
                                     ⊤
                         ⇐⇒ ∥W (u − v)∥2 ≤ ∥u − v∥2 ∀u, v ∈ Ψ                                        (19)
                         ⇐⇒ ∥W ∥op ≤ 1,                                                              (20)
where we use the fact that ψ is a surjection from S to Ψ and that A is positive definite. Now, we
have
     =      sup        Ep(τ,z) [(ϕ(sT )⊤ z)2 ]                                                       (21)
         π,∥W ∥op ≤1

     =      sup        Ep(τ,z) [(ψ(sT )⊤ W z)2 ]                                                     (22)
         π,∥W ∥op ≤1

     =           sup          Ep(z) [(f (z)⊤ W z)2 ]   (∵ Every state is reachable within T steps)   (23)
         f :Rd →Ψ,∥W ∥op ≤1
                                            √                          √
     =           sup           Ep(z) [(g(z)⊤ AW z)2 ]        (g(z) =       A−1 f (z))                (24)
         g:Rd →Bm ,∥W ∥op ≤1
                                       √
     =     sup       Ep(z) [ sup (g(z)⊤ AW z)2 ]                                                     (25)
         ∥W ∥op ≤1         g:Rd →Bm
                                    √
     =     sup       Ep(z) [ sup (u⊤ AW z)2 ]                                                        (26)
         ∥W ∥op ≤1         ∥u∥2 ≤1
                             √
     =     sup       Ep(z) [∥ AW z∥22 ]     (∵ Dual norm)                                            (27)
         ∥W ∥op ≤1

     =     sup       Ep(z) [z ⊤ W ⊤ AW z]                                                            (28)
         ∥W ∥op ≤1

     =     sup       Ep(z) [tr(zz ⊤ W ⊤ AW )]                                                        (29)
         ∥W ∥op ≤1

     =     sup       tr(Ep(z) [zz ⊤ ]W ⊤ AW )                                                        (30)
         ∥W ∥op ≤1

     =     sup       tr(W W ⊤ A).                                                                    (31)
         ∥W ∥op ≤1

Since W W ⊤ is a positive semidefinite matrix with rank at most d and ∥W ∥op ≤ 1, there exists d
eigenvalues 0 ≤ λ1 , . . . , λd ≤ 1 and the corresponding orthonormal eigenvectors v1 , . . . , vd such
              Pd                                        Pd
that W W ⊤ = k=1 λk vk vk⊤ . Hence, tr(W W ⊤ A) = k=1 λk vk⊤ Avk , and to maximize this, we


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


must set λ1 = · · · = λd = 1 as A is positive definite. The remaining problem is to find d orthonor-
                                         Pd
mal vectors v1 , . . . , vd that maximize k=1 vk⊤ Avk . By the Ky Fan’s maximum principle (Bhatia,
2013), its solution is given as the d eigenvectors corresponding to the d largest eigenvalues of A.
Therefore, W = [a1 a2 · · · ad ], where a1 , . . . , ad are the top-d principal components of A, maxi-
mizes the squared METRA objective in Equation (15).

Theorem D.2 states that linear squared METRA is equivalent to PCA in the temporal embedding
space. In practice, however, ϕ can be nonlinear, the shape of Ψ can be arbitrary, and the MDP may
not admit any temporally consistent embeddings. Nonetheless, this theoretical connection hints at
the intuition that the METRA objective encourages the agent to span the largest “temporal” mani-
folds in the state space, given the limited capacity of Z.

E     C ONNECTIONS BETWEEN WDM AND DIAYN, DADS, AND CIC
In this section, we describe connections between our WDM objectives (either IW (S; Z) or
IW (ST ; Z)) and previous mutual information skill learning methods, DIAYN (Eysenbach et al.,
2019a), DADS (Sharma et al., 2020), and CIC (Laskin et al., 2022). Recall that the IW (S; Z)
objective (Equation (4)) maximizes
                  T
                  X −1
                        Ep(τ,z) [ϕL (st )⊤ ψL (z)] − Ep(τ ) [ϕL (st )]⊤ Ep(z) [ψL (z)] ,

                                                                                         (32)
                    t=0
and the IW (ST ; Z) objective (Equation (6)) maximizes
  T
  X −1
        Ep(τ,z) [(ϕL (st+1 ) − ϕL (st ))⊤ ψL (z)] − Ep(τ ) [ϕL (st+1 ) − ϕL (st )]⊤ Ep(z) [ψL (z)] ,

                                                                                                       (33)
    t=0
where we use the notations ϕL and ψL to denote that they are Lipschitz constrained. By simplifying
Equation (32) or Equation (33) in three different ways, we will show that we can obtain “Wasser-
stein counterparts” of DIAYN, DADS, and CIC. For simplicity, we assume p(z) = N (0, I), where
N (0, I) denotes the standard Gaussian distribution.

E.1       DIAYN

If we set ψL (z) = z in Equation (32), we get
                                          rt = ϕL (st )⊤ z.                                            (34)
This is analogous to DIAYN (Eysenbach et al., 2019a), which maximizes
                            I(S; Z) = −H(Z|S) + H(Z)                                                   (35)
                                               "T −1              #
                                                X
                                     ≳ Ep(τ,z)        log q(z|st )                                     (36)
                                                    t=0
                                                   "T −1                 #
                                                    X
                                       ≃ Ep(τ,z)           −∥z − ϕ(st )∥22 ,                           (37)
                                                    t=0
                               rtDIAYN = −∥ϕ(st ) − z∥22 ,                                      (38)
where ‘≳’ and ‘≃’ respectively denote ‘>’ and ‘=’ up to constant scaling or shifting, and we assume
that the variational distribution q(z|s) is modeled as N (ϕ(s), I). By comparing Equation (34) and
Equation (38), we can see that Equation (34) can be viewed as a Lipschitz, inner-product variant of
DIAYN. This analogy will become clearer later.

E.2       DADS

If we set ϕL (s) = s in Equation (33), we get
                       rt = (st+1 − st )⊤ ψL (z) − (st+1 − st )⊤ Ep(z) [ψL (z)]                        (39)
                                                           L
                                                      1X
                          ≈ (st+1 − st )⊤ ψL (z) −          (st+1 − st )⊤ ψL (zi ),                    (40)
                                                      L i=1


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we use L independent samples from N (0, I), z1 , z2 , . . . , zL , to approximate the expectation.
This is analogous to DADS (Sharma et al., 2020), which maximizes:
          I(S ′ ; Z|S) = −H(S ′ |S, Z) + H(S ′ |S)                                                  (41)
                                 "T −1                                        #
                                  X
                       ≳ Ep(τ,z)       log q(st+1 |st , z) − log p(st+1 |st )                       (42)
                                   t=0
                                  "T −1                             L
                                                                                              !#
                                   X                            1X
                      ≈ Ep(τ,z)           log q(st+1 |st , z) −       log q(st+1 |st , zi )        ,   (43)
                                   t=0
                                                                L i=1
                                                               L
                                                       1       X
              rtDADS = −∥(st+1 − st ) − ψ(st , z)∥22 +              ∥(st+1 − st ) − ψ(st , z)∥22 ,     (44)
                                                            L i=1
where we assume that the variational distribution q(s′ |s, z) is modeled as q(s′ − s|s, z) =
N (ψ(s, z), I), as in the original implementation (Sharma et al., 2020). We also use the same sample-
based approximation as Equation (40). Note that the same analogy also holds between Equation (40)
and Equation (44) (i.e., Equation (40) is a Lipschitz, inner-product variant of DADS).

E.3   CIC

If we do not simplify ϕL or ψL in Equation (32), we get
                           rt = ϕL (st )⊤ ψL (z) − ϕL (st )⊤ Ep(z) [ψL (z)]                            (45)
                                                         L
                                                     1   X
                              ≈ ϕL (st )⊤ ψL (z) −         ϕL (st )⊤ ψL (zi ),                         (46)
                                                     L i=1
where we use the same sample-based approximation as Equation (40). By Jensen’s inequality, Equa-
tion (46) can be lower-bounded by
                                                    L
                                                 1X
                        ϕL (st )⊤ ψL (z) − log         exp ϕL (st )⊤ ψL (zi ) ,

                                                                                                       (47)
                                                 L i=1
as in WPC (Ozair et al., 2019). This is analogous to CIC (Laskin et al., 2022), which estimates the
MI via noise contrastive estimation (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; van den Oord et al., 2018; Poole
et al., 2019):
                               "T −1                        L
                                                                                    !#
                                X
                                            ⊤            1X                ⊤
             I(S; Z) ≳ Ep(τ,z)

                                      ϕ(st ) ψ(z) − log       exp ϕ(st ) ψ(zi )        ,       (48)
                                t=0
                                                        L i=1
                                               L
                                            1X
               rtCIC = ϕ(st )⊤ ψ(z) − log         exp ϕ(st )⊤ ψ(zi ) .

                                                                                                       (49)
                                            L i=1
Note that Equation (47) can be viewed as a Lipschitz variant of CIC (Equation (49)).
In this work, we use the ψL (z) = z simplification with Equation (33) (i.e., Equation (7)), as we
found this variant to work well while being simple, but we believe exploring these other variants is
an interesting future research direction. In particular, given that Equation (47) resembles the standard
contrastive learning formulation, combining this (more general) objective with existing contrastive
learning techniques may lead to another highly scalable unsupervised RL method, which we leave
for future work.

F     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
F.1   F ULL QUALITATIVE RESULTS

Figure 11 shows the complete qualitative results of behaviors discovered by METRA on state-based
Ant and HalfCheetah, and pixel-based Quadruped and Humanoid (8 seeds for each environment).
We use 2-D skills for Ant and Humanoid, 4-D skills for Quadruped, and 16 discrete skills for
HalfCheetah. The full qualitative results suggest that METRA discovers diverse locomotion be-
haviors regardless of the random seed.


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Ant
       (States)


  HalfCheetah
   (States)


   Quadruped
    (Pixels)


      Humanoid
       (Pixels)


Figure 11: Full qualitative results of METRA (8 seeds). METRA learns diverse locomotion behaviors
regardless of the random seed.

                       S = R29            Z = R2                           S = R64×64×3           Z = R2

         Ant                                                   Humanoid
       (States)                                                 (Pixels)

                   x-y trajectories   φ(s) trajectories                    x-y trajectories   φ(s) trajectories


Figure 12: Latent space visualization. METRA learns to capture x-y coordinates in two-dimensional latent
spaces in both state-based Ant and pixel-based Humanoid, as they are the most temporally spread-out dimen-
sions in the state space. We note that, with a higher-dimensional latent space (especially when Z is discrete),
METRA not only learns locomotion skills but also captures more diverse behaviors, as shown in the Cheetah
and Kitchen videos on our project page.


F.2    L ATENT SPACE VISUALIZATION

METRA simultaneously learns both the skill policy π(a|s, z) and the representation function ϕ(s),
to find the most “temporally spread-out” manifold in the state space. We train METRA on state-
based Ant and pixel-based Humanoid with 2-D continuous latent spaces Z, and visualize the learned
latent space by plotting ϕ(s) trajectories in Figure 12. Since the x-y plane corresponds to the most
temporally “important” manifold in both environments, METRA learns to capture the x-y coordi-
nates in two-dimensional ϕ, regardless of the input representations (note that Humanoid is pixel-
based). We also note that, with a higher-dimensional latent space (especially when Z is discrete),
METRA not only learns locomotion skills but also captures more diverse, non-linear behaviors, as
shown in the Cheetah and Kitchen videos on our project page.

F.3    A BLATION S TUDY OF L ATENT S PACE S IZES

To demonstrate how the size of the latent space Z affects skill learning, we train METRA with 1-
D, 2-D, and 4-D continuous skills and 2, 4, 8, 16, and 24 discrete skills on Ant and HalfCheetah.
Figure 13 compares skills learned with different latent space sizes, which suggests that the diversity
of skill generally increases as the capacity of Z grows.

F.4    A DDITIONAL BASELINES

In the main paper, we compare METRA with 11 previous unsupervised exploration and unsuper-
vised skill discovery methods. In this section, we additionally compare METRA with DGPO (Chen
et al., 2024), a method that aims to find diverse behaviors that maximize a task reward (Kumar
et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2022; Zahavy et al., 2023a;b; Chen et al., 2024). Since we consider a con-
trolled Markov process without external rewards, we use only the intrinsic reward part of DGPO for


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Z = R1       Z = R2        Z = R4         Z = {1, 2}   Z = {1, 2, 3, 4} Z = {1, . . . , 8} Z = {1, . . . , 16} Z = {1, . . . , 24}


        Ant
      (States)


    HalfCheetah
     (States)


Figure 13: Skills learned with different latent space sizes. Since METRA maximizes state coverage under
the capacity of the latent space Z, skills become more diverse as the capacity of Z grows.

Table 1: Comparison with DGPO. We compare METRA with an additional baseline for discrete skill learn-
ing, DGPO (Chen et al., 2024). METRA exhibits the best state coverage in both Ant and HalfCheetah. We use
4 random seeds and ‘±’ denotes standard deviations.

      Environment (Metric)                                      DIAYN                    DGPO                 METRA (ours)
      HalfCheetah (policy state coverage)              6.75 ± 2.22               6.75 ± 2.06                  186.75 ± 16.21
      HalfCheetah (total state coverage)              19.50 ± 3.87              22.25 ± 5.85                  177.75 ± 17.10
      Ant (policy state coverage)                     11.25 ± 5.44               7.00 ± 3.83                 1387.75 ± 77.38
      Ant (total state coverage)                    107.75 ± 17.00             121.50 ± 4.36                6313.25 ± 747.92

comparison:
                                                                      q(z|st+1 )
                               rtDGPO = ′ min′            log                              ,                                                    (50)
                                            z ∈Z,z ̸=z          q(z|st+1 ) + q(z ′ |st+1 )
where q is a skill discriminator (Eysenbach et al., 2019a) and DGPO assumes that Z is a discrete
space. Intuitively, this objective encourages each behavior to be maximally different from the most
similar other behavior.
Table 1 presents the comparison results on HalfCheetah and Ant, where we train DIAYN, DGPO,
and METRA with 16 discrete skills for 10000 epochs (16M steps). Even though DGPO maximizes
“worst-case” diversity (Equation (50)), it still maximizes a metric-agnostic KL divergence between
different skills (Chen et al., 2024), which leads to limited state coverage, as in DIAYN. In contrast,
METRA maximizes a metric-aware Wasserstein distance and thus shows significantly better state
coverage.

G     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
We implement METRA on top of the publicly available LSD codebase (Park et al., 2022). Our
implementation is available at https://github.com/seohongpark/METRA. For unsuper-
vised skill discovery methods, we implement LSD (Park et al., 2022), CIC (Laskin et al., 2022), DI-
AYN (Eysenbach et al., 2019a), and DADS (Sharma et al., 2020) on the same codebase as METRA.
For six exploration methods, ICM (Pathak et al., 2017), LBS (Mazzaglia et al., 2022), RND (Burda
et al., 2019), APT (Liu & Abbeel, 2021b), APS (Liu & Abbeel, 2021a), and Plan2Explore (Sekar
et al., 2020) (or Disagremeent (Pathak et al., 2019)), we use the original implementations by Laskin
et al. (2021) for state-based environments and the Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2020) variants by Rajeswar
et al. (2023) for pixel-based environments. For LEXA (Mendonca et al., 2021) in Section 5.3, we
use the original implementation by Mendonca et al. (2021). We run our experiments on an internal
cluster consisting of A5000 GPUs. Each run in Section 5.3 takes no more than 24 hours.

G.1    E NVIRONMENTS

Benchmark environments. For state-based environments, we use the same MuJoCo HalfCheetah
and Ant environments (Todorov et al., 2012; Brockman et al., 2016) as previous work (Sharma
et al., 2020; Park et al., 2022; 2023b). HalfCheetah has an 18-dimensional state space and Ant
has a 29-dimensional state space. For pixel-based environments, we use pixel-based Quadruped
and Humanoid from the DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018) and a pixel-based version of


                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kitchen by Gupta et al. (2019); Mendonca et al. (2021). In DMC locomotion environments, we
use gradient-colored floors to allow the agent to infer its location from pixels, similarly to Hafner
et al. (2022); Park et al. (2023a). In Kitchen, we use the same camera setting as LEXA (Mendonca
et al., 2021). Pixel-based environments have an observation space of 64 × 64 × 3, and we do not
use any proprioceptive state information. The episode length is 200 for Ant and HalfCheetah, 400
for Quadruped and Humanoid, and 50 for Kitchen. We use an action repeat of 2 for pixel-based
Quadruped and Humanoid, following Mendonca et al. (2021). In our experiments, we do not use
any prior knowledge or supervision, such as the x-y prior (Eysenbach et al., 2019a; Sharma et al.,
2020), or early termination (Park et al., 2022).
Metrics. For the state coverage metric in locomotion environments, we count the number of 1 × 1-
sized x-y bins (Ant, Quadruped, and Humanoid) or 1-sized x bins (HalfCheetah) that are occupied
by any of the target trajectories. In Kitchen, we count the number of pre-defined tasks achieved by
any of the target trajectories, where we use the same six pre-defined tasks as Mendonca et al. (2021):
Kettle (K), Microwave (M), Light Switch (LS), Hinge Cabinet (HC), Slide Cabinet (SC), and Bottom
Burner (BB). Each of the three types of coverage metrics, policy state coverage (Figures 5 and 7),
queue state coverage (Figure 7), and total state coverage (Figure 7), uses different target trajectories.
Policy state coverage, which is mainly for skill discovery methods, is computed by 48 deterministic
trajectories with 48 randomly sample skills at the current epoch. Queue state coverage is computed
by the most recent 100000 training trajectories up to the current epoch. Total state coverage is
computed by the entire training trajectories up to the current epoch.
Downstream tasks. For quantitative comparison of skill discovery methods (Figure 6), we use
five downstream tasks, AntMultiGoals, HalfCheetahGoal, HalfCheetahHurdle, QuadrupedGoal,
and HumanoidGoal, mostly following the prior work (Park et al., 2022). In HalfCheetahGoal,
QuadrupedGoal, and HumanoidGoal, the task is to reach a target goal (within a radius of 3) ran-
domly sampled from [−100, 100], [−7.5, 7.5]2 , and [−5, 5]2 , respectively. The agent receives a re-
ward of 10 when it reaches the goal. In AntMultiGoals, the task is to reach four target goals (within
a radius of 3), where each goal is randomly sampled from [sx − 7.5, sx + 7.5] × [sy − 7.5, sy + 7.5],
where (sx , sy ) is the agent’s current x-y position. The agent receives a reward of 2.5 whenever it
reaches the goal. A new goal is sampled when the agent either reaches the previous goal or fails
to reach it within 50 steps. In HalfCheetahHurdle (Qureshi et al., 2020), the task is to jump over
multiple hurdles. The agent receives a reward of 1 whenever it jumps over a hurdle. The episode
length is 200 for state-based environments and 400 for pixel-based environments.
For quantitative comparison with LEXA (Figure 8), we use five goal-conditioned tasks. In locomo-
tion environments, goals are randomly sampled from [−100, 100] (HalfCheetah), [−50, 50]2 (Ant),
[−15, 15]2 (Quadruped), or [−10, 10]2 (Humanoid). We provide the full state as a goal g, whose
dimensionality is 18 for HalfCheetah, 29 for Ant, and 64 × 64 × 3 for pixel-based Quadruped and
Humanoid. In Kitchen, we use the same six (single-task) goal images and tasks as Mendonca et al.
(2021). We measure the distance between the goal and the final state in locomotion environments
and the number of successful tasks in Kitchen.


G.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Unsupervised skill discovery methods. For skill discovery methods, we use 2-D continuous skills
for Ant and Humanoid, 4-D continuous skills for Quadruped, 16 discrete skills for HalfCheetah,
and 24 discrete skills for Kitchen, where continuous skills are sampled from the standard Gaussian
distribution, and discrete skills are uniformly sampled from the set of zero-centered one-hot vec-
tors (Park et al., 2022). METRA and LSD use normalized vectors (i.e., z/∥z∥2 ) for continuous
skills, as their objectives are invariant to the magnitude of z. For CIC, we use 64-D continuous skills
for all environments, following the original suggestion (Laskin et al., 2022), and we found that using
64-D skills for CIC leads to better state coverage than using 2-D or 4-D skills. We present the full
list of hyperparameters used for skill discovery methods in Table 2.
Unsupervised exploration methods. For unsupervised exploration methods and LEXA, we use the
original implementations and hyperparameters (Laskin et al., 2021; Mendonca et al., 2021; Rajeswar
et al., 2023). For LEXA’s goal-conditioned policy (achiever), we test both the temporal distance and
cosine distance variants and use the former as it leads to better performance.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Table 2: Hyperparameters for unsupervised skill discovery methods.

       Hyperparameter                                                 Value
       Learning rate                                                0.0001
       Optimizer                                         Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
       # episodes per epoch                                             8
                                                         200 (Quadruped, Humanoid),
       # gradient steps per epoch
                                                     100 (Kitchen), 50 (Ant, HalfCheetah)
       Minibatch size                                                 256
       Discount factor γ                                              0.99
                                                    106 (Ant, HalfCheetah), 105 (Kitchen),
       Replay buffer size
                                                       3 × 105 (Quadruped, Humanoid)
       Encoder                                             CNN (LeCun et al., 1989)
       # hidden layers                                                  2
       # hidden units per layer                                      1024
       Target network smoothing coefficient                          0.995
                                                                0.01 (Kitchen),
       Entropy coefficient
                                                  auto-adjust (Haarnoja et al., 2018b) (others)
       METRA ε                                                       10−3
       METRA initial λ                                                 30


                      Table 3: Hyperparameters for PPO high-level controllers.

                               Hyperparameter                      Value
                               # episodes per epoch                  64
                               # gradient steps per episode          10
                               Minibatch size                       256
                               Entropy coefficient                  0.01
                               GAE λ (Schulman et al., 2016)        0.95
                               PPO clip threshold ϵ                 0.2



High-level controllers for downstream tasks. In Figure 6, we evaluate learned skills on down-
stream tasks by training a high-level controller π h (z|s, stask ) that selects a skill every K = 25 (Ant
and HalfCheetah) or K = 50 (Quadruped and Humanoid) environment steps, where stask denotes
the task-specific information: the goal position (‘-Goal’ or ‘-MultiGoals’ tasks) or the next hurdle
position and distance (HalfCheetahHurdle). At every K steps, the high-level policy selects a skill
z, and then the pre-trained low-level skill policy π(a|s, z) executes the same z for K steps. We
train high-level controllers with PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) for discrete skills and SAC (Haarnoja
et al., 2018a) for continuous skills. For SAC, we use the same hyperparameters as unsupervised
skill discovery methods (Table 2), and we present the full list of PPO-specific hyperparameters in
Table 3.
Zero-shot goal-conditioned RL. In Figure 8, we evaluate the zero-shot performances of METRA,
LSD, DIAYN, and LEXA on goal-conditioned downstream tasks. METRA and LSD use the proce-
dure described in Section 4.2 to select skills. We re-compute z every step for locomotion environ-
ments, but in Kitchen, we use the same z selected at the first step throughout the episode, as we find
that this leads to better performance. DIAYN chooses z based on the output of the skill discriminator
at the goal state (i.e., q(z|g), where q denotes the skill discriminator of DIAYN). LEXA uses the
goal-conditioned policy (achiever), π(a|s, g).


                                                   25
