Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NTERNAL -C OORDINATE D ENSITY M ODELLING OF
P ROTEIN S TRUCTURE : C OVARIANCE M ATTERS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         After the recent ground-breaking advances in protein structure prediction, one
         of the remaining challenges in protein machine learning is to reliably predict
         distributions of structural states. Parametric models of fluctuations are difficult to
         fit due to complex covariance structures between degrees of freedom in the protein
         chain, often causing models to either violate local or global structural constraints.
         In this paper, we present a new strategy for modelling protein densities in internal
         coordinates, which uses constraints in 3D space to induce covariance structure
         between the internal degrees of freedom. We illustrate the potential of the procedure
         by constructing a variational autoencoder with full covariance output induced by
         the constraints implied by the conditional mean in 3D, and demonstrate that our
         approach makes it possible to scale density models of internal coordinates to full
         protein backbones in two settings: 1) a unimodal setting for proteins exhibiting
         small fluctuations and limited amounts of available data, and 2) a multimodal
         setting for larger conformational changes in a high data regime.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Proteins are macro-molecules that are involved in nearly all cellular processes. Most proteins adopt a
compact 3D structure, also referred to as the native state. This structure is a rich source of knowledge
about the protein, since it provides information about how the protein can engage biochemically
with other proteins to conduct its function. The machine learning community has made spectacular
progress in recent years on the prediction of the native state from the amino acid sequence of a
protein (Jumper et al., 2021; Senior et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2022b; Baek et al., 2021; Wu et al.,
2022a). However, the static picture of the structure of a protein is misleading: in reality a protein
is continuously moving, experiencing both thermal fluctuations and larger conformational changes,
both of which affect its function. One of the remaining challenges in machine learning for structural
biology is to reliably predict these distributions of states, rather than just the most probable state. We
discuss the state of the density modelling field in Section 5 (Related work).
Modelling the probability density of protein structure is non-trivial, due to the strong constraints
imposed by the molecular topology. The specific challenges depend on the chosen structural repre-
sentation: if a structure is represented by the 3D coordinates of all its atoms, these atom positions
cannot be sampled independently without violating the physical constraints of e.g. the bond lengths
separating the atoms. In addition, an arbitrary decision must be made about how the structure is
placed in a global coordinate system, which implies that operations done on this representation should
preferably be invariant or equivariant to this choice. An alternative is to parameterize the structure
using internal coordinates, i.e. in terms of bond lengths, bond angles and dihedrals (rotations around
the bonds). The advantage of this representation is that internal degrees of freedom can be sampled
independently without violating the local bond constraints of the molecule. It also makes it possible
to reduce the number of degrees of freedom to be sampled – for instance fixing the bond lengths to
ideal values, since they fluctuate much less than the torsion angles and bond angles.
For the reasons given above, an internal coordinate representation would appear to be an attractive
choice for density modelling. However, one important problem reduces the appeal: small fluctuations
in internal coordinates will propagate down the chain, leading to large fluctuations remotely down-
stream in the protein. As a consequence, internal-coordinate density modelling necessitates careful
modelling of the covariance structure between the degrees of freedom in order to ensure that small


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


fluctuations in internal coordinates result in small perturbations of the 3D coordinates of the protein.
Such covariance structures are typically highly complex, making direct estimation difficult.
In this paper, we investigate whether density
                                                                        𝜿𝟏 𝜿𝟐                     Constraints
modelling of full-size protein backbones in in-
ternal coordinates is feasible. We empirically                                         𝑥%
                                                                                            𝑥#
demonstrate the difficulty in estimating the co-                                             𝑥$
variance structure of internal coordinates from
data, and instead propose a technique for induc-                                                5𝜿 )
                                                                                        𝒩( 𝝁𝜿 , 𝚺
ing the covariance structure by imposing con-                                                             𝜿
straints on downstream atom movement using                              Model
the Lagrange formalism. Rather than estimat-
ing the covariance structure from scratch, we       Figure 1: A protein structure ensemble is modelled
can instead modulate the covariance structure       in internal coordinate space, while imposing con-
by choosing appropriate values for allowed fluc-    straints on atom fluctuations in Euclidean space.
tuations of downstream atoms. We demonstrate        The resulting full covariance structure can be used
the procedure in the context of a variational au-   to sample from a multivariate normal distribution.
toencoder (Fig. 1).
Given a prior on the internal coordinate fluctuations and a predicted mean, we impose constraints on
the atom fluctuations in 3D space to obtain a full covariance structure over the internal coordinates. We
show that this allows us to generate valid structures in terms of both internal and Cartesian coordinates.
Our method is validated in two regimes: a low data regime for proteins that exhibit small, unimodal
fluctuations, and a high data regime for proteins that exhibit multimodal behavior. We anticipate that
this method could serve as a building block applicable more generally for internal-coordinate density
estimation, for instance internal-coordinate denoising diffusion models.

Our main contributions are:

       • We formulate a procedure for inducing full protein backbone covariance structure in internal
         coordinates, based on constraints on atom fluctuations in 3D space.
       • Rather than predicting a full covariance matrix over internal coordinates, our proposed
         method only requires to predict one Lagrange multiplier for each atom, from which the full
         covariance matrix can be constructed. For M atoms, this corresponds to a reduction from
         (2 × M − 5)2 to simply M predicted values.
       • We design a variational autoencoder which models fluctuations for full-length protein
         backbones in internal coordinates. Even though constraints are formulated in Euclidean
         space, the model is not dependent on a global reference frame (i.e. it is rotationally invariant).
       • We demonstrate that our model provides meaningful density estimates on ensemble data for
         proteins obtained from experiment and simulation.

Scope. The focus of this paper will be on modelling distributions of protein structure states in
internal coordinates. We are thus concerned with thermodynamic ensembles, rather than the detailed
dynamics that a molecule undergoes. Dynamics could potentially be modelled on top of our approach,
for instance by fitting a discrete Markov model to describe transitions between states, and using our
approach to model the thermal fluctuations within a state, but this is beyond the scope of the current
work. Another perspective on our approach is that we wish to describe the aleatoric uncertainty
associated with a static structure.

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   C ARTESIAN VS INTERNAL COORDINATES

As stated before, Cartesian coordinates and internal coordinates each have advantages and disadvan-
tages. Assume we have a 3D protein structure in Euclidean space with atom positions x. Throughout
this paper, we only consider backbone atoms N, Cα and C, which means that the total number of
atoms M = 3 × L, with L the number of amino acids. The Euclidean setting thus results in 3 × M
coordinates. Even though in this setting each of the atoms can fluctuate without affecting other atoms
in the backbone chain, there is no guarantee for chemical integrity, i.e. conservation of bond lengths


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and respecting van der Waals forces. This can lead to backbone crossings and generally unphysical
protein structures.
One way to ensure chemical integrity is to parameterize protein structure in internal coordinate space
using dihedrals κ1 , bond angles κ2 and bond lengths κ3 . Here, dihedrals are torsional angles that
twist the protein around the bond between two consecutive atoms, bond angles are angles within
the plane that is formed by two consecutive bonds, and bond lengths are the distances between two
consecutive backbone atoms. Since bond length distributions have very little variance, we choose to
fix them, thereby reducing the number of variables over which we need to estimate the covariance.
We will refer to the remaining two internal coordinates together as κ to avoid notation clutter. As
dihedrals are defined by four points (the dihedral is the angle between the plane defined by the first
three points and the plane defined by the last three points) and bond angles are defined by three
points, the resulting protein structure representation will have (2 × M ) − 5 coordinates. Not only
does this result in less coordinates to determine a full covariance structure over, the coordinates are
also automatically rotation and translation invariant, as opposed to Cartesian coordinates.
The remaining problem is that small changes in one internal coordinate can have large consequences
for the global structure of the protein, since all atoms downstream of the internal coordinate will
move together, acting like a rigid body. It is therefore challenging to preserve global structure while
altering internal coordinates, since they are mostly descriptive of local structure.

2.2   S TANDARD PRECISION ESTIMATORS DO NOT CAPTURE GLOBAL FLUCTUATIONS

Because of the limitations of internal coordinates mentioned in Section 2.1, it is a highly non-trivial
task to capture a full covariance structure over κ which also conforms to constraints in Euclidean
space that are inherent to the protein. As an example, we use a standard estimator to get a precision
matrix (i.e. the inverse of the covariance matrix) over κ for a short molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation on “1pga”, also known as “protein G” ( Fig. 2). Details about the simulation can be found
in Appendix A. We see that when we take samples from a multivariate Gaussian over κ with the true
mean (based on the dataset) and the estimated precision, the samples exhibit atom fluctuations that
are much higher than the original simulation, and with a very different pattern.
To overcome the limitations that regular covariance and precision estimators have, we incorporate
constraints on atom fluctuations in Euclidean space.

                   𝜿𝟏 𝜿𝟐                           10000
                                  𝜿𝟐
                                                   5000


                                                   0


      20.0
                                  𝜿𝟏               −5000

                      standard
                      estimator
                          𝚺𝜿$𝟏         𝜿𝟏   𝜿𝟐


Figure 2: When a standard estimator is used to get the precision structure over internal coordinates,
resulting atom fluctuations significantly deviate from MD simulations. Blue arrows and red helices
represent secondary structural elements. The variance is calculated as the mean of the variances over
the x, y and z axis, in Å2 .

3     I NTERNAL - COORDINATE DENSITY MODELLING WITH CONSTRAINTS

3.1   S ETUP

We parameterize a 3D protein structure in terms of internal coordinates (i.e. dihedrals and bond
angles, while bond lengths are kept fixed), which together will be referred to as κ. Our aim is to
obtain a multivariate Gaussian distribution over the deviations from the mean p(∆κ), centered at zero,
with a full precision structure. This target distribution is subject to constraints over atom fluctuations,
enforcing the preservation of global structure. We have a prior q(∆κ), which we will call the κ-prior,
over the internal coordinate distribution, where the mean is zero and the precision is a diagonal matrix
                                                                         −2
with the diagonal filled by the inverse variance over all κ values σκ,data     , estimated from our input


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


data. The strength of the κ-prior can be tuned using hyperparameter a. The κ-prior is defined as

                                           1           1    T −1
                              q(∆κ) =         exp − ∆κ Σκ,prior ∆κ ,                                  (1)
                                          Zq           2
                       √
where Zq = σκ,data 2πa is the normalization constant for the κ-prior distribution and Σ−1      κ,prior =
           −2
a · diag(σκ,data ). Our approach will be to construct a new distribution p which is as close as possible
to q, but which fulfills a constraint that prohibits the downstream 3D coordinates from fluctuating too
much. We thus wish to minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the objective distribution
and κ-prior:                                   Z
                                                             p(∆κ)
                                 DKL (p|q) = p(∆κ) ln              d∆κ,                               (2)
                                                             q(∆κ)
adding constraints on the expected value over squared atom displacements of each downstream atom:
                                      E∆κ∼p(∆κ) ∆x2m = Cm

                                                                                                     (3)
                     2
where E∆κ∼p(∆κ) ∆xm is the expected value for the squared displacement of atom m, and Cm is a
constant equivalent to the variance of the atom position σx2m assuming equal variance in all directions
(isotropic Gaussian). Since every ∆xm is a function of ∆κ with probability density function p(∆κ),
we can use the law of the unconscious statistician to reformulate the constraints as follows:
                                                 Z
                         E∆κ∼p(∆κ) ∆xm = ∆x2m p(∆κ)d∆κ = Cm
                                        2
                                                                                                     (4)


3.2   L AGRANGE FORMALISM TO INCORPORATE CONSTRAINTS

Employing Jaynes’ maximum entropy principle (Jaynes, 1957), we use the Lagrange formalism
to incorporate M of these constraints, with M the number of atoms, under the conditions that our
probability density p(∆κ) has zero mean and sums to one1 . This leads to Lagrangian
                           Z                              Z
                                        p(∆κ)
                 D̃(p, q) = p(∆κ) ln           d∆κ + λ0       p(∆κ)d∆κ − 1
                                        q(∆κ)
                              M
                              X        Z
                           +      λm       ∆x2m p(∆κ)d∆κ − Cm .                              (5)
                                 m=1

                                                              D̃(p,q)
Next, we take the functional derivative and set it to zero: ∂∂p(∆κ)   = 0, leading to the following
well-established result (Jaynes, 1957; Kesavan & Kapur, 1989)2 :
                                 M                                              M
                                                                                             !
          p(∆κ)                X
                                          2                 1                  X
                                                                                           2
  0 = ln          + 1 + λ0 +        λm ∆xm ⇒ p(∆κ) =           q(∆κ) exp −          λm ∆xm       (6)
          q(∆κ)                m=1
                                                           Zp                  m=1
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                            D̃(p,q)
with Zp = exp(−1 − λ0 ) the normalization constant of the target distribution. Note that ∂∂p(∆κ)  2 =
  1
p(∆κ) is positive, therefore we know our solution will indeed be a minimum.

3.3   F IRST ORDER APPROXIMATION FOR ATOM FLUCTUATIONS

In order to use Eq. (6) to satisfy the imposed constraints, we need to express ∆x2 in terms of ∆κ.
To first order, we can express the displacement vectors ∆xm of each atom as a regular small angle
approximation (first order Taylor expansion):
                                                    X ∂xm
                                          ∆xm ≈                 ∆κi                                        (7)
                                                      i
                                                          ∂κi

   1
     Even though throughout this derivation we have included the normalization constant for rigor, in practice
we work with unnormalized densities and normalize post hoc, since we
                                                                     recognize the final result to be Gaussian.
   2           ∂
                  ln y/q + λ0 (y − 1) + M               2                 y
                                                                                · y1 + λ0 + M                2
                                        P                                                    P
     Note that ∂y                          m=1 λ m  ∆x  m y −  C m  =  ln q
                                                                            + y                  m=1 λm ∆xm



                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where xm is the position of the mth atom, under the condition that the atom is post-rotational
(Bottaro et al., 2012), i.e., the location of atom m is downstream of the ith internal coordinate. From
Eq. (7) it follows that the squared distance can be approximated by
                                        !2
                       X ∂xm                    X   ∂xm         ∂xm

              2
          ∆xm ≈                    ∆κi       =            ∆κi ·      ∆κj = ∆κT Gm ∆κ ,               (8)
                         i
                              ∂κi                ij
                                                      ∂κi        ∂κj
           ∂xm ∂xm
where Gi,j
       m = ∂κi · ∂κj is a symmetric and positive-definite matrix.

Substituting Eq. (8) and our κ-prior expression from Eq. (1) into our target distribution from Eq. (6)
gives a new Gaussian distribution:

                        1          1    T

                                              −1         −1

              p(∆κ) ≈ exp − ∆κ Σκ,prior + Σκ,constr ∆κ = N (0, Σ̃κ ) ,
                        Z̃         2
                                                           PM
where Z̃ is the new normalization constant, Σ−1
                                              κ,constr = 2    m=1 λm Gm and the covariance matrix
                                                                −1
                                            −1         −1
of the new Gaussian distribution Σ̃κ = Σκ,prior + Σκ,constr        .

3.4   S ATISFYING THE CONSTRAINTS

The final step in the constrained optimization is to establish the values for the Lagrange multipliers.
A closed form solution for this is not readily available, but using the findings from Section 3.3, we
can now rewrite the constraints from Eq. (4) as
                         Cm = E∆κ∼N (0,Σ̃κ ) ∆κT Gm ∆κ = tr(Σ̃κ Gm )

                                                                                                   (9)
where the last simplification step comes from standard expectation calculus on a quadratic form
(∆κT Gm ∆κ), where ∆κ has zero mean (Eq. 378 in Petersen et al. (2008)). Although it is nontrivial
to express Lagrange multipliers λ in terms of atom fluctuations C, we thus see that it is possible to
evaluate C given a set of Lagrange multipliers λ. In the following, we will therefore construct our
models such that our networks predict λ, directly.

3.5   VAE PIPELINE

VAE model architecture. To demonstrate how our method works within a modelling context, we
use a variational autoencoder (VAE), as illustrated in Fig. 3. The VAE has a simple linear encoder
that takes internal coordinates κ (dihedrals and bond angles, bond lengths are kept fixed) as input
and maps to latent space z, where we have a standard Gaussian as a prior on the latent space, which
we call z-prior to avoid confusion with the κ-prior. The decoder outputs the mean over κ, which is
converted into Cartesian coordinates using pNeRF (AlQuraishi, 2018). This mean structure in 3D
coordinates is used for two purposes. First, using the structure we can evaluate the partial derivatives
of atom positions with respect to the individual κ as in Eq. (7). Second, the predicted mean over κ
is used to get a pairwise distance matrix d that serves as the input to a U-Net (Ronneberger et al.,
2015), from which we estimate values for the Lagrange multipliers for each constraint. This allows
the variational autoencoder, conditioned on the latent state z, to modulate the allowed fluctuations.
Implementation-wise, the U-net is concluded with an average pooling operation that for each row-
column combination computes one Lagrange multiplier λ. Together with our fixed-variance κ-prior
over κ and hyperparameter a determining the strength of this κ-prior, a new precision matrix is
formed according to Eq. (9). The model can generate new structures through simple ancestral
sampling: first generating z from the standard normal z-prior, and subsequently sampling from a
multivariate Gaussian distribution with the decoded mean and the constructed precision matrix. For
specific model settings see Appendix A.

Loss. We customarily optimize the evidence lower bound (ELBO) using the Gaussian likelihood
on the internal degrees of freedom as constructed above. This likelihood does not ensure that the
predicted Lagrange multipliers are within the range within which our first order approximation of
the fluctuations is valid. To ensure this, we add an auxiliary regularizing loss in the form of a mean
absolute error over λ−1 , which prevents the κ-prior from dominating. By tuning the weight waux on
the auxiliary loss, we can influence the strength of the constraints.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  𝒩(𝟎, 𝐈)
                            𝒛                   𝒛                              0      +𝟏
                                                                           0         𝚺𝜿,𝐩𝐫𝐢𝐨𝐫
                 MLP                                                       𝑎 ' 𝝈+𝟐
                                                                                𝜿,𝐝𝐚𝐭𝐚


                            𝜿                  𝝁𝜿                  𝝁𝒙                     +𝟏
                                                                                         𝚺𝜿,𝐜𝐨𝐧𝐬𝐭𝐫   )𝜿
                                                                                                     𝚺
                                                    pNeRF
                                𝜿𝟏 𝜿𝟐
                                                                   𝝁𝒅
                                                                            U-Net


                                                           atoms
                                                                                            𝝀
                                                                   atoms
                                        𝜿           )𝜿 )
                                            𝒩( 𝝁𝜿 , 𝚺


Figure 3: Model overview. The encoder (left) embeds internal coordinates into the latent space. The
decoder (right) predicts a mean, from which constraints are extracted to obtain a precision matrix.
Together with the κ-prior over the precision matrix based on the input data, a new precision matrix is
formed which can be used to sample from a multivariate Gaussian.

4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1   T EST CASES

Unimodal setting in low data regime. We consider three test proteins for small fluctuations in a
low data regime: 1unc, 1fsd, and 1pga. 1unc corresponds to the solution structure of the human villin
C-terminal headpiece subdomain. This protein contains 36 residues, corresponding to 108 backbone
(N, Cα and C) atoms. This solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) dataset is freely available
from the Protein Data Bank and contains 25 conformers. 1fsd, a beta beta alpha (BBA) motif, is
also a freely available NMR dataset containing 41 structures. This system has 28 residues with 84
backbone atoms. 1pga, corresponding to B1 immunoglobulin-binding domain protein G, is a 56
amino acid long protein with 168 backbone atoms. We have a short in-house molecular dynamics
(MD) simulation, which is 20ns long and structures were saved at a 50ps interval, resulting in 400
structures for this protein. See Appendix A for more details about the simulation.

Multimodal setting in high data regime. We also include two test cases for larger fluctuations
following a multimodal distribution in a high data regime. Both are known as “fast-folders” and the
MD datasets were obtained from Lindorff-Larsen et al. (2011). We refer the reader to this work for
detailed descriptions of the simulations. Chignolin (cln025) is a peptide with a hairpin structure,
containing 10 residues and thus 30 backbone atoms. The simulation is 106 µs long, saved at a 200 ps
interval, resulting in 534.743 data points. The second test case, 2f4k, is the chicken villin headpiece,
with 35 residues and 105 backbone atoms. The simulated trajectory is 125 µs and also saved every
200 ps, yielding 629.907 structures.

4.2   M ETRICS

For the unimodal setting, we choose two simple measures of local and global structure, respectively.
To evaluate local structure fluctuations, we show Ramachandran plots, a well-known visualization
tool in the context of protein structures, where ϕ and ψ dihedrals, which are the torsional angles
around the N − Cα and Cα − C bonds, are plotted against each other. As a global measure, we report
the variance over atom positions, averaged over three dimensions, across superposed (i.e. structurally
aligned) samples to evaluate global structure fluctuations.
For the multimodal setting, we report free energy landscapes, parameterized by the first two compo-
nents of time-lagged independent component analysis (TICA) (Molgedey & Schuster, 1994). Similar
to e.g. PCA, TICA fits a linear model to map a high-dimensional input to a lower-dimensional output,
but TICA also incorporates the time axis. The resulting components are ranked according to their
capacity to explain the slowest modes of motion. Taking the first two components corresponds to
selecting reaction coordinates that underlie the slowest protein conformational changes, which is
highly correlated with (un)folding behavior. We fit the TICA model on the time-ordered MD data, and
pass samples from the VAE and baselines through the fitted model to create free energy landscapes.


                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Baselines. Apart from comparing the generated samples from our model to reference distributions
from MD or NMR, we include four baselines. The first baseline, named “κ-prior (fixed)” is a VAE
trained to predict /muκ given a fixed covariance matrix that is equal to Σ−1 κ,prior . In other words, this
is the same as our full VAE setup, but omitting the imposed 3D constraints. The second baseline is
“κ-prior (learned)”, which corresponds to a more standard VAE-setting where the decoder directly
outputs a mean and a variance (i.e. a diagonal covariance matrix). The third baseline does not involve
a VAE, but samples structures from a multivariate Gaussian with a mean based on the dataset and a
precision matrix computed by a standard estimator. This is an emperical estimator for MD datasets,
and an Oracle Approximating Shrinkage (OAS) estimator (Chen et al., 2010) for NMR datasets,
since emperical estimators do not converge for such low amounts of samples. Finally, we include the
flow-based model from Köhler et al. (2023) as a fourth baseline, which, to the best of our knowledge,
is the current state of the art in density modelling for internal coordinate representations.

4.3      I NTERNAL - COORDINATE DENSITY MODELLING RESULTS

Unimodal setting in low data regime. The unimodal, low data regime test cases exhibit small
fluctuations around the native protein structure, where the largest fluctuations correspond to the loops
connecting different secondary structure elements. Fig. 4 demonstrates that 1unc, 1fsd and 1pga
structures sampled from the VAE conform to local and global constraints, with valid Ramachandran
distributions when compared to the reference as well as improved atom position variance along the
chain compared to the baselines (see quantitative results in Table A2). Even in the extremely low data
regime of 25 and 41 data points for 1unc and 1fsd, respectively (top two rows in Fig. 4), the VAE is
able to estimate a full covariance matrix that approximates the distribution better than the baselines,
especially in loop regions. This can lead to unphysical structures with backbone crossings, even
though the local structure is preserved. These effects can also be observed in the 3D visualization of
the sampled ensembles in Fig. A2.
                               Ramachandran plots
         1unc           Reference                 VAE
 108 backbone atoms
 25 data points (NMR)
                                                        Variance along the atom chain Å!


          1fsd
  84 backbone atoms
 41 data points (NMR)


         1pga
 168 backbone atoms
 400 data points (MD)


Figure 4: Modelling fluctuations in the unimodal setting for 1pga, 1fsd, and 1unc. Left: structure
visualization, with α-helices in red and β-sheets as blue arrows. Middle: Ramachandran plots for
the MD reference and VAE samples. Right: variance along the atom chain for VAE samples, MD
reference, and baselines. Secondary structure elements are indicated along the x-axis.

The third test case, 1pga (bottom row in Fig. 4), has a more complex structure with two β-strands
at the N-terminus forming a sheet together with two β-strands from the C-terminus. These global
constraints are not captured well by the baselines in this low data regime, resulting in very high
fluctuations in loop regions which violate the native structure (additional visualizations can be found
in Fig. A2). For our VAE, we see the benefits of imposing global constraints, resulting in much better
density estimation compared to the baselines. Moreover, we can control the interplay between local
and global constraints by adjusting the hyperparameters of our model, as exemplified in Appendix D.1.
However, the complexity of this protein prevents perfect density estimation in a low data regime.


                                                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Interestingly, we show in Appendix C.1 that the variance of the atom positions highly correlates to
the imposed constraints C calculated from a set of predicted Lagrange multipliers using Eq. (9).

Multimodal setting in high data regime. Here, we explore the use of our approach for modelling
more complex behavior in a high data regime. Fig. 5 shows the free energy landscape in terms of the
two first TICA components for cln025 and 2f4k. When comparing the VAE and the baselines to the
MD reference (see also quantitative results in Table A3), it is clear that the learned prior and standard
estimator do not capture all modes in the free energy landscape. The flow-based model performs best,
suggesting that in this multimodal setting with plenty of available data, our proof-of-concept VAE is
not as expressive as this state-of-the-art model. Moreover, the benefit of imposing 3D constraints
on top of the fixed κ-prior (see baseline) seems beneficial for cln025, but the effect is not as strong
for the α-helical 2f4k, where local constraints might dominate (a similar effect can be seen when
comparing the VAE to the fixed κ-prior baseline for 1unc in the unimodal setting). However, our
simple VAE setup is evidently able to model large conformational changes through its latent space,
demonstrating how our general-purpose method for modeling fluctuations using 3D constraints can
be incorporated into more expressive models to model complex behavior.
Similar to the unimodal case, there is a tradeoff between local and global constraints which we
can modulate using hyperparameters, as demonstrated in Appendix D.2. In addition, we show in
Appendix C.3 how distinct regions of the VAE latent space map to different clusters in the TICA free
energy landscape, and visualize the corresponding structures.

                              Reference (MD)   VAE   I-prior (Jixed)        𝜅-prior
                                                                           I-  prior(predicted)
                                                                                     (learned)    Standard estimator   Flow
     CLN025
30 backbone atoms
481.269 data points

                                                                                                                              8


                                                                                                                                  Free energy ⁄ S! T
                                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                              4
                      TIC 1


       2F4K                                                                                                                   2
105 backbone atoms
565.117 data points                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                              −2


                                                                       TIC 0


Figure 5: Modelling (un)folding behavior in the multimodal setting for cln025 and 2f4k. Left:
structure visualization. Right: TICA free energy landscapes for MD reference, VAE, and baselines.

5      R ELATED WORK

There is a large body of work on models for analyzing trajectories of molecular dynamics simulations,
either through Markov state models (Chodera & Noé, 2014; Singhal & Pande, 2005; Sarich et al.,
2013; Schütte et al., 1999; Prinz et al., 2011), or more complex modelling strategies (Mardt et al.,
2018; Hernández et al., 2018; Sultan et al., 2018; Mardt et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2019). Typically, these
focused on dimensionality reduced representations of the molecular structures, and are therefore not
density models from which samples can be drawn.
To our knowledge, the first generative density model of full protein coordinates was the Boltzmann
generator (Noé et al., 2019), a normalizing flow over the Cartesian coordinates of protein ensembles.
An extension of this approach was later used to estimate Cα -only coarse-grained force fields for
molecular dynamics simulations (Köhler et al., 2023). This method, which uses internal coordinate
inputs, demonstrated the ability of augmented flows to sample structural ensembles for proteins up
to 35 amino acids . Other approaches involve latent variable models. One example is the IG-VAE,
which generates structures in 3D coordinates but expresses the loss in terms of distances and internal
coordinates to maintain SE(3) invariance. Similar approaches have been used to analyze cryo-EM
data, where the task is to generate ensembles of structures given the observed cryo-EM image data.
Since cryo-EM data provides information at slightly lower resolution than the full-atomic detail
we discuss here, the output of these approaches are often density maps in 3D space (Zhong et al.,
2021; Punjani & Fleet, 2021). One example of atomic-level modelling in this space is Rosenbaum
et al. (2021), which decodes deterministically into 3D coordinates, but describes the variance in


                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


image space. Finally, diffusion models have recently provided a promising new approach to density
modelling, with impressive examples of density modelling at the scale of full-size proteins (Watson
et al., 2022; Ingraham et al., 2022; Anand & Achim, 2022).
The primary objective in our paper is to investigate whether internal-coordinate density modelling
with a full covariance structure is feasible using a simple, parsimonious setup. Internal-coordinate
probabilistic models of proteins have traditionally focused on protein local structure, i.e. correct
modelling of angular distributions of the secondary structure elements in proteins. Early work was
based on hidden Markov models of small fragments (Camproux et al., 1999; 2004; de Brevern et al.,
2000; Benros et al., 2006). The discrete nature of the fragments meant that these models did not
constitute a complete probabilistic model of the protein structure. Later models solved this issue
by modelling local structure in internal coordinates, using different sequential models and angular
distributions (Edgoose et al., 1998; Bystroff et al., 2000; Hamelryck et al., 2006; Boomsma et al., 2008;
2014; Thygesen et al., 2021). Due to the downstream effects of small internal-coordinate fluctuations,
these models are not by themselves capable of modelling the distribution of entire protein structures,
but they are useful as proposal distributions in Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulations of
proteins (Irbäck & Mohanty, 2006; Boomsma et al., 2013). Using deep learning architectures to
model the sequential dependencies in the protein chain, recent work has pushed the maximum length
of fragments that can be reliably modelled to length 15 (Thygesen et al., 2021), where the fragment
size is limited due to the challenges in estimating the necessary covariance structure.
Our work was inspired by methods used for constrained Gaussian updates in MCMC simulation,
first introduced by Favrin et al. (2001), and later extended by Bottaro et al. (2012). Our method
generalizes the approach to global updates of proteins, derives the relationship between the Lagrange
multipliers and corresponding fluctuations in Euclidean space, and uses neural networks to govern
the level of fluctuations in order to modulate the induced covariance structures.
Recent work has demonstrated that internal-coordinate modelling can also be done using diffusion
models (Jing et al., 2022). So far this method has been demonstrated only on small molecules. We
believe the method we introduce in this paper might help scale these diffusion approaches to full
proteins. In Cartesian space, the Chroma model (Ingraham et al., 2022) demonstrated the benefits of
correlated diffusion arising from simple constraints between atoms. Our method can be viewed as an
extension of this idea to richer covariance structures.


6    D ISCUSSION

Although protein structure prediction is now considered a solved problem, fitting the density of
structural ensembles remains an active field of research. Many recent activities in the field focus
on diffusion models in the Cartesian coordinate representation of a protein. In this paper, we take
a different approach, and investigate how we can describe small-scale fluctuations in terms of a
distribution over the internal degrees of freedom of a protein. The main challenge in this context is
the complex covariance between different parts of the chain. Failing to model this properly results in
models that produce disruptive changes to the global structure even for fairly minor fluctuations in
the internal coordinates. Instead of estimating the covariance matrix from data, we show that it can
be induced by imposing constraints on the Cartesian fluctuations. In a sense, this represents a natural
compromise between internal and Cartesian coordinates: we obtain samples that are guaranteed to
fulfill the physical constraints of the local protein topology (e.g. bond lengths, and bond angles),
while at the same time producing meaningful fluctuations globally.
We implement the idea in the decoder of a variational autoencoder on two protein systems. This is
primarily a proof of concept, and this implementation has several limitations. First of all, the standard
deviations in the κ-prior of the internal degrees of freedom are currently set as a hyperparameter. These
could be estimated from data, either directly within the current VAE setup, or using a preexisting
model of protein local structure. Another limitation is the current model is that the produced
fluctuations are generally too small to fully cover the individual modes of the target densities. This
could be solved by constructing a hierarchical VAE, where samples are constructed as a multi-step
process, similar to the generation process in diffusion models. In fact, we believe that our fundamental
approach of induced covariance matrices could be a fruitful way to make diffusion models in internal
coordinates scale to larger systems, by allowing for larger non-disruptive steps. We leave these
extensions for future work.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   C ODE AND DATA AVAILABILITY
Code and in-house generated data will be made available upon acceptance.

R EFERENCES
Mohammed AlQuraishi. pnerf: Parallelized conversion from internal to cartesian coordinates. bioRxiv,
 pp. 385450, 2018.
Namrata Anand and Tudor Achim. Protein structure and sequence generation with equivariant
  denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15019, 2022.
Minkyung Baek, Frank DiMaio, Ivan Anishchenko, Justas Dauparas, Sergey Ovchinnikov, Gyu Rie
 Lee, Jue Wang, Qian Cong, Lisa N Kinch, R Dustin Schaeffer, et al. Accurate prediction of protein
 structures and interactions using a three-track neural network. Science, 373(6557):871–876, 2021.
C. Benros, A.G. de Brevern, C. Etchebest, and S. Hazout. Assessing a novel approach for predicting
  local 3D protein structures from sequence. Proteins, 62:865–880, 2006.
W. Boomsma, K.V. Mardia, C.C. Taylor, J. Ferkinghoff-Borg, A. Krogh, and T. Hamelryck. A
  generative, probabilistic model of local protein structure. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 105(26):
  8932–8937, 2008.
Wouter Boomsma, Jes Frellsen, Tim Harder, Sandro Bottaro, Kristoffer E Johansson, Pengfei
 Tian, Kasper Stovgaard, Christian Andreetta, Simon Olsson, Jan B Valentin, et al. Phaistos: A
 framework for markov chain monte carlo simulation and inference of protein structure. Journal of
 computational chemistry, 34(19):1697–1705, 2013.
Wouter Boomsma, Pengfei Tian, Jes Frellsen, Jesper Ferkinghoff-Borg, Thomas Hamelryck, Kresten
 Lindorff-Larsen, and Michele Vendruscolo. Equilibrium simulations of proteins using molecular
 fragment replacement and nmr chemical shifts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 111(38):13852–13857, 2014.
Sandro Bottaro, Wouter Boomsma, Kristoffer E. Johansson, Christian Andreetta, Thomas Hamelryck,
  and Jesper Ferkinghoff-Borg. Subtle monte carlo updates in dense molecular systems. Journal of
  Chemical Theory and Computation, 8(2):695–702, 2012.
C. Bystroff, V. Thorsson, and D. Baker. HMMSTR: a hidden Markov model for local sequence-
  structure correlations in proteins. J Mol Biol, 301(1):173–190, 2000.
AC Camproux, P. Tuffery, JP Chevrolat, JF Boisvieux, and S. Hazout. Hidden Markov model
 approach for identifying the modular framework of the protein backbone. Protein Eng Des Sel, 12
 (12):1063–1073, 1999.
AC Camproux, R. Gautier, and P. Tufféry. A hidden Markov model derived structural alphabet for
 proteins. J Mol Biol, 339(3):591–605, 2004.
Yilun Chen, Ami Wiesel, Yonina C Eldar, and Alfred O Hero. Shrinkage algorithms for mmse
  covariance estimation. IEEE transactions on signal processing, 58(10):5016–5029, 2010.
John D Chodera and Frank Noé. Markov state models of biomolecular conformational dynamics.
  Current opinion in structural biology, 25:135–144, 2014.
AG de Brevern, C. Etchebest, and S. Hazout. Bayesian probabilistic approach for predicting backbone
 structures in terms of protein blocks. Proteins, 41(3):271–287, 2000.
Peter Eastman, Jason Swails, John D Chodera, Robert T McGibbon, Yutong Zhao, Kyle A Beauchamp,
  Lee-Ping Wang, Andrew C Simmonett, Matthew P Harrigan, Chaya D Stern, et al. Openmm 7:
  Rapid development of high performance algorithms for molecular dynamics. PLoS computational
  biology, 13(7):e1005659, 2017.
T. Edgoose, L. Allison, and DL Dowe. An MML classification of protein structure that knows about
   angles and sequence. Pac Symp Biocomput, 3:585–596, 1998.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G. Favrin, A. Irbäck, and F. Sjunnesson. Monte Carlo update for chain molecules: Biased Gaussian
  steps in torsional space. J. Chem. Phys., 114:8154–8158, 2001.
T. Hamelryck, J.T. Kent, and A. Krogh. Sampling realistic protein conformations using local structural
   bias. PLoS Comput Biol, 2(9):e131, 2006.
Carlos X Hernández, Hannah K Wayment-Steele, Mohammad M Sultan, Brooke E Husic, and Vijay S
  Pande. Variational encoding of complex dynamics. Physical Review E, 97(6):062412, 2018.
Moritz Hoffmann, Martin Konrad Scherer, Tim Hempel, Andreas Mardt, Brian de Silva, Brooke Elena
 Husic, Stefan Klus, Hao Wu, J Nathan Kutz, Steven Brunton, and Frank Noé. Deeptime: a python
 library for machine learning dynamical models from time series data. Machine Learning: Science
 and Technology, 2021.
John Ingraham, Max Baranov, Zak Costello, Vincent Frappier, Ahmed Ismail, Shan Tie, Wujie
  Wang, Vincent Xue, Fritz Obermeyer, Andrew Beam, et al. Illuminating protein space with a
  programmable generative model. bioRxiv, pp. 2022–12, 2022.
A. Irbäck and S. Mohanty. Profasi: a monte carlo simulation package for protein folding and
  aggregation. J. Comput. Chem., 27(13):1548–1555, 2006.
Edwin T Jaynes. Information theory and statistical mechanics. Physical review, 106(4):620, 1957.
Bowen Jing, Gabriele Corso, Jeffrey Chang, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Torsional
  diffusion for molecular conformer generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01729, 2022.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žı́dek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
Hiremaglur K Kesavan and Jagat Narain Kapur. The generalized maximum entropy principle. IEEE
  Transactions on systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 19(5):1042–1052, 1989.
Jonas Köhler, Yaoyi Chen, Andreas Krämer, Cecilia Clementi, and Frank Noé. Flow-matching:
  Efficient coarse-graining of molecular dynamics without forces. Journal of Chemical Theory and
  Computation, 19(3):942–952, 2023.
Kresten Lindorff-Larsen, Stefano Piana, Ron O Dror, and David E Shaw. How fast-folding proteins
  fold. Science, 334(6055):517–520, 2011.
James A Maier, Carmenza Martinez, Koushik Kasavajhala, Lauren Wickstrom, Kevin E Hauser, and
  Carlos Simmerling. ff14sb: improving the accuracy of protein side chain and backbone parameters
  from ff99sb. Journal of chemical theory and computation, 11(8):3696–3713, 2015.
Andreas Mardt, Luca Pasquali, Hao Wu, and Frank Noé. Vampnets for deep learning of molecular
  kinetics. Nature communications, 9(1):1–11, 2018.
Andreas Mardt, Luca Pasquali, Frank Noé, and Hao Wu. Deep learning markov and koopman models
  with physical constraints. In Mathematical and Scientific Machine Learning, pp. 451–475. PMLR,
  2020.
Lutz Molgedey and Heinz Georg Schuster. Separation of a mixture of independent signals using time
  delayed correlations. Physical review letters, 72(23):3634, 1994.
Frank Noé, Simon Olsson, Jonas Köhler, and Hao Wu. Boltzmann generators: Sampling equilibrium
  states of many-body systems with deep learning. Science, 365(6457):eaaw1147, 2019.
Kaare Brandt Petersen, Michael Syskind Pedersen, et al. The matrix cookbook. Technical University
  of Denmark, 7(15):510, 2008.
Jan-Hendrik Prinz, Hao Wu, Marco Sarich, Bettina Keller, Martin Senne, Martin Held, John D
  Chodera, Christof Schütte, and Frank Noé. Markov models of molecular kinetics: Generation and
  validation. The Journal of chemical physics, 134(17):174105, 2011.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ali Punjani and David J Fleet. 3d flexible refinement: structure and motion of flexible proteins from
  cryo-em. BioRxiv, 2021.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Dan Rosenbaum, Marta Garnelo, Michal Zielinski, Charlie Beattie, Ellen Clancy, Andrea Huber,
  Pushmeet Kohli, Andrew W Senior, John Jumper, Carl Doersch, et al. Inferring a continuous
  distribution of atom coordinates from cryo-em images using vaes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14108,
  2021.
Marco Sarich, Ralf Banisch, Carsten Hartmann, and Christof Schütte. Markov state models for rare
 events in molecular dynamics. Entropy, 16(1):258–286, 2013.
Schrödinger. The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System. version 2.5.2.
Ch Schütte, Alexander Fischer, Wilhelm Huisinga, and Peter Deuflhard. A direct approach to
  conformational dynamics based on hybrid monte carlo. Journal of Computational Physics, 151(1):
 146–168, 1999.
Andrew W Senior, Richard Evans, John Jumper, James Kirkpatrick, Laurent Sifre, Tim Green,
  Chongli Qin, Augustin Žı́dek, Alexander WR Nelson, Alex Bridgland, et al. Improved protein
  structure prediction using potentials from deep learning. Nature, 577(7792):706–710, 2020.
Nina Singhal and Vijay S Pande. Error analysis and efficient sampling in markovian state models for
  molecular dynamics. The Journal of chemical physics, 123(20):204909, 2005.
Mohammad M Sultan, Hannah K Wayment-Steele, and Vijay S Pande. Transferable neural networks
 for enhanced sampling of protein dynamics. Journal of chemical theory and computation, 14(4):
 1887–1894, 2018.
Christian B Thygesen, Christian Skjødt Steenmans, Ahmad Salim Al-Sibahi, Lys Sanz Moreta,
  Anders Bundgård Sørensen, and Thomas Hamelryck. Efficient generative modelling of protein
  structure fragments using a deep markov model. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 10258–10267. PMLR, 2021.
Joseph L Watson, David Juergens, Nathaniel R Bennett, Brian L Trippe, Jason Yim, Helen E Eisenach,
  Woody Ahern, Andrew J Borst, Robert J Ragotte, Lukas F Milles, et al. Broadly applicable and
  accurate protein design by integrating structure prediction networks and diffusion generative
  models. bioRxiv, pp. 2022–12, 2022.
Kevin E Wu, Kevin K Yang, Rianne van den Berg, James Y Zou, Alex X Lu, and Ava P Amini.
  Protein structure generation via folding diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15611, 2022a.
Ruidong Wu, Fan Ding, Rui Wang, Rui Shen, Xiwen Zhang, Shitong Luo, Chenpeng Su, Zuofan Wu,
  Qi Xie, Bonnie Berger, et al. High-resolution de novo structure prediction from primary sequence.
  BioRxiv, pp. 2022–07, 2022b.
Tian Xie, Arthur France-Lanord, Yanming Wang, Yang Shao-Horn, and Jeffrey C Grossman. Graph
  dynamical networks for unsupervised learning of atomic scale dynamics in materials. Nature
  communications, 10(1):1–9, 2019.
Ellen D Zhong, Tristan Bepler, Bonnie Berger, and Joseph H Davis. Cryodrgn: reconstruction of
  heterogeneous cryo-em structures using neural networks. Nature methods, 18(2):176–185, 2021.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Model. See Fig. 3 for an overview of the model. The encoder and the decoder of the VAE are
simple three-layer MLPs (multilayer perceptrons). Given a protein with M backbone atoms, the
encoder takes (2 × M − 5) × 2 inputs, corresponding to (M − 3) dihedrals and (M − 2) bond
angles which are fed in as pairs of (sin, cos) inputs to avoid periodicity issues. Similarly, the decoder
yields (2 × M − 5) × 2 outputs, which can be converted to angles in the [−π, π] interval using
the 2-argument arctangent (atan2). The MLP linear layer sizes of the encoder are [128, 64, 32],
mapping to a 16-dimensional latent space, and layer sizes of the decoder are [32, 64, 128] (reverse of
the encoder).
We use a standard U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) to predict atom fluctuation constraints λ from the
mean predictions that the decoder outputs. The predicted mean for the internal degrees of freedom
µκ is translated into a mean structure µx using pNeRF (AlQuraishi, 2018), from which we calculate
a pairwise distance matrix. This M × M matrix with a single “channel” serves as the input to the
U-Net, which scales the number of channels up to 1024 in four steps before scaling back down to one
channel in four steps.
All datasets were split 90%-10% into a training and validation set. The best model is selected based
on the validation loss. The weights for the κ-prior and auxiliary loss were explored with grid search
(see Appendix D), values chosen for the models reported in the main paper are shown in Table A1
together with other experimental details. The model training starts with a warm-up phase in two
different ways: 1) predicting µκ only, with Σ = I and 2) linearly increasing the weight of the
KL-term from 0 to 1. Proteins in the low data regime (unimodal setting) have a 100 epoch mean-only
warm-up and a 200 epoch KL warm-up, while proteins in the high data regime (multimodal setting)
have a 3 epoch mean-only warm-up and an 8 epoch KL warm-up. All models were trained using an
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 5e−4 , on a Nvidia Quadro RTX (48GB) GPU.
Final metrics are calculated on structures sampled from the model. For the evaluation in the unimodal
setting, the number of samples was chosen to be equal to the total number of data points (25, 41
and 400 for 1unc, 1pga and 1fsd, respectively). For the multimodal cases, 400.000 samples were
drawn for TIC analysis. TICA was done using the Deeptime library (Hoffmann et al., 2021), using
a lagtime of 100 and reducing the high-dimensional input to two dimensions. The TICA model is fit
on the reference data (ordered in time), from which the resulting linear map is stored and applied to
sampled structures from the VAE and baselines. All structure visualizations were done using PyMOL
(Schrödinger, version 2.5.2).


                            Table A1: Experimental details for test cases.

               # train    # validation      # residues     # epochs      batch size      a     waux
    1unc         23             2               36           1000            32         50       1
    1fsd         37             4               28           1000            32         25       1
    1pga        360             40              56           1000            32         50       25
    cln025    481269          53474             10             50            64         25       50
    2f4k      565117          62790             35             50            32         50       1

Molecular dynamics details. The molecular dynamics simulation for 1pga was done in OpenMM
(Eastman et al., 2017), using an Amber forcefield (Maier et al., 2015), water type TIP3P, box geometry
“rhombic dodecahedron” and a padding of 1 nm on each side of the solvated protein (i.e. 2 nm in
total). The simulation is 20ns in total with a 50ps time lag, giving 400 structures. For MD details on
cln025 and 2f4k we refer the reader to Lindorff-Larsen et al. (2011).


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     Q UANTITATIVE RESULTS
B.1    U NIMODAL SETTING , LOW DATA REGIME


           Table A2: MSE (lower is better) to reference for atom fluctuations, unimodal setting.

               VAE       κ-prior (fixed)     κ-prior (learned)     Standard estimator        Flow
  1unc         0.021          2.080               0.013                   5.888             122.490
  1fsd         0.585         13.949               12.732                  9.666             107.052
  1pga         0.040          3.654               1.709                 1154.914           3157.693


B.2    M ULTIMODAL SETTING , HIGH DATA REGIME


Table
      A3: Jensen-Shannon
                             distance (lower is better) between binned Boltzmann distributions, i.e.
       free energy
exp − kB T           , comparing VAE and baselines to the reference, multimodal setting.

                 VAE       κ-prior (fixed)    κ-prior (learned)      Standard estimator       Flow
    cln025       0.456          0.539                0.606                  0.686             0.194
    2f4k         0.373          0.297                0.342                  0.517             0.183


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     VAE SAMPLING
C.1    C OMPARING CONSTRAINTS TO ATOM FLUCTUATIONS ACROSS SAMPLES

As derived in Eq. (9), we can evaluate the constraint value Cm for each atom m given a set of
Lagrange multipliers. These constraints were placed on the squared atom displacements, which is
equivalent to the variance along the atom chain. Fig. A1 demonstrates that the isotropic fluctuations
of 400 1pga samples drawn from the VAE are indeed quite close to C calculated from 400 separately
sampled sets of Lagrange multipliers. Since the constraints are placed on non-superposed (i.e.
not structurally aligned) protein structures3 , this plot shows the variance along the atom chain for
non-superposed structures.
              Variance along the atom chain Å!
                      (non-superposed)


Figure A1: Variance along the atom chain for non-superposed 1pga structures sampled with the VAE
(orange) compared to constraints C calculated from predicted λ-values (grey dashed). Secondary
structure element locations are indicated.


C.2    V ISUALIZATION OF SAMPLED STRUCTURES IN THE UNIMODAL SETTING

Fig. A2 shows sampled superposed ensembles for our model and baselines, as well as the MD/NMR
reference. This demonstrates that VAE samples, where global constraints were enforced, generally
have globally consistent fluctuations compared to the reference data. In contrast, the baselines tend to
exhibit fluctuations that are too large, which can lead to unphysical structures containing crossings
and, in some cases, lacking secondary structure elements.


    3
      Sampled protein structures are built using pNeRF(AlQuraishi, 2018), which builds the chain step-by-step,
thereby corresponding to our post-rotational constraints.


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            1pga                     1fsd                    1unc


           Reference


             VAE


            𝜅-prior
            (5ixed)


           𝜅-prior
           (learned)


           Standard
           estimator


             Flow


Figure A2: Visualization of ensembles for reference data, the VAE model and baselines for 1pga,
1fsd and 1unc. Number of samples is equal to the reference ensemble (400, 41 and 25 for 1pga, 1fsd
and 1unc, respectively.)


                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3       L ATENT SPACE VISUALIZATION IN THE MULTIMODAL SETTING

In this section, we visualize the VAE latent space in the multimodal setting (cln025) in Fig. A3.
Moreover, we demonstrate how 100 random samples from latent space map to structure samples
in the TICA free energy landscape, and show the 3D structures that correspond to these samples.
Transitions from the native state to more unfolded conformations can be observed when going from
the cluster in the top right of TICA space towards the left. Depending on Σ̃, fluctuations around the
means (which are decoded from the latent space samples) can vary in size. Therefore, means that
are close together in terms of latent space location do not necessarily lead to sampling similar 3D
structures. Moreover, we used a UMAP to reduce the number of latent dimensions from 16 to 2, and
this simplified representation might not capture the full complexity of the latent space. Nonetheless, it
is apparent that more unfolded structures largely originate from the rightmost cluster in latent space.



                                        Latent space
                                                                                        3               2
                                                                                                                1
                                                                                4
                      42                   4
              2                                   4
                           4            4 2
                                                 4                                  5
 UMAP 1


          4                             2
                                            3 4
                                        34
                                                4
                                                                        TIC 1
                                          4   4 4
                  3                            4
                                                   6
                                            4              Decode: 𝝁𝜿               6
                                            24                Get 𝜆
          2                                                        1
                                                             Infer 𝚺
                       5                                           1)
                                                            𝒩(𝝁𝜿 , 𝚺
                                                             Sample

                               UMAP 0                                                           TIC 0



     1                          2                      3                4                   5               6


Figure A3: Top left: UMAP reduction to 2D of the originally 16-dimensional VAE latent space, with a
100 samples shown in random shapes and colors. The grey scatterplot depicts the aggregated posterior,
with the KDE of the aggregated posterior as grey lines. Annotated green numbers correspond to
boxes in the TICA free energy landscape (all structures corresponding to box 1 are left unlabelled to
avoid clutter). Top right: structure samples corresponding to latent space samples visualized in TICA
space with the same symbols and colors as the latent space samples. Samples are grouped together in
green numbered boxes. Bottom row: 3D structures corresponding to the different numbered boxes in
the TICA plot.


                                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     A BLATION FOR HYPERPARAMETERS
The two main hyperparameters that need to be chosen in the VAE setting are the strength of the
κ-prior a, and the weight of the regularizing loss waux . These two weights can be set to prioritize
local or global constraints in different ways. We demonstrate the effect on a unimodal case (protein
G, 1pga) and a multimodal case (chignolin, cln025). In both cases, results are shown for a gridsearch
over a = [1, 25, 50] and waux = [1, 25, 50].

D.1    U NIMODAL

Fig. A4 shows results for the ablation on a and waux in the unimodal setting. Increasing the strength
of the κ-prior through a while keeping waux constant corresponds to narrower distributions in the
Ramachandran plot and bond angle distributions. A higher weight waux for a constant a leads to
stronger global constraints, as demonstrated by the fluctuations along the atom chain.

D.2    M ULTIMODAL

To understand the impact of hyperparameters in the multimodal setting, we first consider the impact
on samples drawn from the VAE that was trained with a fixed κ-prior, which depends on hyperpa-
rameter a. Fig. A5 illustrates how the distribution in the TIC free energy landscape changes when
strengthening the prior. For a = 1, there is a preference towards the metastable cluster on the top left,
while increasing the value of a leads to a stronger preference for the lowest energy cluster on the top
right.
When sampling from the VAE, where constraints are imposed on top of the κ-prior, there is interplay
between a and waux , as shown in Fig. A6. Even though the exact trend is less clear here, the relative
values of the hyperparameters have an observable influence on e.g. the width of the ”bridge” between
the topmost two clusters, the size of the higher-energy downward extrusion of the top left cluster, and
the spread towards the less populated cluster on the bottom right.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          1pga, 168 backbone atoms   Ramachandran               Bond angles
                                                                    Reference


                                                                                                                                 Secondary structure elements



                             Precision matrix                         VAE
      𝑎 = 1, 𝑤!"# = 1
      𝑎 = 1, 𝑤!"# = 25
      𝑎 = 1, 𝑤!"# = 50
      𝑎 = 25, 𝑤!"# = 1


                                                                                              Variance along the atom chain Å$
      𝑎 = 25, 𝑤!"# = 25
      𝑎 = 25, 𝑤!"# = 50
      𝑎 = 50, 𝑤!"# = 1
      𝑎 = 50, 𝑤!"# = 25
      𝑎 = 50, 𝑤!"# = 50


Figure A4: Ablation of a and waux for protein G (1pga, structure shown at top left). From left to
right: precision matrix example predicted by the VAE, Ramachandran plot, bond angle distributions,
fluctuations along the atom chain (secondary structure elements indicated, VAE κ-prior (fixed) out of
scale for a = 1).
                                                 19
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           MD reference, CLN025             𝑎=1                       𝑎 = 25                  𝑎 = 50
                                                                                                                   8


                                                                                                                       Free energy ⁄ 𝑘! 𝑇
                                                                                                                   6

                                                                                                                   4
   TIC 1


                                                                                                                   2

                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                   −2
                                                      TIC 0


  Figure A5: Influence of hyperparameter a on samples drawn from the VAE with a fixed κ-prior
  (without imposing constraints) for chignolin (cln025), visualized in TIC space.


        MD reference, CLN025    𝑎 = 1, 𝑤!"# = 1    𝑎 = 1, 𝑤!"# = 25        𝑎 = 1, 𝑤!"# = 50    𝑎 = 25, 𝑤!"# = 1


                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                            Free energy ⁄ 𝑘$ 𝑇


                                                                                                                                     6

                                                                                                                                     4
TIC 1


           𝑎 = 25, 𝑤!"# = 25   𝑎 = 25, 𝑤!"# = 50   𝑎 = 50, 𝑤!"# = 1       𝑎 = 50, 𝑤!"# = 25    𝑎 = 50, 𝑤!"# = 50
                                                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                  −2


                                                        TIC 0


  Figure A6: Hyperparameter ablation of a and waux VAE samples for chignolin (cln025), visualized
  in TIC space.


                                                                20
