Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E XTRAPOLATING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS                                                          TO
N ON -E NGLISH BY A LIGNING L ANGUAGES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Existing large language models show disparate capability across different lan-
         guages, due to the imbalance in the training data. Their performances on En-
         glish tasks are often stronger than on tasks of other languages. In this paper,
         we empower pre-trained LLMs on non-English languages by building seman-
         tic alignment across languages. We start from targeting individual languages
         by performing cross-lingual instruction-tuning (CoIT) on LLaMA, i.e. tuning
         it with translation task data and cross-lingual general task data to obtain cross-
         lingual models (x-LLaMAs), and formulate underlying scaling laws to investigate
         the advantages of using scalable translation data. Then we perform multilingual
         instruction-tuning (MuIT) with mixed resources to build multilingual m-LLaMA.
         We also illustrate how we leverage the scaling laws to optimize data allocation in
         a resource-constrained setting. Experiment results on cross-lingual benchmarks
         XQUAD and MLQA show that x-LLaMAs surpass the English instruction-tuned
         counterpart (Alpaca) by an average of 27.83% across six non-English languages.
         Evaluation results on translation dataset F LORES -101 show that x-LLaMAs out-
         perform previous LLaMA-based models by an average of 18.89%. Encourag-
         ingly, m-LLaMA achieves comparable performance to x-LLaMAs on individual
         languages and demonstrates the ability to follow multilingual instructions. Further
         analysis on response content and representation space reveals the alignment of the
         multilingual semantic space within the middle layers of m-LLaMA.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The language ability of LLMs is often imbalanced across languages (Zhu et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2023), because both the pre-training corpus (Blevins & Zettlemoyer, 2022)
and the instruction-tuning data (Wang et al., 2023b) are English-dominated. As a result, LLMs
usually perform poorly on non-English languages, especially on languages that are dissimilar to
English (Bang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023).
There have been some attempts to enhance LLMs’ non-English abilities by continued pre-training
with large scale monolingual corpus (Cui et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023). However, learning a
language from monolingual data may need large scale data and computing.
In this paper, we elicit the non-English ability of pre-trained LLMs by building semantic alignment
between English and non-English. To extrapolate the English ability to a particular non-English lan-
guage, we propose a multi-task setting which combines translation tasks and cross-lingual general
tasks during instruction-tuning. The translation tasks are used to stimulate the semantic alignment
between languages, while the cross-lingual general tasks enhance the instruction-following capa-
bilities of models (Fig 1). These cross-lingual instruction tuning (CoIT) brings out a cross-lingual
model tailored to a specific non-English language.
Next, we explore to extrapolate LLM to multiple languages simultaneously through multilingual
instruction-tuning (MuIT) with mixed multilingual resources (Fig 1). We consider two specific
settings in our study. In the first setting, we simply combine all available resources for instruction-
tuning to obtain multilingual LLM. In the second setting, we consider a practical scenario where
instruction-tuning is performed under with a specific data budget. To achieve optimal data allocation,
we formulate the task as non-linear programming based on our previously discovered scaling laws.
The objective of this optimization is to maximize the averaged multilingual performance.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                       Pre-trained                                                                     Pre-trained
                                                                         LLaMA                                                                           LLaMA



                                   Instruction: Analyze the tone of the following sentences.
          Alpaca-En    Alpaca-En                                                                                 Alpaca-En          En→Zh         Alpaca-Zh
                                   Input: I am so upset with you right now.
                                   Output: The tone of the sentences is angry and accusatory.

           Alpaca-Ar                                                                                             Alpaca-Tr           En→Ar         Alpaca-Ar
                       Alpaca-Zh   Instruction: 分析下⾯句⼦的语⽓
                                   Input: 我现在对你很⽣⽓
                                   Output: 句⼦的语⽓充满愤怒和指责
            En→Ar       En→Zh                                                                                     En→Tr              En→Tr         Alpaca-Tr
                                   Instruction: Translate the following sentences from English to Chinese.
                                   Input: Bulgaria will have its first geostationary communications satellite.
                                   Output: 保加利亚将拥有第⼀颗对地静⽌通信卫星                                                                                     Alpaca-En


           x-LLaMA                                         x-LLaMA                                               x-LLaMA                 m-LLaMA
           (Arabic)                                       (Chinese)                                              (Turkish)        (Chinese, Arabic, Turkish)
                                         Cross-lingual Instruction Tuning (CoIT)                                             Multilingual Instruction-tuning (MuIT)


Figure 1: Illustration of cross-lingual instruction-tuning (CoIT) and multilingual instruction-tuning
(MuIT). We perform cross-lingual instruction-tuning by tuning pre-trained LLM with both cross-
lingual general task instruction data and translation task instruction data. We mix multilingual re-
sources together and perform multilingual instruction-tuning to extrapolate pre-trained LLM to mul-
tiple languages simultaneously.


In the experiments, we use LLaMA-7B as the pre-trained LLM and consider six challenging tar-
get languages1 that share little alphabet with English. For each language, a separate x-LLaMA is
obtained with language-specific data. And a m-LLaMA is obtained with mixed multilingual data.
Experiment results on two cross-lingual benchmarks XQUAD and MLQA show that x-LLaMAs
outperforms the model tuned with English instructions (Alpaca-7B) by an average of 27.83%. No-
tably, the accuracy of x-LLaMAs on non-English tasks is comparable to the performance of Alpaca-
7B on English tasks. We also observe that x-LLaMAs exhibit strong translation ability without
the need of massively continued pre-training. Evaluation results on multilingual translation dataset
F LORES -101 show that x-LLaMAs outperforms previous LLaMA-based models by an average of
18.89% and even outperforms the supervised multilingual translation system M2M-12B (Fan et al.,
2021) in half of the evaluated translation directions.
In our first setting of multilingual instruction-tuning, we discover that m-LLaMA can achieve com-
parable performance to strong x-LLaMAs on individual languages. Moreover, m-LLaMA is now
capable of following multilingual instructions. Further analysis on response content and representa-
tion space reveals that m-LLaMA has a tendency to generate non-English response based on its En-
glish memory and multilingual semantic space becomes aligned in the middle layers of m-LLaMA,
demonstrating the effectiveness of our methods. In our second setting, experiments on data allo-
cation shows that our optimized mixture yields higher multilingual performance than a uniform
mixture. This showcases a practical usage of our formulated scaling laws.
The main contribution of this paper can be summarized as:

           • We explore cross-lingual instruction-tuning (CoIT) and multilingual instruction-tuning
             (MuIT) to elicit the non-English ability of LLMs.
           • Experiment results demonstrate that our instruction-tuning methods can simultaneously
             boost LLM’s non-English language ability, e.g., following multilingual instructions, gener-
             ating multilingual response, and translation ability.
           • We formulate the scaling law in cross-lingual instruction-tuning and devise a data allocation
             strategy based on formulated laws for resource-constrained multilingual instruction-tuning.
           • We compare the scaling law of cross-lingual instruction-tuning and continued pre-training,
             and show that aligning language is a more efficient choice.


2       BACKGROUND

To unlock the potential of pre-trained LLMs, Wei et al. (2022) propose instruction-tuning. In this
stage, LLM will be fed with instruction data {T, X, Y }, where T is a task instruction that describes
    1
        The six languages are Arabic (Ar), Greek (El), Hindi (Hi), Turkish (Tr), Vietnamese (Vi), Chinese (Zh).


                                                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the task requirement. X is an optional input and Y is the desired output for the given task. The
objective of this optimization stage is to minimize following the negative log-likelihood.
                                         1     X
                              arg min                  − log p(Y |T, X)                       (1)
                                  θ     |D|
                                            {T,X,Y }∈D

where θ denotes learnable parameters of the LLM and D represents the instruction tuning dataset.
The instruction-tuning dataset often covers diverse tasks, which is found beneficial for generaliza-
tion to unseen instructions and tasks (Wei et al., 2022). However, we notice that commonly-used
instruction-tuning datasets, e.g., A LPACA (Taori et al., 2023), FLAN (Longpre et al., 2023) are
English-dominant, which limits LLM’s potential on following non-English instructions and solving
non-English tasks.


3     E LICITING LLM’ S NON -E NGLISH A BILITY

Empowering LLM on more languages beyond English is non-trivial. Training a LLM from scratch
for each non-English language is almost prohibitive due to the huge cost of data collection and com-
putation. In this paper, we explore to elicit pre-trained LLM’s non-English ability by strengthening
semantic alignment between English and target languages. We begin by targeting a single language
by performing cross-lingual instruction-tuning (CoIT, §3.1). To better understand the potential of
aligning languages, we design a formulation to describe the scaling law in cross-lingual instruction-
tuning (§3.2). In the end, we introduce multilingual instruction-tuning (MuIT), aiming at eliciting
LLM’s language ability on multiple non-English languages simultaneously and presents a potential
usage of the scaling law in multilingual data allocation (§3.3).

3.1   C ROSS - LINGUAL I NSTRUCTION - TUNING

To elicit LLM’s non-English ability, we perform cross-lingual instruction-tuning (illustrated in Fig 1)
with multi-task data, including cross-lingual general task instruction data DG and translation task
instruction data DT .


General task instruction data DG Considering that commonly-used instruction-tuning dataset is
almost in English, we translate it to a foreign version with a translation engine. We then utilize both
English and non-English version as cross-lingual general task instruction data. This approach aims
to encourage LLM to better comprehend and follow cross-lingual instructions.


Translation task instruction data DT Intuitively, translation data is a valuable resource for learn-
ing semantic alignment. Previous researches have also shown that LLM’s translation performance
can be enhanced by using expert-annotated translation data Jiao et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023)
for instruction-tuning. Unlike them, we use publicly available parallel corpora, e.g., W IKI M A -
TRIX (Schwenk et al., 2021), N EWS C OMMENTARY (Tiedemann, 2012), to construct translation task
instruction data, making our method more reproducible, scalable and extendable to more languages.
While both En-X (translating English to non-English) and X-En (translating non-English to English)
translation data are beneficial for learning semantic alignment, we find that placing non-English text
on the target side of translation data yields better performance improvements for LLMs on non-
English tasks compared to placing it on the source side. This finding will be further demonstrated in
the upcoming experiments.

3.2   S CALING L AW OF C ROSS - LINGUAL I NSTRUCTION - TUNING

We use bilingual translation performance as an indicator of semantic alignment and find that the
scale of translation task instruction data has a huge impact on it. To quantify the relationship between
translation performance S and translation data scale X , we formulate the underlying scaling law
based on following intuitions: (1) The upper bound of S is 100, which is the maximum score of
frequently used translation quality metrics such as COMET and BLEU. (2) Translation performance
tends to improve as the translation data scale increases. (3) Languages that are less similar to English


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


require a larger amount of translation data to establish semantic alignment compared to languages
more similar to English. Consequently, we present our final formulation as follows:
                                       S(X ) = 100 − α · (γ · X )β                                          (2)
where α > 0 and β ∈ (−1, 0) are parameters to estimate, γ ∈ (0, 1) is the language similarity2
the target language and English. When estimating the scaling law for a specific language, we first
compute γ and then estimate α and β with observed data points. In the following subsection, we
will further demonstrate how these scaling laws can assit us in optimizing data allocation when
constructing multilingual LLM in a resource-constrained scenario.

3.3   M ULTILINGUAL I NSTRUCTION - TUNING

While cross-lingual instruction-tuning is effective, serving customized LLMs for each language can
be costly, particularly as the number of languages increases. Therefore, we take a step further
and investigate the possibility of extrapolating a singe pre-trained LLM to multiple non-English
languages simultaneously.
To achieve this goal, we perform multilingual instruction-tuning with a combination of multilingual
resources. This includes general task instruction data in multiple languages and translation task
instruction data from multiple directions. By leveraging these resources, the instruction-tuned LLM
can establish alignment between English and multiple languages, enabling it to comprehend and
follow multilingual instructions.
As for data mixture, we consider two settings. In the first setting, we straightforwardly combine
all available resources for instruction-tuning. But a potential drawback of this approach is that
instruction-tuning LLM with large-scale multilingual data may take huge computational cost.
Therefore we also consider a practical scenario, where the available instruction data is constrained
by a specific data budget. For instance, the total amount of utilized parallel data is a fixed number.
To achieve the optimal data combination in this scenario, we propose to formulate data allocation as
a non-linear programming problem. The objective of this programming problem is to maximize the
averaged multilingual performance:
               n                    n
            1X                      X
      max         S(Xi ),    s.t.         Xi = C,   where 0 ≤ Xi ≤ Ximax ,          i = 1, 2, 3 · · · , n
            n i=1                   i=1

There are two constraints in this formulation: (i) data budget, the total amount of translation task
instruction data is limited by a fixed budget C. (ii) data availability, the maximum number of
available translation data for language i is Ximax .

4     E XPERIMENT S ETTING


Pre-trained LLM We take LLaMA-7B as the pre-trained LLM, which is trained on trillions of
tokens (mainly in English) and found to be competitive with state-of-the-art LLMs (Touvron et al.,
2023). We construct x-LLaMAs for six challenging target languages: Arabic (Ar), Greek (El), Hindi
(Hi), Turkish (Tr), Vietnamese (Vi) and Chinese (Zh), which share little alphabet with English.


Baseline LLMs For comparison, we include several models that are built by instruction tuning on
LLaMA: Alpaca-7B (Taori et al., 2023), which is tuned with English instructions; Parrot-7B (Jiao
et al., 2023), which is tuned with human annotated translation data; Bayling-7B (Zhang et al., 2023),
which is tuned with human interactive translations and English instruction data. We also present re-
sults from Chinese-Alpaca-7B (Cui et al., 2023) and Bigtrans-13B (Yang et al., 2023) for reference.
Both these two models extend the vocabulary of LLaMA and use a large scale monolingual data for
continued pre-training.

   2
     We calculate language similarity following the approach of Pan et al. (2021) using multi-way translation
data.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Instruction tuning details For translation task instruction data, we use publicly available paral-
lel corpora, W IKI M ATRIX3 (Schwenk et al., 2021) and N EWS C OMMENTARY4 (Tiedemann, 2012).
These corpora are more accessible and scalable compared to high-cost expert-annotated data (Jiao
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). The statistics of two datasets are presented in Table 1. For mul-
tilingual general task instruction data, we incorporate A LPACA dataset (Taori et al., 2023), which
consists of 52k English questions and corresponding response, and we obtain its foreign version
with in-house translation engine. We use stanford alpaca5 as the code base. More training details
are provided in Appendix A.

                   Parallel Corpora     Ar        El        Hi        Tr       Vi       Zh
                    W IKI M ATRIX     999.8k    620.8k     231.5k   477.7k   1073.8k   786.5k
                 N EWS C OMMENTARY     97.4k      -         2.8k      -         -      126.0k
                       T OTAL         1097.2k   620.8k     234.3k   477.7k   1073.8k   912.5k

Table 1: Statistics of parallel corpora. In our experiments, we use above two open-source parallel
corpora to construct translation task instruction data.


Evaluation Dataset To evaluate LLM’s performance on non-English languages, we use two
benchmark cross-lingual datasets, XQUAD (Artetxe et al., 2020) and MLQA (Lewis et al., 2020),
which requires the model to reason over the given context and answer the given question. In addi-
tion, we create a new multilingual evaluation set MI-E VAL (introduced in Appendix B) to assess
the capability of LLM in following multilingual instructions. These multilingual multi-way test sets
allow us to compare language ability across languages. To evaluate LLM’s translation ability, we
use multilingual translation dataset F LORES -101 (Goyal et al., 2022). Details of the prompts used
for all these tasks are provided in Appendix C.


Evaluation Metrics On XQUAD, MLQA and MI-E VAL, we follow Liu et al. (2023) and Wang
et al. (2023a) to use ChatGPT for generation quality evaluation. On XQUAD, MLQA, we also
report exact-matching results in Appendix D. For translation tasks, we use COMET (Rei et al.,
2020), BLEURT (Sellam et al., 2020) and sentence-piece BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) as metrics6 .
More evaluation details can be referred to Appendix D.

5       M AIN R ESULTS

5.1     R ESULTS ON C ROSS - LINGUAL I NSTRUCTION - TUNING


x-LLaMA achieves great improvement on non-English QA tasks Table 2 presents experimen-
tal results for non-English question answering tasks. We can see that Alpaca-7B performs poorly
on non-English, although it achieves 95% answer accuracy on corresponding English questions.
Notably, x-LLaMA outperforms its counterpart (Alpaca-7B) by an average of 27.83% across six
non-English languages. More importantly, x-LLaMA’s answer accuracy on non-English tasks
is approaching Alpaca-7B’s answer accuracy on English tasks. This indicates that cross-lingual
instruction-tuning is an effective way to elicit LLM’s non-English ability.
Table 2 also reports multilingual performance of other two representative LLaMA-based models.
Both Chinese-Alpaca-7B (trained on a large-scale Chinese corpus) and Bayling-7B (trained on
chinese-annotated interactive translation data) shows impressive performance on Chinese task. But
they does not perform well on five other languages. Since their used training data can not be easily
obtained, it is hard to extend their training frameworks to cover more languages.

    3
     https://opus.nlpl.eu/News-Commentary.php
    4
     https://github.com/facebookresearch/LASER/tree/main/tasks/WikiMatrix
   5
     https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca
   6
     Specifically, we report COMET score computed by wmt22-comet-da model and report BLEURT score
computed by BLEURT-20 model.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             XQUAD                               MLQA
                System
                               Ar     El     Hi  Tr        Vi     Zh     Ar     Hi  Vi        Zh
               Alpaca-7B       0.36   0.64   0.41   0.51   0.45   0.59   0.39   0.36   0.50   0.67
           Chinese-Alpaca-7B   0.34   0.22   0.20   0.22   0.35   0.91   0.38   0.22   0.34   0.97
              Bayling-7B       0.44   0.48   0.53   0.55   0.58   0.88   0.43   0.55   0.54   0.89
             x-LLaMA-7B        0.82   0.75   0.81   0.64   0.81   0.80   0.85   0.76   0.93   0.81

Table 2: Evaluation results on XQUAD and MLQA dataset. The highest answer accuracy in each
column is indicated in bold. For reference, Alpaca-7B’s answer accuracy on corresponding English
task is 0.95 on XQUAD and 0.96 on MLQA.


x-LLaMA shows impressive translation performance Figure 2 and Figure 9 (Appendix E)
present the performance of x-LLaMA and baseline systems in translating between English and non-
English, which serves as crucial evidence for language alignment. Compared with other LLaMA-
based LLMs, x-LLaMA exhibits higher translation performance in all evaluated directions. Notably,
x-LLaMA even outperforms strong supervised baseline M2M-12B (Fan et al., 2021) on four En-X
directions (translating English to non-English) and two X-En directions (translating non-English to
English), and is approaching strong commercial translation engines, ChatGPT and Google Translate.


         Figure 2: Performance of different systems in translating English to non-English.


Scaling laws of cross-lingual instruction-tuning Now, we investigate x-LLaMA’s translation
performance under varying translation data scales and present the advantages of using scalable
translation task instruction data for language alignment. As illustrated in Figure 3, adding trans-
lation data is always beneficial for strengthening semantic alignment. Encouragingly, our designed
formulation (represented by the dotted line) effectively captures the trend and provide quantified
relationship between translation performance and translation data scale. In subsequent experiments,
we will demonstrate the practical applications of these formulated scaling laws, e.g., optimizing data
allocation, analyzing learning efficiency.

5.2   R ESULTS ON M ULTILINGUAL I NSTRUCTION - TUNING


m-LLaMA achieves comparable performance to x-LLaMAs on individual languages. In our
first setting, we combine all available resources to construct m-LLaMA. We then compare the per-
formance of m-LLaMA with that of x-LLaMAs customized for individual languages. Figure 4
shows that m-LLaMA can achieve comparable performance to x-LLaMAs on non-English QA tasks
and multilingual translation tasks. This indicates the feasibility of extrapolating pre-trained English
LLaMA to multiple non-English languages simultaneously.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: The relationship between translation data scale and translation performance (COMET).
Our designed formulation (the dotted line) fits well with the trend and we list estimated scaling laws
in the figure.


Figure 4: Performance comparison between m-LLaMA and x-LLaMAs on multilingual question
answering (left), multilingual translation (middle) and following multilingual instruction (right).


m-LLaMA is able to handle multilingual instructions according to its English memory. More
importantly, incorporating multiple languages into a single m-LLaMA enables it to follow mul-
tilingual instructions. Evaluation results on MI-E VAL (Fig. 4) show that m-LLaMA can achieve
comparable response quality to x-LLaMAs when provided with instructions in different languages.
Additionally, we find that our instruction-tuning approach has minor impact on LLM’s English
proficiency7 but makes m-LLaMA have a tendency to generate response to non-English instructions
with its English memory. Table 3 show two representative cases where m-LLaMA produces similar
response when given instructions in different languages. This phenomenon suggests that English
and non-English becomes aligned within LLM after our instruction-tuning.

Visualization results show that multilingual semantic space becomes aligned in the middle
layers of m-LLaMA. For comprehensive analysis, we investigate the representation space of m-
LLaMA and Alpaca-7B. Specifically, we use them to encode multilingual multi-way data from
F LORES -101 dataset and compare encoded representations across different layers. Figure 5 displays
visualization results. For Alpaca-7B, representations of different languages always stay apart from
bottom layers to top layers. In contrast, we observe representation overlap in m-LLaMA, especially
in the middle layers, which offers another evidence that multilingual instruction-tuning encourages
language alignment.

Our formulated scaling laws can be used to optimize data allocation for data-constrained
multilingual instruction-tuning. In our second setting, we study data-constrained multilingual
instruction-tuning and explore the usage of formulated scaling laws. We compare our devised allo-
   7
     We draw this conclusion by comparing the answer quality of m-LLaMA and Alpaca-7B on English test set
of MI-E VAL. Generally, their answer quality is close. On 24% of test cases, m-LLaMA wins. On 32% of test
cases, m-LLaMA loses. On the rest of test cases, the two models tie.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         m-LLaMA (Chinese instruction)                                        m-LLaMA (English instruction)
 [Input]                                                                         [Input]
 选择三个形容词来描述一条街道                                                                  Choose three adjectives to describe a street

 [Output]                                                                        [Output]
 繁华、充满活力和美丽。(Bustling, vibrant and beautiful.)                                   Busy, vibrant, and lively.
 [Input]                                                                         [Input]
 民主社会努力维护哪些价值观?                                                                  What values does a democratic society strive to uphold?

 [Output]                                                                        [Output]
 民主社会努力维护的价值观包括个人自由、平等、言论和宗教自由、                                                  A democratic society strives to uphold values such as
 人身安全、公正法律和人类尊严。民主社会还促进尊重多样性和包                                                   freedom, equality, justice, and human rights. It is com-
 容性，以及言论自由和集体决策的权利。(The values that democratic                                   mitted to upholding the right of all citizens to partici-
 societies strive to uphold include individual liberty, equality, freedom of     pate in decision-making and to be treated with respect
 speech and religion, security of the person, just laws, and human dignity.      and dignity. It also seeks to promote freedom of speech
 Democratic societies also promote respect for diversity and inclusion, as       and thought, as well as the rule of law.
 well as the rights to freedom of expression and collective decision-making.)



Table 3: Two representative cases where m-LLaMA makes similar response when given instructions
in different languages. The gray text in the bracket denotes the English meaning of Chinese response.


Figure 5: Visualization analysis on the representation space of m-LLaMA and Alpaca-7B. For
Alpaca-7B, representations of different languages always stay apart from bottom layers to top lay-
ers. In contrast, we observe representation overlap in m-LLaMA, especially in middle layers.


cation approach with uniform data allocation in Table 4. The experiment results is mixed. When
the data budget is low, e.g., 300k, the gap between different data allocation strategies is minor.
When the data budget reaches 1.2M, our optimized allocation achieves significantly higher aver-
aged multilingual translation performance than uniform allocation in all three metrics, which meets
our optimization objective.

                                     Data Allocation                                                  F LORES -101
  Budget
                 Ar         El        Hi        Tr           Vi          Zh        COMET              BLEURT                BLEU
              50,000      50,000     50,000     50,000     50,000       50,000    82.13               66.36              30.05
   300k
              41,842      44,953     73,002     59,652     40,731       39,816    82.38 (+0.25)       66.75 (+0.39)      30.21 (+0.16)
              200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000                     84.22               69.73               33.81
   1.2M
              183,539 189,556 234,233 242,263 175,985 174,422                     84.70∗ (+0.48)      70.42∗ (+0.69)      34.40∗ (+0.59)


Table 4: Comparison results between our optimized allocation and uniform allocation. The number
in the bracket denotes the performance gap between the two data allocation strategies. The annota-
tion “*” indicates that the improvement is significant (p < 0.1).



                                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6    A NALYSIS AND D ISCUSSION


Ablation study We conduct experiments with different combinations of instruction data for abla-
tion study (Table 6). Instruction tuning LLaMA-7B with Chinese Alpaca data is better than English
Alpaca data on the Chinese task. Jointly using two versions of Alpaca data brings further im-
provement. Interestingly, using translation task instruction data alone can reach moderate answer
accuracy. And we find that putting Chinese on the target side of translation data is more useful for
boosting LLaMA’s non-English ability. Jointly using cross-lingual general task instruction data and
En-Zh translation task instruction data reaches the highest accuracy.


Using translation data is far more efficient than monolingual data for building semantic align-
ment. Using monolingual corpus of target language for continued pre-training is another way to
help LLM to understand non-English and improve translation performance (Yang et al., 2023). For
comparison, we use Chinese monolingual corpus M C4 (Xue et al., 2021) for continued pre-training
and use cross-lingual general task data for instruction-tuning. Figure 7 compares scaling laws of
two approach. We observe that using parallel data is far more efficient than using monolingual data
for accomplishing semantic alignment.


    Alpaca-En   Alpaca-Zh   En-Zh   Zh-En   XQUAD
       ✓                                     0.59
                   ✓                         0.66
                             ✓               0.60
       ✓           ✓                         0.75
       ✓           ✓         ✓               0.80
       ✓           ✓                 ✓       0.60


Figure 6: Ablation study of cross-lingual
instuction-tuning on Chinese XQUAD. “Alpaca-
En” and “Alpaca-Zh” denotes original and foreign Figure 7: Comparison between scaling laws
version Alpaca data. “En-Zh” and “Zh-En” de- of cross-lingual instruction-tuning and continued
notes the direction of translation data.         pre-training.


Discussion on extending vocabulary for non-English. Unlike previous work (Cui et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2023), we do not extend vocabulary for target non-English languages. The effect is dual.
Our approach does not require a large-scale non-English corpus to learn embedding of extended
tokens. On the other hand, since LLaMA usually tokenizes non-English tokens to bytes, our model
is slower in encoding and decoding non-English sequence than those models equipped with extended
vocabulary. We leave the exploration on vocabulary manipulation as our future work.

7    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we focus on extrapolating pre-trained large language models to non-English by build-
ing semantic alignment across languages. Specifically, we explore two approach: cross-lingual
instruction-tuning (CoIT) and multilingual instruction-tuning (MuIT). Experiment results show that
our cross-lingual models, x-LLaMAs, achieve great improvements on non-English, e.g., outperform-
ing its English counterpart (Alpaca-7B) by 27.83% on question answering tasks and by 18.89% on
translation tasks. After training on mixed multilingual resources, our m-LLaMA model can achieve
comparable performance to strong x-LLaMAs on individual languages and is capable of following
multilingual instructions. Further analysis of response consistency and representation space reveals
that multilingual semantic space becomes aligned in the middle layers of m-LLaMA. In the setting
of resource-constrained multilingual instruction-tuning, we show the usage of formulated scaling
laws to achieve optimal data allocation. Overall, our approach and findings illuminate the potential
for developing more potent LLMs for non-English languages.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Mikel Artetxe, Sebastian Ruder, and Dani Yogatama. On the cross-lingual transferability of mono-
 lingual representations. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
 putational Linguistics (ACL), 2020.
Yejin Bang, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Nayeon Lee, Wenliang Dai, Dan Su, Bryan Wilie, Holy Lovenia,
  Ziwei Ji, Tiezheng Yu, Willy Chung, et al. A multitask, multilingual, multimodal evaluation of
  chatgpt on reasoning, hallucination, and interactivity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04023, 2023.
Terra Blevins and Luke Zettlemoyer. Language contamination helps explains the cross-lingual ca-
  pabilities of English pretrained models. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2022.
Marta R Costa-jussà, James Cross, Onur Çelebi, Maha Elbayad, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Heffernan,
 Elahe Kalbassi, Janice Lam, Daniel Licht, Jean Maillard, et al. No language left behind: Scaling
 human-centered machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04672, 2022.
Yiming Cui, Ziqing Yang, and Xin Yao. Efficient and effective text encoding for chinese llama and
  alpaca. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08177, 2023.
Angela Fan, Shruti Bhosale, Holger Schwenk, Zhiyi Ma, Ahmed El-Kishky, Siddharth Goyal, Man-
  deep Baines, Onur Celebi, Guillaume Wenzek, Vishrav Chaudhary, et al. Beyond english-centric
  multilingual machine translation. The Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 2021.
Naman Goyal, Cynthia Gao, Vishrav Chaudhary, Peng-Jen Chen, Guillaume Wenzek, Da Ju, San-
  jana Krishnan, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Francisco Guzmán, and Angela Fan. The Flores-101 eval-
  uation benchmark for low-resource and multilingual machine translation. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL), 2022.
Haoyang Huang, Tianyi Tang, Dongdong Zhang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Ting Song, Yan Xia, and Furu
  Wei. Not all languages are created equal in llms: Improving multilingual capability by cross-
  lingual-thought prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07004, 2023.
Wenxiang Jiao, Jen-tse Huang, Wenxuan Wang, Xing Wang, Shuming Shi, and Zhaopeng Tu. Parrot:
 Translating during chat using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02426, 2023.
Patrick Lewis, Barlas Oguz, Ruty Rinott, Sebastian Riedel, and Holger Schwenk. MLQA: Evalu-
  ating cross-lingual extractive question answering. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2020.
Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. Gpteval: Nlg
  evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634, 2023.
Shayne Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V
  Le, Barret Zoph, Jason Wei, et al. The flan collection: Designing data and methods for effective
  instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13688, 2023.
Xiao Pan, Mingxuan Wang, Liwei Wu, and Lei Li. Contrastive learning for many-to-many multi-
  lingual neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2021.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2002.
Ricardo Rei, Craig Stewart, Ana C Farinha, and Alon Lavie. COMET: A neural framework for
  MT evaluation. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), 2020.
Holger Schwenk, Vishrav Chaudhary, Shuo Sun, Hongyu Gong, and Francisco Guzmán. WikiMa-
  trix: Mining 135M Parallel Sentences in 1620 Language Pairs from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of
  Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL),
  2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thibault Sellam, Dipanjan Das, and Ankur Parikh. BLEURT: Learning robust metrics for text
  generation. In Proceedings of Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (ACL), 2020.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Jörg Tiedemann. Parallel data, tools and interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the Eighth Interna-
   tional Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), 2012.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, and
  Zhifang Sui. Large language models are not fair evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17926,
  2023a.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560, 2022.
Yizhong Wang, Hamish Ivison, Pradeep Dasigi, Jack Hessel, Tushar Khot, Khyathi Raghavi
  Chandu, David Wadden, Kelsey MacMillan, Noah A Smith, Iz Beltagy, et al. How far can camels
  go? exploring the state of instruction tuning on open resources. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04751,
  2023b.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-
  drew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Linting Xue, Noah Constant, Adam Roberts, Mihir Kale, Rami Al-Rfou, Aditya Siddhant, Aditya
  Barua, and Colin Raffel. mT5: A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text transformer.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), 2021.
Wen Yang, Chong Li, Jiajun Zhang, and Chengqing Zong. Bigtrans: Augmenting large lan-
 guage models with multilingual translation capability over 100 languages. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.18098, 2023.
Shaolei Zhang, Qingkai Fang, Zhuocheng Zhang, Zhengrui Ma, Yan Zhou, Langlin Huang, Mengyu
  Bu, Shangtong Gui, Yunji Chen, Xilin Chen, et al. Bayling: Bridging cross-lingual alignment and
  instruction following through interactive translation for large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.10968, 2023.
Yanli Zhao, Andrew Gu, Rohan Varma, Liang Luo, Chien-Chin Huang, Min Xu, Less Wright,
  Hamid Shojanazeri, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, et al. Pytorch fsdp: experiences on scaling fully
  sharded data parallel. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11277, 2023.
Wenhao Zhu, Hongyi Liu, Qingxiu Dong, Jingjing Xu, Shujian Huang, Lingpeng Kong, Jiajun Chen,
 and Lei Li. Multilingual machine translation with large language models: Empirical results and
 analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04675, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     D ETAILS OF O UR I NSTRUCTION - TUNING

For each experiment, we instruction-tune LLaMA’s full parameters for 3 epoch on 8×A100. The
learning rate is set as 2e-5 and batch size is set as 128. For training acceleration, we adopt FSDP
training strategy (Zhao et al., 2023).


B     D ETAILS OF O UR C ONSTRUCTED MI-E VAL DATASET

We follow the fashion of “self-instruct” (Wang et al., 2022) and generate new English instructions
with Alpaca dataset as seed. Then we translate these instructions to six non-English languages
with strong multilingual machine translation system NLLB Costa-jussà et al. (2022) and obtain the
multilingual multi-way evaluation set MI-E VAL.


           Task              Dataset      Prompt
                                          Answer the final question with following context.
                          XQUAD, MLQA     Context: <Context>
    Question Answering
                            (English)     Question: <Question>
                                          Answer:


                          XQUAD, MLQA                                                 ‫الرجاء الإجابة على الأسئلة بناء ً على الفقرات التالية‬
    Question Answering
                            (Arabic)
                                                                                                                 <Context> :‫فقرة‬

                                                                                                                          <Q> :‫سؤال‬

                                                                                                                                    :‫إجابة‬


                          XQUAD, MLQA     Απαντήστε στις ερωτήσεις με βάση τις παρακάτω παραγράφους
    Question Answering
                             (Greek)      παράγραφος: <Context>

                                          ερώτηση: <Question>

                                          Απάντηση:


                          XQUAD, MLQA     कृपया नम्न ल खत पैराग्राफ के अनुसार प्र ों के उ र दें
    Question Answering
                             (Hindi)
                                          अनु    े द: <Context>

                                          सवाल: <Question>

                                          उ र:


                          XQUAD, MLQA     Lütfen soruları aşağıdaki paragraflara göre cevaplayınız
    Question Answering
                            (Turkish)     paragraf: <Context>

                                          soru: <Question>

                                          Cevap:


                          XQUAD, MLQA     Hãy trả lời các câu hỏi theo đoạn văn sau
    Question Answering
                           (Vietnamese)   đoạn văn: <Context>

                                          câu hỏi: <Question>

                                          Trả lời:
                                          请根据以下段落，回答问题
                          XQUAD, MLQA     段落: <Context>
    Question Answering
                            (Chinese)     问题: <Question>
                                          答案:
    Machine Translation     Flores-101    Translate the following sentences from <SRC> to <TGT>.

                             Table 1: Prompt

Figure 8: Our used prompts for downstream tasks. In the prompt for question answering tasks,
<Context> and <Question> denote the placeholder for the given context and question. In the
prompt for machine translation tasks, <SRC> and <TGT> denote English name of source and
target language.                  1



                                                     12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    O UR U SED P ROMPTS FOR D OWNSTREAM TASKS

We report all our used prompts in Figure 8. For question answering tasks, i.e., XQUAD and MLQA,
we apply language-specific prompt when evaluate LLM’s performance on the target language. Ta-
ble 5 lists two cases for better illustration. For machine translation tasks, i.e. F LORES -101, we use
English instruction for multilingual translation in our experiments.

 [Input (English prompt)]
 Answer the final question with following context
 Context: The Broncos defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers in the divisional round, 23−16, by scoring 11 points in the final three
 minutes of the game. They then beat the defending Super Bowl XLIX champion New England Patriots in the AFC Champi-
 onship Game, 20−18, by intercepting a pass on New England’s 2-point conversion attempt with 17 seconds left on the clock.
 Despite Manning’s problems with interceptions during the season, he didn’t throw any in their two playoff games.
 Question: Who did the Broncos defeat in the AFC Championship game?
 Answer:

 [Output]
 New England Patriots
 [Input (Chinese prompt)]
 请根据以下段落，回答问题
 段落: 野马队在分区轮以23−16 击败了匹兹堡钢人队，在比赛的最后三分钟拿下11 分。然后他们在美式足球联合
 会(AFC) 锦标赛上以20−18 击败了第49 届超级碗卫冕冠军新英格兰爱国者队，在比赛还剩17 秒时拦截了新英格兰队
 的两分转换传球。尽管曼宁在本赛季的拦截上有问题，但他在两场季后赛中未投任何球。
 问题: 野马队在AFC 锦标赛中打败了谁？
 答案:

 [Output]
 野马队在AFC 锦标赛中打败了新英格兰爱国者队。


                        Table 5: Cases of using our prompt for handling QA tasks.



D    D ETAILS OF C ONDUCTING E VALUATION WITH C HAT GPT

In this paper, we use ChatGPT to automatically evaluate the quality of question answering and
instruction following. The evaluation prompts are reported below. Considering the API cost of
evaluating with ChatGPT, we use the first one hundred questions in XQUAD and MLQA as repre-
sentatives for experiments. Table 6 also reports exact-matching results on full test set. However, we
notice two limits of exact-matching evaluation: (1) it does not penalty answer that heavily copies the
given context. (2) it does not favor answer that is correct but different from the reference answer.

     Evaluating Answer Quality with ChatGPT
    Prompt:
    You will be given a context followed by question. You will then be given one potential
    answer to the question. Your task is to tell if the answer is correct. Please make sure you
    read and understand these instructions carefully. Please keep this document open while
    reviewing, and refer to it as needed.

    Evaluation Criteria: Correctness (YES or NO): Is the answer correct? YES means the answer
    provides an accurate and valid response that aligns with the facts, logic, and requirements
    of the question. The answer should be in the same language as the context. NO means
    otherwise.
    Context: <Context & Question>
    Answer: <Answer>

    Evaluation Form (YES or NO):


                                                         13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Comparing Response Quality with ChatGPT
    Prompt:
    We would like to request your feedback on the performance of two AI assistants in response
    to the user question displayed above. Please rate the helpfulness, relevance, accuracy, level
    of details of their responses.

    Each assistant receives an overall score on a scale of 1 to 10, where a higher score indicates
    better overall performance. Please first provide a comprehensive explanation of your
    evaluation, avoiding any potential bias and ensuring that the order in which the responses
    were presented does not affect your judgment. Then, output two lines indicating the scores
    for Assistant 1 and 2, respectively.

    Output with the following format:
    Evaluation evidence: <Explanation>
    Score of the Assistant 1: <Score>
    Score of the Assistant 2: <Score>


                                             XQUAD                               MLQA
                System
                               Ar     El     Hi  Tr        Vi     Zh     Ar     Hi  Vi        Zh
               Alpaca-7B       0.16   0.53   0.21   0.49   0.51   0.32   0.10   0.10   0.34   0.31
           Chinese-Alpaca-7B   0.29   0.11   0.07   0.32   0.18   0.72   0.20   0.09   0.07   0.58
              Bayling-7B       0.35   0.43   0.46   0.51   0.53   0.62   0.25   0.31   0.35   0.59
             x-LLaMA-7B        0.49   0.56   0.59   0.61   0.54   0.53   0.27   0.31   0.47   0.48

Table 6: Evaluation results on XQUAD and MLQA dataset (measured by exact matching). The
bold text denotes the highest answer accuracy along the column. For reference, Alpaca-7B’s answer
accuracy on corresponding English task is 0.88 on XQUAD and 0.66 on MLQA.


E    T RANSLATION P ERFORMANCE ON R EVERSE T RANSLATE D IRECTIONS
Due to the page limit of main text, we report translation performance of different systems on trans-
lating non-English to English here (Fig. 9). The findings are similar to those in §5.1.


        Figure 9: Performance of different systems on translating non-English to English.


                                                    14
