Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ED SRC: F EDERATED                                L EARNING                 WITH            S ELF -
R EGULATING C LIENTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a prominent privacy-preserving decen-
         tralized paradigm for collaborative machine learning across many devices. How-
         ever, FL suffers from performance degradation in the global model due to hetero-
         geneity in clients’ locally generated data. Some prior studies address this issue by
         limiting or even discarding certain clients’ contributions to the global model, re-
         sulting in unnecessary computation and communication for the discarded clients.
         Alternatively, selectively choosing clients to participate in FL may avoid such re-
         source waste. But, such active client selection requires client-level profiling that
         violates privacy. In this paper, we present a novel FL approach, called FedSRC:
         Federated Learning with Self-Regulating Clients, that can save clients’ resources
         while preserving their anonymity. In FedSRC, clients can determine themselves if
         their local training is favorable to the global model and whether they should partic-
         ipate in an FL round using a lightweight checkpoint based on a local inference loss
         on the global model. Through comprehensive evaluations using four datasets, we
         show that FedSRC can improve global model performance, all the while reducing
         communication costs by up to 30% and computation costs by 55%.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Motivation. Federated Learning (FL) is a popular privacy-preserving distributed Machine Learning
(ML) approach that has been implemented in widely used applications like Google’s Gboard Hard
et al. (2019) and Apple’s Siri Granqvist et al. (2020). In FL, many clients collaboratively train a
shared ML model through iterations where clients locally train the shared model using their private
data and anonymously send back their updated model. FL enjoys the advantages of training with
a larger dataset from many clients, yet clients’ data never leaves their devices, offering enhanced
privacy. A central FL server facilitates the iterations by aggregating the clients’ model updates into
the shared global model.
A well-documented drawback of FL’s siloed decentralized training is the slow convergence and poor
performance of the global model due to statistical differences (i.e., not independent or identically
distributed (non-IID)) among the clients’ data Li et al. (2020b). On top of the naturally occurring
data variation among FL clients, another source of such statistical differences is the data quality. The
quality and reliability of the locally collected client data by different hardware and sensors may vary
significantly, especially in mobile and wearable devices Cho et al. (2021a;b). Device manufacturers
utilize hardware/sensors of varying qualities to meet their own goals of device functionality and price
points. Moreover, continued innovation in mobile devices is yielding increasingly high-quality data
with newer generations of sensors and hardware Haghi et al. (2017); Cheng et al. (2021). A recent
Facebook study identifies thousands of different types of hardware among the devices using their
application Wu et al. (2019). In addition, malfunctioning devices can also be responsible for feeding
FL with bad-quality data Liu et al. (2020). Worse yet, the FL clients’ devices and sensors are also
subject to malicious attacks that may intentionally corrupt client data to poison the global model,
exacerbating FL’s data quality issue Tolpegin et al. (2020).
Limitations of existing approaches. A prominent line of prior work aims at handling the afore-
mentioned data heterogeneity/quality issue by controlling the contributions from different clients Li
et al. (2022); Karimireddy et al. (2020); Yin et al. (2018); Talukder & Islam (2022). This approach
is built upon the idea that the updates from certain clients (e.g., clients with bad data quality) are un-


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


favorable for the global model and should be given a lower weight in FL’s centralized model update
aggregation. While this can improve FL performance, a major limitation of the aggregation-weight-
based approach is that clients whose model updates receive a lower weight and, hence, contribute
little to the central model still go through the computationally hungry model training and communi-
cate the updated model to the central FL server. This unnecessary use of clients’ computation and
communication resources makes FL training inefficient.
An alternative to the wasteful weight-based approach to handle FL’s data heterogeneity is “active
client selection” where the central server profiles the quality of clients’ model updates and selects
only “favorable” clients to participate in FL training Cho et al. (2022); Goetz et al. (2019). While
active client selection does not waste resources, this approach needs to tag client updates with client
IDs for the active selection. Therefore, it cannot maintain clients’ anonymity and diminishes FL
privacy.
Our contribution. We recognize that both the above-mentioned resource waste and breach of
anonymity can be avoided (while still handling data quality issues) if the clients themselves can
anticipate the resource waste and refrain from participating in model updates. To enable this client-
side active client selection, we propose a novel FL approach where the clients actively regulate
their own participation. We call this Federated Learning with Self-Regulating Clients or FedSRC in
short. In FedSRC, clients implement a “checkpoint” in its local training path to determine whether
it should continue and finish training and send the model update back to the FL central server. A
client saves the computation cost of local training and the communication cost of sending the model
update if it decides to exit the FL round. On the other hand, client anonymity is not violated, as the
central server does not need any client profiling for client selection. Furthermore, FedSRC’s client-
side implementation can still be paired with heavier centralized FL techniques that tackle model and
data poisoning attacks at the central server. To the best of our knowledge, FedSRC offers the first
variation of FL that allows clients to make strategic decisions to aid the FL global model.
However, implementing FedSRC’s active client
selection (i.e., participation checkpoint) that               Global Server                       FL Client
handles FL’s data quality issue is challenging.
In FL, clients only have access to their own
data and, therefore, cannot statistically deter-                                Global M
                                                                                           odel
mine their data quality and employ strategic FL
participation. Moreover, our selection strategy                                 Inference Loss           Inference
                                                        Threshold
must be lightweight since it needs to be de-            Calculation                                       Checkpoint
                                                                                 Threshold
ployed on the client device.
                                                                                                          Training
With these constraints in mind, we develop an                                                             Potential
                                                                                      Model
inference loss-based participation policy where                               Trained                   Training Cost
                                                                                                           Savings
the clients utilize the global shared model as           Model
a “litmus test” for their data quality and exit        Aggregation              Global M                  Potential
                                                                                           odel          Upload Cost
the FL training if they have high local infer-                                                             Savings
ence loss on the global model. Our design
is motivated by our empirical observation that,    Figure 1: FedSRC adds one checkpoint based on
in general, clients’ low-quality data results in   inference loss during training for regulating client
higher local inference loss on the global model.   participation.
Fig. 1 illustrates the main working principle of
FedSRC while the details are presented in Sec-
tion 3.1.
We also offer the first-ever theoretical analysis of FL convergence under clients with data quality
issues. Our analysis reveals that FedSRC’s strategic selection can boost both the performance and
convergence rate of FL. We evaluate FedSRC using four different datasets and show that with the
same number of communication rounds, FedSRC can save as much as 30% on communication and
55% on computational cost.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   F EDERATED L EARNING

Problem formulation. Suppose in a federated setup, there are K clients, each with their own dataset
Dk . The objective of FL is to minimize the global loss F (w), which can be expressed as
                                              K X                     K
                                      1       X                       X
                         F (w) = PK                      f (w, ξ) =         pk Fk (w)                (1)
                                    k=1 |Dk | k=1 ξ∈Dk                k=1

where f (w, ξ) is the composite loss function for sample ξ and model parameter w, pk = PK|Dk|D       |
                                                                                                 k=1   k|

is the fraction of data at the k-th client, and Fk (w) = |D1k | ξ∈Dk f (w, ξ) is the local loss function
                                                               P

of client k.
Solution. The FedAVG McMahan et al. (2017) algorithm minimizes Eq. equation 1 efficiently by
dividing training into multiple rounds. In each round t, a fraction C of clients (m = CK) is
randomly selected from K, and the selected clients are denoted by S (t) . Selected clients perform τ
local SGD iterations and update their models, which are then aggregated into a new global model.
Accordingly, the model update for a client can be written as follows:

                  (t)
                 wk − ηt gk (wk(t) , ξk(t) )                               if (t + 1) mod τ ̸= 0
          (t+1)
         wk     = 1 P w(t) − η g (w(t) , ξ (t) ) = w̄(t+1)

                 m          l        t l     l l                           if (t + 1) mod τ = 0
                          l∈S (t)
         (t+1)
where wk       denotes the local model parameters of client k at iteration t, w̄(t+1) is the global
                                         (t) (t)                   (t)
model, ηt is the learning rate, and gk (wk , ξk ) = 1b ξ∈ξ(t) ∇f (wk , ξ) is the stochastic gradient
                                                      P
                                                              k
                   (t)
over mini-batch ξk of size b which is randomly sampled from local dataset Dk of client k. The
global model, w̄(t) , is only updated after every τ iteration. But, for the purpose of our analysis, we
consider a virtual sequence of w̄(t) that is updated at each iteration as follows:
                                                              ηt X         (t) (t)
                       w̄(t+1) = w̄(t) − ηt ḡ (t) =: w̄(t) −         gk (wk , ξk ).
                                                              m   (t)
                                                              k∈S


2.2   I MPROVING FL W ITH DATA Q UALITY I SSUES

Biased aggregation. In FL, treating every client equally (e.g., model aggregation of FedAVG)
when they have data quality issues may lead to severe performance degradation of the global model
Talukder & Islam (2022). Unlike centralized training, FL suffers more from data quality issues. FL
clients train their ML models locally, and their model updates can deteriorate significantly due to bad
data, eventually affecting the aggregated (with equal weights) global model. To mitigate this, sev-
eral biased FL aggregation policies have been developed Li et al. (2022); Karimireddy et al. (2020);
Talukder & Islam (2022). However, while a biased aggregation improves global performance, it
can also be seen as “unfair” to clients who get low or zero weights and, consequently, do not benefit
from federation. After all, FL is intended for collaborative training across many participating clients.
Nevertheless, we argue in favor of biased aggregation since clients with bad data quality suffer from
worse model performance on their local data anyway; including them in model aggregation only
harms the global model for everyone else.
Self-regulating clients. Implementing the biased aggregation in the central server is inefficient
since it requires every client, even those with data quality issues, to complete the local training and
model update. To avoid this wasteful (for clients with bad data) model training and updating the
central server, we adopt biased aggregation through client selection, i.e., we select the clients with
good data to participate in FL training. However, client selection in such a manner requires profiling
of clients’ data quality and, hence, if implemented at the central server, breaks clients’ anonymity.
Consequently, to maintain client anonymity even through the client selection process, we need the
clients to be able to profile and apply the selection to themselves; in other words, clients need to
self-regulate their FL participation.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   (a) CIFAR10              (b) FEMNIST                (c) MNIST
Figure 2: Histograms of clients’ test losses on the global model of one training round of FedAVG
for different dataset in presence of bad clients.


                   (a) CIFAR10              (b) FEMNIST                (c) MNIST
Figure 3: Accuracy of inference loss-based detection (cutoff) of good and bad clients across the
training rounds.


Challenges. Implementing self-regulating clients with strategic client selection is non-trivial. First,
clients only have access to their own data, which may not be enough to apply statistical methods to
determine the quality of data effectively. Second, unlike the central server, the clients also do not
have access to other clients’ model updates. Third, the selection strategy must be lightweight with
low overhead since FL clients are resource-constrained. In what follows, we develop a lightweight
client selection policy to address these challenges.

3     O UR S OLUTION
3.1   FedSRC: F EDERATE L EARNING WITH S ELF -R EGULATING C LIENTS

Client classification. To implement a client selection strategy, we first need to define who should
be considered as a “bad client” and discarded from model aggregation. Since FL clients’ data is
private, we cannot directly assess clients’ data quality. Hence, we classify bad clients based on the
impact of their inclusion in the global model as follows:
Definition 1 (ϵ-Bad Client). An FL client is ϵ-bad if its inclusion in the unbiased global aggregation
increases the converged global objective loss by more than ϵ.

The parameter ϵ in our definition serves two purposes. First, it allows us to set the degree of negative
impact that constitutes a bad client. Second, it can absorb the variation of global objective loss (for
good client participation) due to non-IID data distribution and the sequence of client participation
in the training rounds. Our definition, however, can only be an approximate definition of bad clients
since we cannot distinguish the impact of bad data (from bad clients) and non-IID data (from good
clients) on the global loss. Nevertheless, our definition serves to develop a client selection strategy
for improving the global model performance, albeit there is a possibility (tunable through ϵ) of
treating some good clients with non-IID data as bad clients.
Client selection strategy. The client classification in Definition 1 requires N + 1 complete FL
training for N clients, rendering it impractical due to its huge computation and communication
overheads. Moreover, this classification also breaks client anonymity at the central server. Hence,
we need to develop a lightweight approach for identifying good and bad clients at the client level
that can serve as a proxy for Defintion 1.
We devise FedSRC’s client selection strategy based on our empirical observation that clients with
bad quality data suffer from worse performance when vetted against the global model. More specif-
ically, we find that the bad clients tend to have a higher inference loss on the shared global model
across training rounds, even when they are included in the model aggregation. To demonstrate this,
we run experiments on several data sets with 30% of clients suffering from noisy data (more details


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 FedSRC
Input: Initial global model (w0 )
 1: for each round i = 0 to t do
 2:     Global model sharing (Server): The central server randomly selects a subset of FL clients
         and sends them the latest global model.
 3:     Local inference (Client):The clients run inference on the global model with a random subset
         of their training data set and send back the inference loss to the central server.
 4:     Setting participation threshold (Server): The central server collects the test losses from the
         clients, determines the participation threshold, and then broadcasts the threshold to the
         participating clients.
 5:     Self-Regulating participation (Client): The clients check their test loss against the server’s
         threshold. A client stops training and drops from the FL round if its test loss exceeds the
         participation threshold.
 6:     Local training (Client): Participating clients complete the training and send the updated
         model to the central server.
 7:     Model aggregation (Server): Central server aggregates the model updates and prepares the
         global model for the next FL round.
 8: end for


of data sets and how we add the noise can be found in Section 4.1 and Appendix B). Fig. 2 shows the
histograms of clients’ test losses on the global model of one training round of FedAVG for different
data sets. We can clearly see that the test losses of the bad clients are distinguishably higher than
those of good clients, and we can set a cutoff/threshold to separate the good and the bad clients.
To investigate the efficacy of an inference loss threshold-based approach, we then vary the clients’
data quality by changing the amount of noise in the bad clients’ data. We track the accuracy of an
inference loss-based detection of good and bad clients and show them in Fig. 3. We see that, even
when there is only 10% Gaussian noise added to the bad clients, an interference loss threshold can
identify the good and bad clients with ∼80% accuracy.
The inference on the client side is not computation-heavy and can be done on a randomly chosen
subset of a client’s training data. An inference loss-based approach satisfies our requirements for
client-side regulation since it can be a reasonably accurate proxy for Definition 1. Consequently, we
set our client selection strategy as follows: during FL training, we select the clients with inference
loss lower than a given threshold.
Threshold-based participation. While we would like the clients to implement our selection strat-
egy and set the participation threshold themselves, they do not have access to the inference losses of
other clients. Hence, in FedSRC, we engage the central server to anonymously collect the inference
losses of participating clients’ of a particular FL round and determine the participation threshold.
This is an additional step we introduce in FedSRC. We defer the discussion of the overhead associ-
ated with FedSRC to the end of this section.
Setting the participation threshold. Since we have the inference losses of both good and bad
clients, the central server can set the threshold autonomously by running unsupervised clustering
to break the inference losses into two groups and setting the cluster boundary as the threshold. A
computationally lighter alternative to the autonomous approach above is utilizing insight into user
data sets, such as the expected percentage of clients with bad data or user-defined participation
policy, such as discarding a certain percentage of clients every round. The central server can then
set the threshold accordingly to satisfy the externally determined participation percentage. Ideally,
with perfect separation between good and bad clients, the user-supplied percentage should match
the percentage of bad clients participating in the FL round. While determining the percentage of
bad clients in a real-world scenario is non-trivial, we find in our evaluation that overestimating the
percentage of bad clients is more favorable than underestimating (Fig. 11(a) in the Appendix C.3).
The intuition behind this observation is that including a few bad clients is more harmful to the global
model than missing the contribution from a few good clients.
After setting the threshold, the central server broadcasts the threshold loss to all clients selected for
that specific training round. At no point in FedSRC does the central server need to track the source


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of the data (i.e., client ID) it collects from clients. We summarize the implementation of FedSRC in
Algorithm 1.
Overhead of FedSRC’s implementation. FedSRC’s checkpoint adds minor computational over-
head to the client as we add one additional inference on a subset of the client’s training data. But the
added inference cost is negligible compared to the training cost savings. We can also tap the initial
minibatch error before the global weight is modified to estimate the inference loss of the clients when
the minibatch is randomly sampled from the training data. In FedSRC, clients also have additional
communication with the central server to send their test losses. However, the clients send only one
value to the server, hence, the extra communication cost is negligible. Nevertheless, to collect the
test losses from all clients reliably, the server may need to offer longer response deadlines, thereby
leaving FL clients waiting for the participation threshold.

3.2   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS

Here, we prove the convergence of FedSRC and discuss how our client selection policy affects the
convergence. To facilitate our analysis, We make the following assumptions:
Assumption 1. F1 , . . . , Fk are all L-smooth, i.e., for all v and w,
                                                                    L
                        Fk (v) ≤ Fk (w) + (v − w)T ∇Fk (w) + ∥v − w∥22 .
                                                                     2
Assumption 2. F1 , . . . , Fk are all µ-strongly convex, i.e., for all v and w,
                                                                     µ
                        Fk (v) ≥ Fk (w) + (v − w)T ∇Fk (w) + ∥v − w∥22 .
                                                                     2
Assumption 3. For the mini-batch ξk uniformly sampled at random from Dk of user k, the resulting
stochastic gradient is unbiased; that is, E[gk (wk , ξk )] = ∇Fk (wk ). Also, the variance of stochastic
gradients is bounded: E[∥gk (wk , ξk ) − ∇Fk (wk )∥2 ] ≤ σ 2 for all k = 1, . . . , K.
Assumption 4. The stochastic gradients’ expected squared norms are uniformly bounded, i.e.,
E[∥gk (wk , ξk )∥2 ] ≤ G2 for k = 1, . . . , K.
Denote by B the set of ϵ-bad clients for a fixed ϵ > 0, and let G be the set of good clients (i.e., those
that are not ϵ-bad. By Definition 1, these sets are fixed.
Since our assumption is that there are bad clients whose updates adversely affect the global model,
our convergence analysis takes this into account by separating the good and bad clients in all terms
defined below. We utilize similar ideas to Cho et al. (2022) by defining a local-global objective gap
and a skewness of biased selection of clients who send their model update to the central server. In
contrast to prior work, our definitions are in terms of the good (or potentially bad) clients, which
allows us to understand the effect of our client selection strategy in the context of our problem setup.
                                                            P
We define the global loss for two client sets: Fg (w) = k∈G pk Fk (w) for the good clients in G,
and similarly define Fb for the bad clients in B. The optimal global losses for good and bad clients
are Fg∗ = minw Fg (w) and Fb∗ = minw Fb (w). Additionally, we define the global model optimum
w∗ = arg minw F (w), and the client-level optima wk∗ = arg minw Fk (w) for each client k.
Definition 2 (Local-Global Objective). We define the local-global objective gap for the set of good
clients as follows:
                                  X                X
                     Γg = Fg∗ −         pk Fk∗ =         pk (Fk (w∗ ) − Fk (wk∗ )) ≥ 0.              (2)
                                  k∈G              k∈G

For highly non-iid data, Γg is non-zero, and larger Γg implies higher data heterogeneity. Γg = 0
implies consistent optimum models among the clients and the central server.
Definition 3 (Selection Skewness). Let w be the current weights of the global model, and π be any
client selection strategy. We let S(π, w) denote the selected clients using selection strategy π and
define the skewness of the client selection strategy π for good and bad clients via
                                         ES(π,w) p1              Fk (w′ ) − Fk∗
                                                         P
                                                         k∈S(π,w)∩G
                    ρg (S(π, w), w′ ) =                           X                       ,          (3)
                                                     Fg (w′ ) −         pk Fk∗
                                                                  k∈G


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               ES(π,w) 1q                  Fk (w′ ) − Fk∗
                                                               P
                                                            k∈S(π,w)∩B
                    ρb (S(π, w), w′ ) =                              X                           ,   (4)
                                                        Fg (w′ ) −         pk Fk∗
                                                                     k∈G
where p is the number of selected good clients, q is the number of selected bad clients, and m = p+q.
Above, the current global model weights w influences the selection strategy π, while w′ is the global
model weight at which the selection skewness is evaluated. ES(π,w) [·] represents the expectation
over the randomness from the selection strategy π in determining S(π, w).
Note that the denominator of both ρg and ρb are the same, and represent the current gap between
the local and global models for good clients only. This is because we do not wish to select the
bad clients, and their local-global objective gap should not influence our convergence analysis. The
following terms are useful for providing a concrete error bound in the main theorem below.

                                         ρ̄g = min′ ρg (S(π, w), w′ ),                               (5)
                                                 w,w
                                         ρ̃g = max ρg (S(π, w), w∗ ).                                (6)
                                                  w
We define ρ̄b and ρ̃b similarly.
                                                                                   1
Theorem 1. Under the Assumptions stated above, for a learning rate ηt = µ(t+γ)          with γ = 4L  µ ,
and for client selection strategy π that selects the same number of good and bad clients (p and q,
respectively) after time T , the error of federated learning with self-regulating clients satisfies, for
every t ≥ T ,


                                  4L(32τ 2 G2 + σ 2 /m)   8L2 Γg ρ¯b   L(γ + 1)(∥w̄(1) − w∗ ∥2 )

                           1
E[F (w̄(t) )] − F ∗ ≤                                   +            +
                        (t + γ)          3µ2 ρ̄g            µ2 ρ¯g                2
                        |                                  {z                                    }
                                                               Vanishing Term

                        8LΓg       pρ̃g + q ρ̃b
                   +                            −1
                          3µ          mρ̄g
                        |             {z           }
                                   Bias Term
                                                                                                     (7)
To the best of our knowledge, Theorem 1 provides the first theoretical bound of convergence for
federated averaging in the presence of bad clients. The complete proof of the theorem can be found
in Appendix A.
Effect of the client selection strategy. First, note that for an unbiased client selection strategy
(clients participate in the model update uniformly at random), both good and bad clients will provide
a model update. As the training of the model progresses, the loss of the good clients decreases,
whereas the loss of the bad clients does not improve. This results in a decreasing ρg , but increasing
ρb , both of which negatively affect both the rate of convergence of the vanishing term and the
magnitude of the bias term in equation 7. A biased client selection strategy that is able to discard
clients with higher loss will ensure an increase in the number of good clients selected and decrease in
number of bad clients selected, which reduces the value of ρb and increases the value of ρg , resulting
in both faster convergence and smaller bias.
Reducing ρb and increasing ρg for faster convergence. Under our model for good and bad clients,
if our selection strategy prioritizes client updates for those with small testing loss value Fk , the
number of bad clients selected in S(π, w) will be smaller, which results in larger ρg but smaller
ρb . Consequently, the first two terms in the vanishing term of Theorem 1 will be smaller leading to
faster convergence compared to an unbiased selection strategy.
Bias Term. Similarly, a client selection strategy that prioritizes lower-loss clients will reduce the
bias term as p increases. Indeed, ρeb should be larger than ρeg for a given selection strategy, so
decreasing q, the number of bad clients selected, decreases the numerator significantly, even as p
increases. Likewise, as p increases based on the selection strategy, the denominator increases as
well, thereby decreasing the bias term.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (a) FEMNIST             (b) CIFAR10                  (c) MNIST          (d) SHAKESPEARE
           Figure 4: Comparison of global loss of FedSRC with benchmark algorithms.

4     E VALUATION

4.1   S ETTINGS

Dataset and model description. We utilize four prominent datasets: MNIST LeCun et al. (2010),
CIFAR10 Krizhevsky (2009), FEMNIST Caldas et al. (2018), and SHAKESPEARE Caldas et al.
(2018) which are widely utilized in the literature McMahan et al. (2017); Li et al. (2020c). For
the MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets, we create non-IID settings by assigning each client a dominant
class of 50% data and the remaining classes with the rest of the data. FEMNIST and SHAKESPEARE
datasets are naturally non-IID. For the handwriting classification of MNIST and FEMNIST, we im-
plement multilayer perceptron (MLP). Convolutional Neural Network(CNN) is used for CIFAR10
image classification, and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is used for the next character prediction
in SHAKESPEARE. More details of our model description and dataset can be found in Appendix B.
Evaluation scenarios. We consider three scenarios reflecting potential data corruption due to sensor
quality, malfunction, and aging. Label shuffling: It can be referred to as random sensor malfunction,
leading to assigning random labels to data. Label flipping: It refers to mislabeling data, leading
to the same mislabel across all the client data. Noisy data: It results from hardware quality in the
feature space. To simulate this, we added Gaussian noise to the feature and then clipped the value
within the desired feature space level. As the default configuration for our evaluation, we use a mix
of 70% good clients with 30% bad clients. The bad clients are equally divided among the three
cases. More details of our evaluation scenarios can be found in Appendix B.
Benchmark algorithms. To assess the performance of FedSRC, we compare it with the following
benchmark algorithms. FedAVG McMahan et al. (2017): the standard federated averaging technique
which assigns client weights based on dataset size. Median Yin et al. (2018): a Byzantine robust
aggregation rule that independently aggregates each model parameter. For each ith parameter, the
server sorts the ith parameters of the selected clients and takes the median as the global parameter.
Trimmed Mean Yin et al. (2018): another Byzantine robust aggregation rule that independently
aggregates each model parameter. It sorts the parameters and removes a percentage of the largest and
smallest values, then averages the remaining for each parameter. FedASL Talukder & Islam (2022):
automatically assigns weights to clients based on the median of their training losses. Clients within
a predefined “good zone” around the median have higher contributions to the global model, while
those outside this zone have inversely proportional contributions of the distance from the median.
Krum Blanchard et al. (2017): operates by calculating the Euclidean distance norms between each
client’s model weights and those of other clients. It removes the highest value for each client,
averages the rest, and selects the client with the lowest scores as the next global model.

4.2   R ESULTS

Comparison with the benchmark algo-
rithms.       We compare FedSRC with the
benchmark algorithms under our default set-
ting. Here, we block 30% clients in FedSRC,
Trimmed Mean, and Krum, while FedASL dis-
cards clients falling outside one standard de-
                                                       (a) Computation Savings (b) Communication Sav-
viation (i.e., discards ∼32% clients). FedAVG
                                                                               ings
does not discard any clients. We show the test
loss of the global model against an uncorrected           Figure 5: Client side savings of FedSRC.
test data set in Fig. 4. The comparison of their


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


accuracy can be found in Fig. 6 in Appendix B. Our experiments reveal that FedSRC consistently
outperforms other benchmark algorithms resulting in better global performance. For instance, for
the FEMNIST data set, after 300 training rounds, FedSRC has 33%, 33%, 33%, 28% and 34% lower
loss compared to FedASL, Trimmed Mean, Median, Krum, and FedAVG. Extended evaluation of
FedSRC can be found in Appendix B for IID and extreme Non-IID cases for MNIST and CIFAR10
and in all the cases FedSRC outperforms the benchmark algorithms.
Computation and communication savings. To evaluate the client-side computation and communi-
cation savings achieved by FedSRC, we conduct experiments across various proportions of corrupted
clients for different datasets. Clients need to do a forward pass (inference loss) of the first batch only
to make the decision of participation. Fig. 5(a) demonstrates that FedSRC yields substantial savings
of up to 55% in local computational expenses for higher proportions of malicious clients. Turning
to communication savings, when a client abstains from participating, the model upload cost for the
trained model is spared. Meanwhile, there is negligible extra communication for sending the test
loss to the server. Fig. 5(b) shows that FedSRC can save up to 30% of the communication cost with
60% bad clients. Note here that, unlike computation savings, the communication savings do not
depend on the dataset.
Extended results. We also evaluate FedSRC’s integration with centralized FL approaches and vary-
ing degrees of data quality issues. We defer these results to the Appendix C due to space limitations.

5    R ELATED WORK
The performance of FL deteriorates in the presence of corrupted clients Tolpegin et al. (2020). No-
tably, FedAVG lacks mechanisms to mitigate the impact of bad clients Fang et al. (2020); Tolpegin
et al. (2020). Consequently, various FL algorithms have emerged to defend against data corruption
Pillutla et al. (2022); So et al. (2020); Sattler et al. (2020). Statistics-based algorithms. Krum Blan-
chard et al. (2017) selects a global model based on similarity to local models. Bulyan Guerraoui et al.
(2018) augments Krum with a Trimmed Mean Yin et al. (2018) variant. However, Bulyan’s compu-
tational burden arises from dual computations in each training round. Byzantine Robust Algorithms.
Median Yin et al. (2018) sorts outliers from individual models before global averaging. Geometric
Median (GM) Chen et al. (2017); Pillutla et al. (2022) is another technique, but computational inten-
sity hampers its edge feasibility. Client Selection Algorithms. Loss-based client selection methods,
like AFL Goetz et al. (2019) and Power-of-Choice Cho et al. (2022), assess and prioritize high-loss
clients. However, these methods compromise privacy due to ID tagging. Re-weighting Algorithms.
Zhao et al. (2020) adjusts aggregation weights based on cross-validation. Zhao et al. (2019) and
Talukder & Islam (2022) reweight models using auxiliary data, but online detection raises privacy
concerns. Other Data Poisoning Approaches. Some methods rely on trusted client subsets Cao et al.
(2021); Han & Zhang (2020); Li et al. (2020a); Sattler et al. (2020); Ghosh et al. (2020) or cluster-
based approaches Sattler et al. (2020) for defense. Yet, trustworthiness and communication con-
straints pose challenges.
In contrast, FedSRC can manage client-side data corruption without reliance on validation datasets
or identity disclosure. Moreover, client-side blocking reduces local computation and communica-
tion costs. To the best of our knowledge, FedSRC is the pioneering algorithm that addresses data
corruption directly from the client side.

6    C ONCLUDING R EMARKS
In this paper, we presented FedSRC, a novel solution for handling data corruption from the client side
to enhance the efficiency of federated learning. Our approach saves communication and computation
costs while enhancing global model accuracy and preserving client anonymity. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first attempt to regulate client participation from the client side. Limitations.
FedSRC relies on client-level statistics to implement its checkpoint, and therefore, it cannot operate
if a significant portion of clients is corrupted. FedSRC saves the communication cost of sending a
trained model to the server. A client in FedSRC still needs to download the model to check its local
test loss, regardless of its participation. As FedSRC works at the client level, it cannot prevent model
poisoning attacks with compromised clients. While FedSRC cannot prevent these attacks, it does
not introduce any new attack vector.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Julien Stainer. Machine learning
  with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Sebastian Caldas, Sai Meher Karthik Duddu, Peter Wu, Tian Li, Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMa-
  han, Virginia Smith, and Ameet Talwalkar. Leaf: A benchmark for federated settings. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.01097, 2018.
Xiaoyu Cao, Minghong Fang, Jia Liu, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Fltrust: Byzantine-robust feder-
  ated learning via trust bootstrapping. In ISOC Network and Distributed System Security Sympo-
  sium (NDSS), 2021.
Yudong Chen, Lili Su, and Jiaming Xu. Distributed statistical machine learning in adversarial set-
  tings: Byzantine gradient descent. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of
  Computing Systems, 1(2):1–25, 2017.
Yuemeng Cheng, Kan Wang, Hao Xu, Tangan Li, Qinghui Jin, and Daxiang Cui. Recent develop-
  ments in sensors for wearable device applications. Analytical and bioanalytical chemistry, 413
  (24):6037–6057, 2021.
Sylvia Cho, Ipek Ensari, Chunhua Weng, Michael G Kahn, and Karthik Natarajan. Factors affecting
  the quality of person-generated wearable device data and associated challenges: Rapid systematic
  review. JMIR mHealth and uHealth, 9(3):e20738, 2021a.
Sylvia Cho, Chunhua Weng, Michael G Kahn, Karthik Natarajan, et al. Identifying data quality
  dimensions for person-generated wearable device data: Multi-method study. JMIR mHealth and
  uHealth, 9(12):e31618, 2021b.
Yae Jee Cho, Jianyu Wang, and Gauri Joshi. Client selection in federated learning: Convergence
  analysis and power-of-choice selection strategies. AISTATS, 2022.
Minghong Fang, Xiaoyu Cao, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Gong. Local model poisoning attacks to
 {Byzantine-Robust} federated learning. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Secu-
 rity 20), pp. 1605–1622, 2020.
Avishek Ghosh, Jichan Chung, Dong Yin, and Kannan Ramchandran. An efficient framework for
  clustered federated learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:19586–
  19597, 2020.
Jack Goetz, Kshitiz Malik, Duc Bui, Seungwhan Moon, Honglei Liu, and Anuj Kumar. Active
  federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12641, 2019.
Filip Granqvist, Matt Seigel, Rogier van Dalen, Aine Cahill, Stephen Shum, and Matthias Paulik.
   Improving on-device speaker verification using federated learning with privacy. 2020.
Rachid Guerraoui, Sébastien Rouault, et al. The hidden vulnerability of distributed learning in
  byzantium. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3521–3530. PMLR, 2018.
Mostafa Haghi, Kerstin Thurow, and Regina Stoll. Wearable devices in medical internet of things:
 scientific research and commercially available devices. Healthcare informatics research, 23(1):
 4–15, 2017.
Yufei Han and Xiangliang Zhang. Robust federated learning via collaborative machine teaching. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4075–4082, 2020.
Andrew Hard, Chloé M Kiddon, Daniel R Ramage, Françoise Simone Beaufays, Hubert Eichner,
  Kanishka Rao, Rajiv Mathews, Sean Augenstein, and Swaroop Ramaswamy. Federated learning
  for mobile keyboard prediction. 2019.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  ICML, 2020.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, 2009.
Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and CJ Burges. Mnist handwritten digit database. ATT Labs [Online].
  Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist, 2, 2010.
Shenghui Li, Edith Ngai, Fanghua Ye, and Thiemo Voigt. Auto-weighted robust federated learning
  with corrupted data sources. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., feb 2022.
Suyi Li, Yong Cheng, Wei Wang, Yang Liu, and Tianjian Chen. Learning to detect malicious clients
  for robust federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00211, 2020a.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
  methods, and future directions. IEEE signal processing magazine, 37(3):50–60, 2020b.
Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of
  fedavg on non-iid data. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020c. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJxNAnVtDS.
Caihua Liu, Patrick Nitschke, Susan P Williams, and Didar Zowghi. Data quality and the internet of
  things. Computing, 102(2):573–599, 2020.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
Krishna Pillutla, Sham M Kakade, and Zaid Harchaoui. Robust aggregation for federated learning.
  IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 2022.
Felix Sattler, Klaus-Robert Müller, Thomas Wiegand, and Wojciech Samek. On the byzantine ro-
  bustness of clustered federated learning. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference
  on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 8861–8865. IEEE, 2020.
Jinhyun So, Başak Güler, and A Salman Avestimehr. Byzantine-resilient secure federated learning.
   IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 39(7):2168–2181, 2020.
Zahidur Talukder and Mohammad A Islam. Computationally efficient auto-weighted aggregation
  for heterogeneous federated learning. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Edge Computing
  and Communications (EDGE), pp. 12–22. IEEE, 2022.
Vale Tolpegin, Stacey Truex, Mehmet Emre Gursoy, and Ling Liu. Data poisoning attacks against
  federated learning systems. In Computer Security–ESORICS 2020: 25th European Symposium
  on Research in Computer Security, ESORICS 2020, Guildford, UK, September 14–18, 2020, Pro-
  ceedings, Part I 25, pp. 480–501. Springer, 2020.
Carole-Jean Wu, David Brooks, Kevin Chen, Douglas Chen, Sy Choudhury, Marat Dukhan, Kim
  Hazelwood, Eldad Isaac, Yangqing Jia, Bill Jia, Tommer Leyvand, Hao Lu, Yang Lu, Lin Qiao,
  Brandon Reagen, Joe Spisak, Fei Sun, Andrew Tulloch, Peter Vajda, Xiaodong Wang, Yanghan
  Wang, Bram Wasti, Yiming Wu, Ran Xian, Sungjoo Yoo, and Peizhao Zhang. Machine learning
  at facebook: Understanding inference at the edge. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on
  High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pp. 331–344, 2019. doi: 10.1109/HPCA.
  2019.00048.
Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Ramchandran Kannan, and Peter Bartlett. Byzantine-robust distributed
  learning: Towards optimal statistical rates. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5650–5659. PMLR, 2018.
Lingchen Zhao, Qian Wang, Qin Zou, Yan Zhang, and Yanjiao Chen. Privacy-preserving collabora-
  tive deep learning with unreliable participants. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
  Security, 15:1486–1500, 2019.
Lingchen Zhao, Shengshan Hu, Qian Wang, Jianlin Jiang, Chao Shen, Xiangyang Luo, and Pengfei
  Hu. Shielding collaborative learning: Mitigating poisoning attacks through client-side detection.
  IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 18(5):2029–2041, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS

Our proof follows similar lines to that of Cho et al. (2022) but with modifications based on our
problem formulation of having good and bad clients as well as our different skewness metrics and
local-global objective gap ρg , ρb , and Γg , respectively. To begin, we present some preliminary
lemmas that are useful for the proof of Theorem 1.

A.1    P RELIMINARY L EMMAS

Lemma 1. Assume Fk is L-smooth with global optimum at wk∗ . Then for any wk in the domain of
Fk ,

                              ∥∇Fk (wk )∥2 ≤ 2L(Fk (wk ) − Fk (wk∗ )).

Proof. Since Fk is L-smooth,
                                                                      1
            Fk (wk ) − Fk (wk∗ ) − ⟨∇Fk (wk∗ ), wk − wk∗ ⟩ ≥            ∥∇Fk (wk ) − ∇Fk (wk∗ )∥2
                                                                     2L
and ∇Fk (wk∗ ) = 0 since wk∗ is a minimizer, so this implies
                                                                1
                                 Fk (wk ) − Fk (wk∗ ) ≥           ∥∇Fk (wk )∥2
                                                               2L
which yields the claim.
                   (t)      1                       (t)
Lemma 2. For wk and w̄(t) = m
                                           P
                                                   wk ,
                                         k∈S (t)
                                                                
                             1         X                  (t)
                               E                 ∥w̄(t) − wk ∥2  ≤ 16ηt2 τ 2 G2 .
                             m
                                       k∈S (t)


Proof. We have


    1 X              (t)
                            X 1 X (t)           (t)    1 X X        (t)   (t)
           ∥w̄(t) − wk ∥2 ≤      ∥       wk̃ − wk ∥2 = 2          ∥wk̃ − wk ∥2
    m  (t)                   (t)
                                   m                  m   (t)
      k∈S                        k∈S (t)         k̃∈S         (t)                k∈S   k̃∈S
                                                                          1 X (t)     (t)
                                                                        = 2   ∥wk̃ − wk ∥2 ,
                                                                         m   (t)
                                                                             k,k̃∈S
                                                                               k̸=k̃
                                      Pn               Pn
where the inequality follows from ∥ i=1 xi ∥2 ≤ n i=1 ∥xi ∥2 . For k = k̃, the right hand side of
the above inequality is zero. Since the selected clients get updated at every τ for any t there exist t0
            (t )    (t)                                                 (t)    (t)
such that wk̃ 0 = wk , where 0 ≤ t − t0 ≤ τ . Hence for any t, ∥wk̃ − wk ∥2 is bounded above
by τ updates. With non-increasing ηt over t and ηt0 ≤ 2ηt , we can write the right hand side of the
above inequality as


                                t +τ −1
    1 X (t)       (t) 2   1 X 0X
                                                     (i) (i)        (i)    (i) (i)

        ∥w    − w k  ∥  ≤     ∥         η i   gk̃ (w    , ξ   ) − gk    (wk   , ξk )  ∥2
    m2 (t)
           k̃             m2
                             (t) i=t
                                                     k̃    k̃
      k,k̃∈S                       k,k̃∈S            0

        k̸=k̃                        k̸=k̃
                                          t +τ −1
                                 ηt20 τ X 0X               (i) (i)           (i) (i) (i)
                             ≤                    2∥ gk̃ (wk̃ , ξk̃ )∥2 + 2∥gk (wk , ξk ) ∥2 .
                                 m2      (t)i=t
                                    k,k̃∈S           0

                                      k̸=k̃



                                                          12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Taking expectation and applying Assumption 4 gives
                                             +τ −1 h
                                     "                                                      #
 h 1 X
              (t)    (t) 2
                           i 2η 2 τ
                                t0
                                       X t0X                (i) (i) 2       (i) (i) (i)
                                                                                          i
E 2        ∥wk̃ − wk ∥ ≤            E               ∥ gk̃ (wk̃ , ξk̃ )∥ + ∥gk (wk , ξk ) ∥2
   m      (t)
                               m2         (t)i=t
       k,k̃∈S                                              k,k̃∈S          0

         k̸=k̃                                               k̸=k̃
                                                      t +τ −1
                                            8ηt2 τ X 0X                  8η 2 τ X
                                        ≤      2
                                                             (G2 + G2 ) = t2      2τ G2
                                             m      (t) i=t
                                                                          m      (t)
                                                  k,k̃∈S             0                         k,k̃∈S
                                                    k̸=k̃                                        k̸=k̃

                                            8ηt2 τ
                                        =          m(m − 1)2τ G2 ≤ 16ηt2 τ 2 G2 .
                                             m2


Lemma 3. For any random selection strategy, E∥w̄(t) − w∗ ∥2 has the following upper bound:
                                            1    X        (t)
                      E[∥w̄(t) − w∗ ∥2 ] ≤ E[           ∥wk − w∗ ∥2 ].
                                           m        (t)                        k∈S


Proof.
                                                  1 X (t)                   1 X      (t)
                E[∥w̄(t) − w∗ ∥2 ] = E[∥                 wk − w∗ ∥2 ] = E[∥        (wk − w∗ )∥2 ]
                                                  m  (t)
                                                                            m  (t)
                                                       k∈S                                     k∈S
                                                                                            1 X      (t)
                                                                                       ≤ E[        ∥wk − w∗ ∥2 ].
                                                                                            m  (t)
                                                                                              k∈S


A.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
                1
                  P             (t) (t)                                                 (t) (t)
Letting ḡ(t) = m   k∈S(t) gk (wk , ξk ), and using the condensed notation ḡk = ḡk (w̄k , ξk ) for
simplicity, we have

∥w̄(t+1) − w∗ ∥2 = ∥w̄(t) − ηt ḡ (t) − w∗ ∥2
                             ηt X              (t)   ηt X          (t)
 = ∥w̄(t) − ηt ḡ (t) − w∗ −             ∇Fk (wk ) +         ∇Fk (wk )∥2
                             m       (t)
                                                     m   (t)
                                            k∈S                                  k∈S
                 ηt X          (t)           1 X           (t)     (t)
 = ∥w̄(t) − w∗ −         ∇Fk (wk )∥2 + ηt2 ∥        (∇Fk (wk ) − ḡk )∥2
                 m   (t)
                                             m  (t)
                              k∈S                                              k∈S

               (t)       ∗ηt X          (t)  1 X           (t)     (t)
+ 2ηt ⟨w̄            −w −         ∇Fk (wk ),        (∇Fk (wk ) − ḡk )⟩
                          m   (t)
                                             m  (t)
                                  k∈S                                k∈S

         (t)          ∗ 2           (t)        1 X∗            (t)
 = ∥w̄         − w ∥ − 2ηt ⟨w̄            −w ,           ∇Fk (wk ⟩ +
                                               m
                                                 k∈S (t)
                             |                 {z                 }
                                                       A1
                  ηt X            (t)  1 X              (t)    (t)          1 X             (t)
2ηt ⟨w̄(t) − w∗ −           ∇Fk (wk ),           (∇Fk (wk ) − gk )⟩ + ηt2 ∥           ∇Fk (wk ∥2
                  m                    m                                    m
                    k∈S (t)              k∈S (t)                              k∈S (t)
|                                {z                                } |              {z          }
                                                  A2                                                          A3
        1        X              (t)     (t)
+ ηt2 ∥                  (∇Fk (wk ) − ḡk )∥2
         m
               k∈S (t)
   |                         {z                        }
                             A4

 = ∥w̄(t) − w∗ ∥2 + A1 + A2 + A3 + A4 .                                                                             (8)


                                                                         13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We first bound the quantity A1 of inequality (8) as follows:
          2ηt X                          (t)
 A1 = −              ⟨w̄(t) − w∗ , ∇Fk (wk )⟩
           m     (t)
                  k∈S
         2ηt X                (t)       (t)    2ηt X          (t)             (t)
     =−             ⟨w̄(t) − wk , ∇Fk (wk )⟩ −              ⟨wk − w∗ , ∇Fk (wk )⟩
          m                                    m
            k∈S (t)                                 k∈S (t)

       ηt  X       1             (t) 2           (t) 2        2ηt X       (t)            (t)
     ≤                    (t)
                       ∥w̄ − wk ∥ + ηt ∥∇Fk (wk )∥ −                    ⟨wk − w∗ , ∇Fk (wk )⟩
       m     (t)
                   η t                                         m    (t)
                k∈S                                                               k∈S
    (using the AM-GM and Cauchy–Schwarz inequalities)
        1 X                  (t)   η2 X           (t)     2ηt X      (t)            (t)
     =             ∥w̄(t) − wk ∥2 + t      ∥∇Fk (wk )∥2 −          ⟨wk − w∗ , ∇Fk (wk )⟩
        m      (t)
                                   m   (t)
                                                          m    (t)
                k∈S                                   k∈S                            k∈S
       1 X              (t)    2Lηt2 X         (t)

     ≤        ∥w̄(t) − wk ∥2 +            Fk (wk ) − Fk∗
       m  (t)
                                m     (t)
                k∈S                                     k∈S
           2ηt X      (t)            (t)
         −          ⟨wk − w∗ , ∇Fk (wk )⟩ (using Lemma 1)
           m    (t)
                  k∈S
        1 X                  (t)    2Lηt2 X              (t)

     ≤            ∥w̄(t) − wk ∥2 +                  Fk (wk ) − Fk∗
       m                               m
          k∈S (t)                          k∈S (t)
         2ηt   X       h
                             (t)                  µ (t)         i
       −                Fk (wk ) − Fk (w∗ ) + ∥wk − w∗ ∥2 ,
         m         (t)
                                                  2
                  k∈S

where the last inequality follows from µ strong convexity of Fk (Assumption 2). Hence, by Lemma
2, the expected value of A1 satisfies
                             ηt µ   X        (t)         2Lηt2   X              (t)

      E[A1 ] ≤16ηt2 τ 2 G2 −     E         ∥wk − w∗ ∥2 +         E        Fk (wk ) − Fk∗
                              m        (t)
                                                             m        (t)
                                                k∈S                                  k∈S
                    2ηt   X          (t)
                               (Fk (wk ) − Fk (w∗ )) .

                  −    E                                                                                        (9)
                    m      (t)    k∈S

Leaving this bound aside for the moment, next notice that E[A2 ] = 0 because of the unbiased
gradient assumption (Assumption 3). We may then bound A3 by Lemma 2 as follows:
                                               
                         2
                       η     X            (t)       η2 X h                (t)
                                                                              i
          E[A3 ] = E  t2 ∥         ∇Fk (wk )∥2  ≤ t         E ∥∇Fk (wk ∥2
                       m                            m
                            k∈S (t)                   k∈S (t)
                                                                                    
                                                    2Lηt2  X             (t)
                                                  ≤      E          (Fk (wk ) − Fk∗ ) . (10)
                                                     m          (t)            k∈S


Finally, the bound for A4 is as follows:
                                                                                       
                 2                                   2
               η    X
                                    (t)   (t)
                                                   η           X             (t)    (t)
 E[A4 ] =E  t2 ∥            ∇Fk (wk ) − gk ∥2  = t2 ES (t)       E∥(∇Fk (wk ) − gk )∥2 
               m       (t)
                                                  m             (t)
                            k∈S                                                  k∈S

             η 2 mσ 2  η2 σ2
          ≤ t 2 = t ,                                                                                         (11)
                m        m
where the second equality and inequality use Assumption 3.
Using the bounds (9), (10), and (11) in (8), we have
                                                            4
                      ∗ 2                       ∗ 2
                                                            X                                 ηt µ    X      (t)
        (t+1)                           (t)
                                                                E[Ai ] ≤ E ∥w̄(t) − w∗ ∥2 ] −              ∥wk − w∗ ∥2

E[∥w̄           − w ∥ ] ≤ E[∥w̄               −w ∥ ]+                                              E[
                                                            i=1
                                                                                               m       (t)
                                                                                                   k∈S


                                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   ηt2 σ 2   4Lηt   X          (t)          2ηt   X          (t)
+ 16ηt2 τ 2 G2 +                         (Fk (wk ) − Fk∗ ) −           (Fk (wk ) − Fk (w∗ ))

                           +     E                             E
                     m        m      (t)
                                                             m     (t)
                                           k∈S                                 k∈S
                                               η2 σ2   4Lηt2   X            (t)
≤ (1 − ηt µ)E[∥w̄(t) − w∗ ∥2 ] + 16ηt2 τ 2 G2 + t                     (Fk (wk ) − Fk∗ )

                                                     +      E
                                                m        m
                                                              k∈S (t)
                                                       |              {z               }
                                                                                 A5
  2ηt   X            (t)
               (Fk (wk ) − Fk (w∗ )) .

−    E                                                                                              (12)
  m
       k∈S (t)
|                {z                 }
                      A5



The final inequality above utilizes Lemma 3.
Now we bound A5 as follows:


             4Lηt2 X         (t)   2ηt X      (t)   2ηt X
      A5 =E             Fk (wk ) −       Fk (wk ) −          (Fk∗ − Fk (w∗ ))
              m     (t)
                                   m                m    (t)
                           k∈S                         k∈S(t)              k∈S

                2ηt    X                 4Lηt2     X
                                 Fk∗ −                      ∗

            +                                              Fk
                m                         m
                      k∈S (t)                    k∈S (t)
                2ηt (2Lηt − 1) X            (t)                 1 X
                                      (Fk (wk ) − Fk∗ ) +2ηt E          (Fk (w∗ ) − Fk∗ ) .

            =E
                      m                                         m
                              k∈S (t)                             k∈S(t)
                |                {z                    }
                                              A6


Take ηt < 1/(4L) and define υt = 2ηt (1 − 2Lηt ) ≥ 0; then we can bound A6 as


   υt X                (t)
  −           (Fk (wk ) − Fk∗ )
   m
      k∈S (t)
     υt X                 (t)
  =−              (Fk (wk ) − Fk (w̄(t) ) + Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗ )
     m
        k∈S (t)
     υt X                  (t)              υt X
                   Fk (wk ) − Fk (w̄(t) ) −               Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗

  =−
     m                                         m
        k∈S (t)                                  k∈S (t)
     υt  X                         (t)            µ (t)                 υt X
                               (t)         (t)
                   ⟨∇Fk (w ), wk − w̄ ⟩ + ∥wk − w̄(t) ∥2 −                        Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗

  ≤−
     m        (t)
                                                  2                        m  (t)
          k∈S                                                                    k∈S
    νt X                                  1   µ   (t)           υt X
            ηt L(Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗ ) + (     − )∥wk − w̄(t) ∥2 −        Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗

  ≤
    m   (t)
                                         2ηt  2                  m  (t)
        k∈S                                                                           k∈S
 (using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, the AM-GM inequality, and Lemma 1)
      νt            X                              ν
                                                      t    νt µ   X      (t)
  = − (1 − ηt L)          (Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗ ) +         −             ∥wk − w̄(t) ∥2
      m               (t)
                                                  2η t m   2m      (t)
                           k∈S                                           k∈S
     νt          X                           1 X      (t)
  ≤ − (1 − ηt L)      (Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗ ) +        ∥wk − w̄(t) ∥2 .                                (13)
     m            (t)
                                             m  (t)
                           k∈S                                     k∈S



The first inequality above uses µ strong convexity of Fk , the subsequent inequality uses L–
smoothness of Fk , and the final inequality follows because νt (1−η
                                                                2ηt
                                                                    t µ)
                                                                         ≤ 1. Hence, we can bound A5
as follows:


                                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             νt              X                          1   X      (t)
                                  (Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗ ) + E       ∥wk − w̄(t) ∥2

E[A5 ] ≤ −      (1 − ηt L)E
             m                (t)
                                                        m    (t)
                                k∈S                                       k∈S
           2ηt   X
                      (Fk (w∗ ) − Fk∗ )

         +    E
           m      (t)
                   k∈S
         νt            X                                            2ηt   X
                              (Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗ ) + 16ηt2 τ 2 G2 +                   (Fk (w∗ ) − Fk∗ )

      ≤ − (1 − ηt L)E                                                    E
         m                                                           m
                      k∈S (t)                                                 k∈S (t)
         νt            X                                 X
                                (Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗ ) +           (Fk (w̄(t) ) − Fk∗ ) + 16ηt2 τ 2 G2

      = − (1 − ηt L)E
         m                (t)                              (t)
                                k∈S   ∩G                            k∈S    ∩B
           2ηt        X                                 X
                                (Fk (w∗ ) − Fk∗ ) +                (Fk (w∗ ) − Fk∗ )

         +    E
           m
                   k∈S (t) ∩G                         k∈S (t) ∩B
                       νt (1 − ηt L)
      = 16ηt2 τ 2 G2 −                  E pρg (S(π, w̄(τ ⌊t/τ ⌋) ), w̄(t) )
                             m
                                                          X             2ηt
        + qρb (S(π, w̄(τ ⌊t/τ ⌋) ), w̄(t)) (Fg (w̄(t) ) −     pk Fk∗ +        E[ pρg (S(π, w̄(τ ⌊t/τ ⌋) ), w∗ )

                                                                            m
                                                          k∈G
                                                      X
                       (τ ⌊t/τ ⌋)     ∗        ∗
        + qρb (S(π, w̄            ), w )(Fg (w ) −        pk Fk∗ )]
                                                        k∈G
                       νt (1 − ηt L)                              X              2ηt
      ≤ 16ηt2 τ 2 G2 −                pρ̄g + q ρ̄b (E[Fg (w̄(t) −     pk Fk∗ ) +

                                                                                     (pρ̃g + q ρ̃b )Γg
                             m                                                   m
                                                                  k∈G
                     |                           {z                         }
                                                  A7
                                                                                                 (14)
We used the definition of ρ(S(π, w), w′ ) and Γg to arrive at (14). We can get a bound for A7 in (14)
as follows:


         νt (1 − ηt L)                X
  A7 = −                pρ̄g + q ρ̄b      pk E[Fk (w̄(t) )] − F ∗ + F ∗ − Fk∗ )
               m
                                      k∈G
         νt (1 − ηt L)                X
      =−                pρ̄g + q ρ̄b      pk E[Fk (w̄(t) )] − F ∗ + F ∗ − Fk∗
               m
                                           k∈G
         νt (1 − ηt L)                X
                                        pk E[Fk (w̄(t) )] − F ∗

      =−                pρ̄g + q ρ̄b
               m
                                           k∈G
          νt (1 − ηt L)                X
                                         pk F ∗ − Fk∗

        −                pρ̄g + q ρ̄b
                m
                                           k∈G
          νt (1 − ηt L)                                        νt (1 − ηt L)
                         pρ̄g + q ρ̄b E[Fg (w̄(t) )] − F ∗ −

      =−                                                                      pρ̄g + q ρ̄b Γg
                m                                                    m
     (using the definition of Γg )

          νt (1 − ηt L)µ pρ̄g + q ρ̄b   (t)                   νt (1 − ηt L)
                                         E ∥w̄ − w∗ ∥2 −

      ≤−                                                                     pρ̄g + q ρ̄b Γg
                       2m                                           m
     (using µ strongly convexity)

          2ηt (1 − 2Lηt )(1 − ηt L)µ pρ̄g + q ρ̄b   (t)
                                                        E ∥w̄ − w∗ ∥2

      =−
                              2m
           2ηt (1 − 2Lηt )(1 − ηt L)
        −                                pρ̄g + q ρ̄b Γg
                       m
          3ηt µ pρ̄g + q ρ̄b   (t)            ∗ 2
                                                    2ηt pρ̄g + q ρ̄b Γg      6ηt2 pρ̄g + q ρ̄b LΓg
      ≤−                      E ∥w̄ − w ∥ −                               +                               (15)
                  8m                                          m                        m


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where equation (15) is due to µ strong convexity and we used −2ηt (1 − 2Lηt )(1 − Lηt ) ≤ − 34 ηt
and −(1 − 2Lηt )(1 − Lηt ) ≤ −(1 − 3Lηt ). Hence, the bound of A5 is as follows:


                 4Lηt   X                 (t)            2ηt        (t)
                                (Fk (wk ) − Fk∗ ) −          (Fk (wk − Fk (w∗ ))

                     E
                  m                                      m
                        k∈S(t)
                                                                                                 !
                     3ηt µ pρ̄g + q ρ̄b   (t)           ∗ 2      2   6 pρ̄g + q ρ̄b LΓg      2 2
                 ≤−                       E ∥w̄ − w ∥ + ηt                              + 16τ G
                             8m                                              m

                     2ηt pρ̄g + q ρ̄b Γg       2ηt pρ̃g + q ρ̃b Γg
                   −                         +                     .                                 (16)
                              m                        m
Finally, using equation (12), and (16) we can bound ∥w̄(t+1) − w∗ ∥ as follows:
                                        3(pρ̄g + q ρ̄b )      (t)
  E ∥w̄(t+1) − w∗ ∥ ≤ 1 − ηt µ 1 +                         E w̄ − w∗ ∥2

                                             8m
        2
              2 2    σ2     6(pρ̄g + q ρ̄b )LΓg   2ηt Γg
     + ηt 32τ G +        +                       +           (pρ̃g + q ρ̃b − pρ̄g − q ρ̄b )
                     m                m                  m
                   3(pρ̄g + q ρ̄g )      (t)                               σ2     6(pρ̄b + q ρ̄b )LΓg
                                      E w̄ − w∗ ∥2 + ηt2 32τ 2 G2 +

  ≤ 1 − ηt µ 1 +                                                               +
                        8m                                                  m               m

                                          2ηt Γ
                                      +         (pρ̃g + q ρ̃b − pρ̄g − q ρ̄g ).                      (17)
                                           m
Equation (17) is obtained using ρ̄g ≤ ρ̄b , which gives
                                           3ρ̄g      (t)
          E ∥w̄(t+1) − w∗ ∥ ≤ 1 − ηt µ 1 +        E w̄ − w∗ ∥2

                                            8
                                2
                                       2 2    σ2              2ηt Γg
                             + ηt 32τ G +         + 6ρ̄b LΓg +       (pρ̃g + q ρ̃b − mρ̄g ).
                                              m                  m

                                               3ρ̄                   2
By setting ∆t+1 = E ∥w̄(t+1) − w∗ ∥2 , B = 1 + 8g , C = 32τ 2 G2 + σm + 6ρ̄b LΓg , D =

2Γg
 m (pρ̃g + q ρ̃b − mρ̄g ), we get


                                     ∆t+1 ≤ (1 − ηt µB)∆t + ηt2 C + Dηt .
                                 β                1                             ψ
For a decreasing stepsize, ηt = t+γ for some β > µB , γ > 0, we have that ∆t ≤ t+γ , where

                                                       β 2 C + βD(t + γ)

                     ψ = max (γ + 1)∥w̄(1) − w∗ ∥2 ,                       .
                                                            βµB − 1
This can be shown by induction on t (see Lemma 4 below). Then using the L−smoothness of F (·)
we get
                                                 L      L ψ
                             E F (w̄(t) ] − F ∗ ≤ ∆t ≤

                                                               .
                                                 2      2 γ+t
Now for β = µ1 , we get


                                    4L(32τ 2 G2 + σ 2 /m)   8L2 Γg ρ¯b   L(γ + 1)(∥w̄(1) − w∗ ∥2 )

          (T )         ∗     1
E[F (w̄          )] − F ≤                                 +            +
                          (T + γ)           3µ2 ρ̄g          µ2 ρ¯g                 2

                          8LΓg pρ̃g + q ρ̃b
                        +                    −1 ,
                           3µ       mρ̄g
which completes the proof of the theorem.


                                                          17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          β                1
Lemma 4. For a decreasing stepsize, ηt = t+γ for some β > µB , γ > 0,
                                                    ψ
                                            ∆t ≤                                                (18)
                                                   t+γ

where,

                                                      1
               ψ = max (γ + 1)∥w̄(1) − w∗ ∥2 ,             (β 2 C + Dβ(t + γ))

                                                                                                (19)
                                                   βµB − 1
and
                              ∆t+1 ≤ (1 − ηt µB)∆t + ηt2 C + ηt D.

Proof. For t = 1, equation (18) holds clearly as (using (19))
                                        ψ
                               ∆1 ≤          ≤ ∥w̄(1) − w∗ ∥2 = ∆1
                                      γ+1
Assume that it holds for some t, then


                     ∆t+1 ≤ (1 − ηt µB)∆t + ηt2 C + ηt D
                                     β          ψ           β2         β
                           ≤ (1 −         µB)         +         2
                                                                  C+      D
                                   t+γ        t+γ        (t + γ)     t+γ
                             t + γ − βµB          β 2 C + βD(t + γ)
                           =            2
                                            ψ+
                                (t + γ)                 (t + γ)2
                             t+γ−1           β 2 C + βD(t + γ) βµB − 1
                           =          2
                                        ψ+                        −          ψ
                              (t + γ)              (t + γ)2         (t + γ)2
                             t+γ−1
                           =            ψ      (Using (19))
                              (t + γ)2
                               t+γ−1                  ψ
                           ≤               ψ=
                             (t + γ)2 − 1        t+γ+1



B     DATASET AND M ODEL D ESCRIPTION - E XTENDED
B.1   DATASETS

We utilize four prominent datasets: MNIST, CIFAR10, FEMNIST, and the SHAKESPEARE dataset,
widely referenced in the literature McMahan et al. (2017); Li et al. (2020c).
MNIST LeCun et al. (2010). Renowned for handwriting recognition, this dataset consists of 70,000
gray-scale 28×28 images. It includes 60,000 training samples and 10,000 test samples, spanning ten
classes (digits 0-9). We distribute MNIST training data evenly among 100 clients for the IID case.
For Non-IID, each client possesses one dominant class with 80% of the data, while the remaining
classes share 20%. In the extreme Non-IID scenario, a class contributes data to at most two clients.
The standard test set evaluates global model performance.
CIFAR10 Krizhevsky (2009). Comprising 60,000 color 32 × 32 images, the CIFAR10 dataset
encompasses 50,000 training images and 10,000 test images across ten classes. Similar to MNIST,
we consider three distribution types: IID, Non-IID, and extreme Non-IID. Dividing the dataset
into 100 clients, each IID client receives 500 samples. For Non-IID scenarios, one dominant class
constitutes 80% of a client’s data, while the rest is shared among other classes. In the extreme Non-
IID case, each class contributes data to a maximum of two clients. The test set is used to evaluate
the performance of the global model
FEMNIST Caldas et al. (2018). Derived from the LEAF dataset and implemented using Tensor-
Flow Federated, FEMNIST involves 3,383 unique users (first 1000 used). It offers 341,873 training


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


examples and 40,832 test examples, featuring gray-scale 28 × 28 images. The dataset creates a non-
IID and heterogeneous setting, with each user representing a distinct client. Test sets from distinct
clients are collected together to evaluate global performance.
SHAKESPEARE Caldas et al. (2018). Based on ”The Complete Works of William Shakespeare”,
this dataset uses speaking roles in plays to represent individual clients. It encompasses 715 genuine
users (71 clients with at least 60 test data points), providing 16,068 training examples and 2,356
test examples in text format. Like FEMNIST, the SHAKESPEARE dataset is non-IID and hetero-
geneous, associating each user with a unique client.

                                     Table 1: Dataset and Model
                     Dataset         Training   Test     #Client   Distribution   Model
                     MNIST           60,000     10,000   300       IID/Non-IID    LR
                     CIFAR10         50,000     10,000   300       IID/Non-IID    CNN
                     FEMNIST         341,873    40,832   3383      Non-IID        LR
                     SHAKESPEARE     16,068     2,356    715       Non-IID        RNN

B.2   M ODEL PARAMETERS

In the context of an edge setup with IoT devices as clients, we prioritize lightweight models to
accommodate limited power and computational capabilities.
MNIST. For the MNIST dataset, we adopt a simple Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) classifier using
TensorFlow Keras. The architecture includes two hidden layers with ReLU activation: one with 200
neurons, the other with 100 neurons. An output layer with 10 neurons and softmax activation handles
classification. Input features are flattened, and labels are one-hot encoded. The model employs the
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001 and categorical cross-entropy loss. Training spans 300
epochs for all distribution cases.
CIFAR10. Employing the CIFAR10 dataset, we employ a lightweight Convolutional Neural Net-
work (CNN) classifier using TensorFlow Keras. The CNN architecture involves two sets of con-
volutional layers, max-pooling layers, dropout layers, and fully connected layers. ReLU activation
functions operate in the convolutional layers, while softmax is used for the output layer. The model
employs categorical cross-entropy loss, the Adam optimizer with varying learning rates, and trains
until 300 rounds.
FEMNIST. Addressing the FEMNIST dataset, we use a simple MLP with two hidden layers. These
layers consist of fully connected dense layers with ReLU activation. The model input shape is
784 (pixels in each image), featuring 64 neurons in the first hidden layer. The output layer, with
10 neurons, lacks an activation function to complement the Sparse-Categorical-Crossentropy loss
function. The optimization employs a learning rate of 0.001. Training spans 300 epochs.
SHAKESPEARE. Utilizing the SHAKESPEARE dataset, we deploy a Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) featuring a GRU layer with stateful=True. Input data is preprocessed via an ASCII character-
to-index lookup table, forming sequences of length 50+1. The architecture integrates an embedding
layer, a GRU layer with varying units, and a dense layer with 86 output units. A custom evaluation
metric gauges the model’s character prediction accuracy across the input sequence. There are 150
rounds of training across the clients.
Evaluation Scenarios We consider three different scenarios that reflect potential data corruption
due to sensor quality and aging:
Label shuffling. In this scenario, we consider sensors’ label interpretations are incorrect, leading to
the assignment of random labels to data. We experiment with varying percentages of clients whose
labels are randomly shuffled.
Label flipping. Here, a random label is assigned to each client, with the same labels across its data
(e.g., all of Client 1’s data is labeled 2). We consider a fraction of sensors that consistently produce
a fixed, random label output.
Noisy data. This scenario involves correct label interpretation but noisy feature spaces. To simulate
this, we introduce Gaussian noise to the features. For selected clients, the input data is first normal-
ized to [0, 1] and then we add Gaussian noise x = x + ϵ, where ϵ ∼ N (0, 0.7). The resulting values
are clipped again to [0, 1].


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     E VALUATION - E XTENDED
C.1   C OMPARISON WITH B ENCHMARK A LGORITHMS - E XTENDED


       (a) FEMNIST            (b) CIFAR10              (c) MNIST           (d) SHAKESPEARE

Figure 6: Comparison of global accuracy of FedSRC with other state of the arts algorithm for the
FEMNIST, CIFAR10, MNIST and SHAKESPEARE datasets.


       (a) MNIST iid     (b) MNIST non-iid ex-      (c) CIFAR10 iid     (d) CIFAR10 non-iid ex-
                         treme                                          treme

Figure 7: Comparison of loss of FedSRC with other state-of-the-arts algorithm for the CIFAR10
and MNIST datasets.


       (a) MNIST iid     (b) MNIST non-iid ex-      (c) CIFAR10 iid     (d) CIFAR10 non-iid ex-
                         treme                                          treme

Figure 8: Comparison of accuracy of FedSRC with other state-of-the-arts algorithm for the
CIFAR10 and MNIST datasets.

To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of FedSRC compared to state-of-the-art algorithms,
we have conducted extensive assessments across diverse datasets, including FEMNIST, CIFAR10,
MNIST, and SHAKESPEARE. These evaluations were carried out under our default settings, involv-
ing 30% data corruption. In this context, we present an in-depth evaluation focusing on MNIST and
CIFAR10 datasets, considering both the IID (Independent and Identically Distributed) and Non-IID
extreme cases.
In our evaluation, we blocked 30% of clients in FedSRC, Trimmed Mean, and Krum algorithms.
In contrast, FedASL excludes clients falling outside one standard deviation, which accounts for
discarding approximately 32% of clients. Notably, FedAVG does not discard any clients. The per-
formance metrics displayed are the loss and accuracy of the global model when assessed against the
test dataset.
Specifically, we present the outcomes in Figs. 7 represent the loss plot and 8 and 6 represent
the accuracy plot. Our experiments reveal that FedSRC consistently outperforms other benchmark
algorithms resulting in better global performance in the presence of corrupted clients.

C.2   I NTEGRATION WITH E XISTING A LGORITHMS

We demonstrate the effectiveness of integrating FedSRC with other algorithms by implementing it at
the client level while maintaining aggregation protocols such as FedAVG, FedASL, Trimmed Mean,


                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: Performance comparison with integrating FedSRC with existing algorithms for FEMNIST.


Krum, and Median on the server side. As shown in Fig. 9, our integration approach enhances the
performance of these pre-existing algorithms (about 6% increase in accuracy) and reduces the error
loss (about 33% decrease in loss) in the presence of unreliable clients all the while also reducing
computation and communication costs.

C.3    S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

Impact of blocking percentage. To understand the effects of user-defined blocking percentage,
we evaluate the FEMNIST dataset with 30% data corruption. We vary client blocking from 0% to
90%. The goal is to find how the performance FedSRC is impacted by different degrees of client
exclusion. The results, as depicted in Fig. 10, show that the optimal performance achieved when
correctly estimating a 30% threshold. However, there is no significant degradation, especially when
overestimating the blocking percentage.


      Figure 10: Effect of our cutoff (range) in performance of FedSRC for FEMNIST dataset.

The results highlight the robustness of our approach.


Figure 11: Performance comparison of FedSRC with other algorithms in the presence of different
percentages of bad clients for FEMNIST dataset in shuffling.

Impact of Different Percentage of Bad Client: To assess our algorithm against varying levels of
corrupted data, we use FEMNIST dataset with different percentages of bad clients and set the client
blocking parameters of FedSRC and benchmark algorithms. Fig. 11 shows that as the percentage
of unreliable clients increases, conventional algorithms’ accuracy declines. In contrast, our FedSRC
demonstrates remarkable robustness, effectively managing up to 60% of clients with erroneous be-
havior. Naturally, as our algorithm utilizes clients’ loss statistics, its performance falters drastically
with a higher percentage of bad clients.


                                                   21
