Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LLM+A: G ROUNDING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS IN
P HYSICAL W ORLD WITH A FFORDANCE P ROMPTING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         While large language models (LLMs) are successful in completing various lan-
         guage processing tasks, they easily fail to interact with the physical world properly
         such as generating control sequences. We find that the main reason is that LLMs
         are not grounded in the physical world. Existing LLM-based approaches circum-
         vent this problem by relying on additional pre-defined skills or pre-trained sub-
         policies, making it hard to adapt to new tasks. In contrast, we aim to address this
         problem and explore the possibility to prompt pre-trained LLMs to accomplish a
         series of robotic manipulation tasks in a training-free paradigm. Accordingly, we
         propose a framework called LLM+A(ffordance), where the LLM serves as both
         the sub-task planner (that generates high-level plans) and the motion controller
         (that generates low-level control sequences). To ground these plans and control
         sequences on the physical world, we develop the affordance prompting technique
         that stimulates the LLM to 1) predict the consequences of generated plans and
         2) generate affordance values for relevant objects. Empirically, we evaluate the
         effectiveness of LLM+A in various robotic manipulation tasks with natural lan-
         guage instructions and demonstrate that our approach substantially improves per-
         formance by enhancing the feasibility of generated plans and control.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Brown et al.,
2020; Chung et al., 2022) have exhibited remarkable capabilities in a wide range of natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) tasks such as daily dialogue (Thoppilan et al., 2022; Adiwardana et al.,
2020), programming (Chen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023), and text writing (Touvron et al., 2023).
As these pre-trained models assimilate extensive knowledge from internet-scale text corpora and
various domain-specific datasets, they can be leveraged as foundation models and provide rich prior
knowledge. Owing to these advancements, new paradigms have emerged, employing LLMs as ar-
tificial intelligence (AI) assistants to perform embodied robotic tasks in real-world settings (Driess
et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023; Vemprala et al., 2023).
We study the problem of language-conditioned robotic manipulation control with LLMs. Existing
approaches can be generally classified into two main categories: employing LLMs as high-level
sub-task planners (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022a; Wang et al., 2023b), or directly training an
end-to-end large model as low-level motion controllers (Driess et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023; Mu
et al., 2023). The first category leverages the powerful planning and reasoning capabilities of LLMs,
enabling them to decompose human instructions into a series of textual sub-tasks. Nevertheless, to
execute these decomposed plans in real-world scenarios, current methods still depend on pre-trained
skills or primitive actions (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023b; 2022b; Singh et al., 2023), which
are usually learned by behavior cloning and reinforcement learning techniques. This reliance on
specific sub-policies can limit the applicability of these approaches, as they necessitate vast amounts
of robotic data and often struggle to generalize to unseen environments (Huang et al., 2023b) and
different embodiments (Bousmalis et al., 2023). The second category typically trains a large-scale
multi-task backbone model that integrates both linguistic and visual modalities to generate end-to-
end control sequences (Brohan et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023; Reed et al., 2022). However, the
development of such models requires extensive multi-modal datasets, encompassing a diverse array
of robotic tasks. This is costly for many researchers. Therefore, considering the impressive com-
monsense knowledge and powerful in-context learning abilities demonstrated by LLMs, can LLMs


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        [Task] pick up the hammer.
                                                        [Object Parts] [“handle”, “head”]

                                                          [Consequences] Grasping the handle will allow
                                                          the robot to pick up the hammer…
                                                          [Affordance Values] {“handle”: 0.9, “head”: 0.5}

                 (a)
                                                        [Task] moving the cube to the left side of the table.
                                           C            [Object Parts] [“side A”, “side B”, “side C”, “side D”]
                                          D B
                                           A
                                                          [Consequences] Pushing side1 will allow the
                                                          robot to move the block upwards…
                                                          [Affordance Values] {“side A”: 0.5, “side B”: 1,
                                                          “side C”: 0.5, “side D”: 0.1}

                 (b)                                                         (c)



Figure 1: Consider the task of “Push the cube to the left side of the table”. When the control
sequences generated from LLMs are not grounded in the physical world, the robot will move to the
left side of the cube to push it to the left (a) instead of the right location (b). This is due to the gap
between the physical world and generated language plans. This gap can be bridged by prompting
LLMs to predict execution consequences and goal-conditioned affordance values (c) in the proposed
LLM+A method.


function as both sub-task planners and motion controllers, thereby addressing robotic manipulation
tasks without the need for additional training?
However, how to exploit commonsense from LLMs to real-time fine-grained robotic manipulation
tasks remains a challenging problem. This difficulty primarily comes from the fact that LLMs are not
grounded in the physical world, which can potentially result in erroneous or inexecutable plans (Ahn
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a; Yao et al., 2022). For instance, consider a tabletop robotic arm
situated to the left of a block, and the instruction is “push the block to the left side of the table”. It
may move directly right and then push the block as shown in Figure 1(a) instead of maneuvering
around to the right side of the object as shown in Figure 1(b). In this scenario, the block will not
move as expected. The main reason is that LLMs lack more comprehensive information regarding
the current environment, such as spatial relationships on objects. Besides, pre-trained LLMs neglect
to comprehend the consequences of the generated plan in the actual physical world. Therefore, to
generate executable control sequences, LLMs must consider physical laws and object functionalities,
which can help outline the possibilities and effects of generated actions for robots interacting with
objects or specific environmental features.
In the field of robotics, the concept of affordance is considered a crucial mechanism to enable robots
to understand and interact with environments. Given the task instruction, affordance values indicate
the functional priorities for the robot of objects in the current environment to complete the task.
At the current stage of affordance research, the related prior knowledge is usually provided by hu-
mans (Yang et al., 2023). In contrast to previous studies, we demonstrate that LLMs are proficient at
predicting execution consequences and inferring affordance values of different object parts as shown
in Figure 1(c), which effectively provides robots with useful information to complete instructions.
For instance, within the context of hammering or pushing tasks, LLMs can interpret human direc-
tives and ascertain task-specific executable parts for grasping, functioning, effecting, or pushing
respectively.
Motivated by this concept, we introduce a framework, called LLM+A, to exploit the extraction
of embodied commonsense and reasoning capabilities of LLMs to generate control sequences for
robotic manipulation tasks following textual instructions in a training-free pradigm. Firstly, we em-
ploy vision language models (VLMs), such as open-vocabulary detectors (Gu et al., 2021; Minderer
et al., 2022), or large multimodal models (Gao et al., 2023; Awadalla et al., 2023), to provide textual
observation of target objects (such as object shapes, colors, and positional relationships) and interac-
tive environments to the LLMs. Then, we obtain goal-conditioned affordance values from LLMs that
describe the priorities of object executable parts for interaction via affordance prompting. Based on
the above visual perception and affordance values, LLMs decompose human instructions into high-
level sub-tasks, which are feasible in the physical world. Subsequently, LLMs also generate control


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sequences for the current task. Our experiments demonstrate that grounding LLMs in the physical
world to generate motion plans via unlocking their affordance knowledge can highly enhance the
performance in robotic manipulation tasks compared to non-grounded baselines.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

      • We propose LLM+A that adopt large language models (LLMs) to serve as both the high-
        level sub-task planner and the low-level motion controller in robotic control tasks in a
        training-free paradigm.
      • To improve the physical executability of both the sub-task plans and the control sequences
        generated while adhering to the language instruction, we propose affordance prompting to
        stimulate the ability of LLMs to infer goal-conditioned affordance values, which indicate
        the executable priorities of different parts of interacted objects.
      • Experimental results on heterogeneous robotic tasks validate the effectiveness and robust-
        ness of our method.


2   R ELATED WORK

LLMs for Sub-Task Planning and Motion Controlling. With the development of transformers
in recent years, pre-trained large language models (Ouyang et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Brown et al., 2020; Chung et al., 2022) have become an active area of research. These models, pre-
trained on vast amounts of internet-scale text corpora from various tasks, exhibit remarkable com-
monsense and reasoning capabilities in embodied tasks. Numerous recent approaches successfully
employ LLMs to decompose abstract and human instructions into natural language-based high-level
plans (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022a;b; Ding et al., 2023; Shah et al., 2023; Min et al., 2021)
or code-based plans (Liang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023a). For instance, ZSP (Huang et al., 2022a)
demonstrate that LLMs can be utilized for task planning in household domains through iteratively
augmented prompts, enabling the semantic translation of plans into admissible skills. Similarly, Say-
Can (Ahn et al., 2022) leverage LLMs to facilitate robot task planning by incorporating affordance
functions to ensure plan feasibility. While these methods show surprising zero-shot generalization
ability of task planning, the execution of decomposed plans remains dependent on pre-trained skills,
which are usually acquired via behavior cloning and reinforcement learning. This reliance may limit
their applicability, as the training process necessitates substantial amounts of robotic data, which is
costly to obtain. On the other hand, some general robotic models have been proposed to achieve end-
to-end control for real-world robotic applications (Brohan et al., 2023; 2022; Driess et al., 2023; Mu
et al., 2023; Stone et al., 2023; Jang et al., 2022; Suglia et al., 2021). These methods benefit from
high-capacity networks and open-ended task-agnostic training with diverse datasets. In contrast,
the proposed LLM+A leverages LLMs as both the sub-task planner and the motion controller in a
training-free paradigm in robotic manipulation tasks.
Affordance for Robotics. As a popular concept proposed in the field of psychology, affordance has
been extensively utilized in robotic tasks to facilitate agents’ comprehension and interaction with
dynamic environments (Jamone et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2021a; Wu et al., 2021; Mo et al., 2021).
Briefly, affordance encapsulates the potential outcomes and effects resulting from robot’s actions
on a specific object or, more broadly, a segment of the environment. Existing research can be di-
vided into three primary categories: modeling action possibilities (Mo et al., 2021; Borja-Diaz et al.,
2022; Yang et al., 2021), generating keypoint affordances (Fang et al., 2020; Manuelli et al., 2019;
Qin et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021b), and learning partial dynamic models exclusively for afforded
actions (Khetarpal et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021a; Khetarpal et al., 2021). Since their development
primarily relies on data-driven approaches within the visual domain, these methods exhibit limi-
tations when applied to language-conditioned scenarios. Recent methods begin to leverage LLMs
to obtain language-conditioned affordance values. For example, HULC++ (Mees et al., 2023) em-
ployed a self-supervised visual-lingual affordance model to guide robots toward actionable areas
referenced by language. VoxPoser (Huang et al., 2023b) extracted affordances and constraints for
robotic manipulation tasks from pre-trained LLMs, demonstrating generalizability to open-set in-
structions. In this work, we concentrate on grounding LLMs in more fine-grained robotic tasks by
predicting execution consequences and extracting physical affordance values.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Push the blue block to the
                  top side of the table                High-level LLM
                                                                       Consequences
                                                        Affordance                    Sub-task
                                                        Prompting                      Planner
                                                                        Affordance
                                                                        Values

                                                              Affordance       Decomposed
                                                              Values           Sub-task


                                      “Blue block                                                Control Sequences
               Observation            position is …”              Motion Controller
                Descriptor
                                                       Low-level LLM
                  VLM


Figure 2: Overview of LLM+A. Given language instructions and image observations, LLM+A pro-
duces sub-task plans and control sequences for robotic control tasks. LLM+A is composed of a
VLM and a hierarchical LLM. The VLM serves as an observation descriptor to provide the envi-
ronment perception to the LLM. The high-level LLM is responsible for sub-task planning and the
low-level LLM for motion controlling. Notably, the affordance values from the high-level LLM are
necessary intermediate information for the LLM to understand the effects of potential actions and
generate feasible plans grounded in the physical world.


3     M ETHOD

In this section, we first introduce the formulation of robotic manipulation tasks (Sec. 3.1). Then, we
describe our LLM+A framework where the pre-trained visual-language model (VLM) serves as the
observation descriptor and the large language model (LLM) serves as the high-level sub-task planner
and the low-level motion controller (Sec. 3.2). Later, we introduce affordance prompting to predict
consequences and generate affordance values to bridge the gap between generated plans/control
sequences and the physical world (Sec. 3.3).

3.1   ROBOTIC M ANIPULATION

In robotic manipulation tasks that we consider in this paper, the LLM-based agent needs to generate
control sequences for a tabletop robotic arm to complete a given task instructed in open-vocabulary
natural language based on the image observation. Specifically, on the t-th time step, the agent
π(at |ot , l) perceives the image observation ot and outputs the action at to follow the instruction l.
The instruction l is not constrained by any templates, grammatical structures, or vocabularies. For
example, the instruction can be “push the red block to the left center side of the table” or “separate
the yellow block and the green block”. In this paper, the action of the LLM-based agent is a planned
path segment of the end-effector of the robotic arm, represented by K coordinates specifying the
waypoints of the end-effector, i.e., when at = ((x1 , y1 ), · · · , (xK , yK )), the end-effector will move
along the path (x1 , y1 ) → · · · → (xK , yK ).

3.2   LLM+A

In the LLM+A framework, we aim to leverage the commonsense knowledge and reasoning/planning
capability from both the pre-trained VLM and LLM to complete robotic manipulation tasks. Further,
we develop affordance prompting to incorporate the concept of affordance into zero-shot prompting
for the LLM, which can be regarded as an extension of chain-of-thought (CoT) to embodied robotics.
We present the LLM+A framework in Figure 2 and introduce different modules of LLM+A as
follows.
Observation Descriptor. In this module, we feed the current image observation ot combined as a
designed prompt template to the VLM-based observation descriptor to generate text description st
to provide necessary information needed in the subsequent decision making process of the LLM-


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


based sub-task planner and motion controller. Specifically, the text description st contains the spatial
location of relevant objects and all functional parts of them such as the four sides of the cube.
Sub-task Planner. In this module, we feed the text description of the current observation st as
well as the instruction l to the sub-task planner to obtain a series of planned high-level sub-tasks
g = (g1 , g2 , · · · ) required to accomplish the task based on the current observation. Notice that this
plan can change on the subsequent time steps based on future observations and the agent typically
only executes the first sub-task on the current step. Further, to incentivize the sub-task planner to
generate feasible plans, we develop the affordance prompting technique that instructs the sub-task
planner to predict the expected consequences of the control and generate affordance values for the
functional parts of relevant objects. We present the simplified version of the prompt template as
follows:


  Template for Sub-Task Planner:
  You are a robotic arm on the table which can [arm skills].
  You need to accomplish a series of robotic manipulation tasks: [guidelines].
  The task instruction is [task instruction].
  The objects on the table are [object parts].
  You need to:
  1. output the consequences of potential actions;
  2. output the affordance values of each object parts considering the potential consequences;
  3. output the decomposed sub-tasks according to the consequences and affordance values.


In the template, [arm skills] describe the functions of the type of the arm; [guidelines] describe
guidelines or contexts of the task such as the orientation of the table, the range/orientation of the
spatial coordinates; [task instruction] is the open-vocabulary natural-language-based instruction l;
[object parts] are text description of the observation st generated by the observation descriptor. At
last, we ask the LLM to decompose the task instruction l into sub-tasks g. Decomposed sub-tasks
refer to more specific plans appropriate for the robot to execute starting from the current state, e.g.,
“approach right side of the green block while avoiding the red block” and “push the green block to
the top”. To generate more feasible sub-tasks, we adopt affordance prompting which is highlighted
in red. Consequences refer to the effects of object parts after the physical interaction by possible
skills of the robot and affordance values indicate the extent to which each part of the object is
expected to be interacted. These concepts will be further explained later in Sec. 3.3.
Motion Controller. In this module, given the decomposed sub-tasks g = (g1 , g2 , · · · ) and the
affordance values associated with different object parts, we ask the LLM to generate the specific
action at . We also present the simplified version of the prompt template of this procedure as follows:



  Template for Montion Controller:
  You are a robotic arm on the tabletop which can [arm skills].
  You need to accomplish a series of robotic manipulation tasks: [guidelines].
  The task instruction is [task instruction].
  The objects on the table are [object parts].
  Given the [decomposed sub-tasks] and the [affordance values], you need to output the control
  sequence.
  Note that [notes].
  The examples are as follows: [examples].


In this template, [decompoased sub-tasks] and [affordance values] are the outputs generated by the
sub-task planner. The control sequence is the action of the LLM-based agent which refers to a series
of the waypoint coordinates of the end-effector in our case. In addition, we also provide [notes]
and [examples] to facilitate the LLM to generate better control sequences. [Notes] can include
formatting instructions such as “You need to generate the above outputs with JSON format”, and
[examples] follows the few-shot prompting practice.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   A FFORDANCE P ROMPTING

In robotic tasks, the concept of affordance plays a crucial role in enabling robots to comprehend and
interact with the corresponding physical environment. This generally depends on prior knowledge of
relevant actions and the task instruction. LLMs are highly proficient at inferring affordance values,
owing to their rich commonsense knowledge learned from diverse robotic-related datasets during
pre-training. For example, as shown in Figure 1(c), LLMs can accurately assess different parts of
the hammer and their affordance values for the grasping task, based on which robot motions can
be effectively suggested. Another example is a robotic manipulation task, where LLMs identify
the most actionable edge with the highest affordance value for pushing the cube to the left side
of the table. Motivated by this observation, the goal of our affordance prompting technique is to
unlock LLMs with the ability to generate goal-conditioned affordance value, serving as a feasible
intermediate reasoning step that assists the robot in understanding action priorities.
In LLM+A, given [arm skills], [task instruction], and [object parts], we firstly query the LLM to
generate [consequences], which reason about the future effects of possible actions. Then, we ask
the LLM to generate [affordance values] of different object functional parts which indicate their
usefulness in completing the given instruction.
Note that in this process, the affordance prompting technique is zero-shot in the sense that we do
not provide any examples in the prompt to regulate the form of the output. This zero-shot usage
makes the technique easily extend to different tasks. Empirically, the generated affordance values
can effectively improve the feasibility of decomposed sub-tasks and control sequences from LLMs
in the physical world.
To sum up, the affordance prompting technique provides the following advantages to facilitate rea-
soning in robotic tasks:
      1. First, the affordance prompting technique assists LLMs in constraining control sequence
         updates within the set of feasible actions to follow the task instruction.
      2. Secondly, the affordance values are convenient to obtain since only a single intermediate
         reasoning step is necessitated for LLMs, without requiring additional training or a fine-
         tuning process.
      3. Thirdly, the affordance prompting technique adopts a zero-shot setting, which is robust
         across various envrionments and capable of extending to heterogeneous tasks.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We conduct experiments in various robotic tasks to answer the following questions: 1) How effective
is LLM+A for physical interaction compared to other state-of-the-art baselines? 2) How well does
LLM+A predict affordance values and plan action sequences? 3) How robust is LLM+A when
generalized to heterogeneous tasks?

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS

Implementation details. For visual perception, given an image observation, we use the open-
vocabulary detector OWL-ViT (Minderer et al., 2022) to detect the bounding boxes of relevant ob-
jects, and use GPT-4 (June) from OpenAI API (OpenAI, 2023) for both sub-task planner and motion
controller. For the high-level sub-task planner, including the affordance prediction and consequence
prediction, we don’t provide any example outputs (zero-shot). For the low-level motion controller,
we provide two examples in prompts to formalize the output style. The detailed prompts are listed
in the Appendix A.1. Instead of using our LLM+A to re-plan new trajectory waypoints every time
step, the plan will be updated after the robots finish the K = 5 waypoints in the previous round to
increase the time efficiency.
Tasks. We evaluate LLM+A using four simulated task families from Language-Table (Lynch et al.,
2023) and CLIPORT (Shridhar et al., 2022) as follows: 1) Block2Position: Push a block to an ab-
solute location on the board (e.g., the top-left corner). The task is completed when the distance
between the block and the target location is below a threshold. 2) Block2Block: Push a block to an-
other block. The task is completed when the distance between the pushed block and the target block


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Table 1: Success rates of LLM+A and baselines in pushing tasks from Language-Table.
               Method           Block2Position         Block2Block    Separate      Average
            Naive LLM                10%                   8%           70%          29%
              ReAct                  15%                   3%           40%          19%
          Code as Policies           22%                   2%           72%          32%
             LLM+A                   42%                  32%           77%          50%

is below a threshold. 3) Separate: Separate two blocks. The task is completed when the distance
between these blocks is below a threshold. 4) Pick&Palce: Place all blocks of a specified color into
bowls of a specified color. The task is completed when all target blocks are within the bounds of
specific bowls. The simulated environments in Task 1-3) employ an xArm6 robot, constrained to
move in a 2D plane with a cylindrical end-effector. Task 4) utilizes a Universal Robot UR5e with a
suction gripper. For each task, we evaluate our method and baselines for 100 episodes with random
initial object positions and language instructions.
Baselines. We compare LLM+A with three baselines: 1) Naive LLM: Given the same inputs as
LLM+A, we directly prompt the LLM to generate decomposed sub-task plans and motion plans
without affordance prompting. 2) ReAct (Yao et al., 2023): An interactive decision-making ap-
proach of LLM by generating both reasoning traces and primitive actions in an interleaved manner.
In our implementation, ReAct decides the best action in {Move Down, Move Up, Move Left, Move
Right} with the robot coordinates and bounding boxes of blocks as inputs. By planning with such
low-level actions, we evaluate its capability in motion control. 3) Code as Policies (Liang et al.,
2023): An LLM-based code generation approach which directly calls pre-defined API to finish the
task. In our implementation, after it translates the robotic tasks into programmatic codes, it finally
calls one of the basic actions same as ReAct. For both ReAct and Code as Policies, we introduce
two example cases in the prompt to help them understand the evaluation tasks. For all baselines, we
use GPT-4 (June) as the base LLM. All specific prompts of baseline methods are in the Appendix
A.2, A.3, and A.4.

4.2   R ESULTS

How effective is LLM+A compared to baselines? We present the results of LLM+A and other
baselines in three pushing tasks from Langage-Table in Table 1. LLM+A achieves the highest suc-
cess rates and outperforms baseline methods significantly on Block2Position and Block2Block tasks.
Our method achieves 50% average success rate across all tasks. In particular, we do not include any
examples in the high-level sub-task planner when prompting GPT-4. This illustrates such physical
knowledge is inherent in advanced LLMs and our approach can effectively stimulate this aspect of
inference ability and make it valuable for robotics control tasks by affordance prompting. We show
an example dialogue of the Block2Position task between LLM+A and GPT4 in Listing 6. When the
task is to “push the cube to the top”, the robot is commanded by LLM+A to approach the bottom
side of the cube and then move it upwards. In contrast, we find that ReAct and Code as Policies
only tend to imitate the procedure of the example outputs without truly understanding the physical
consequences. Therefore, although we provide two examples for their prompts, the robot still makes
mistakes in choosing the correct side. For example, when the task instruction is “move the cube to
the upper left corner of the table”, their methods guide the robot to approach the left side of the cube
and push it towards the left direction. Their failure case examples are shown in Appendix A.6.
How well does LLM+A predict affordance values and plan action sequences? We display three
examples of Block2Postion, Block2Block, and Separate tasks in Figure 3. First, we observe that our
method can successfully predict goal-conditioned affordance values. For example, LLM assigns a
higher affordance value to the bottom side A of the block to push it to the top side of the table as
shown in Figure 3(a). Besides, the predicted affordance values also dynamically vary according to
the current environment state. As shown in Figure 3(i), LLM firstly assigns a higher affordance score
to the left side D of the red block at the beginning time. However, in Figure 3(k), LLM improves
the affordance value to the top side G of the green block, since pushing side D could indirectly push
the green block off the table. Second, our method can decompose the task instruction and generate
the high-level current sub-task for the robot. As shown in Figure 3(f), the current sub-task is to push


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   “Move the purple cube to the top.”

                           t=1     [Side Affordance]         t=6      [Side Affordance]                 t = 11   [Side Affordance]               t = 14   [Side Affordance]
                                   {“A”: 1, “B”: 0,                   {“A”: 1, “B”: 0,                           {“A”: 1, “B”: 0,                         {“A”: 1, “B”: 0,
                                   “C”: 0, “D”: 0}                    “C”: 0, “D”: 0}                            “C”: 0, “D”: 0}                          “C”: 0, “D”: 0}
                           Arm
         C                         [Current Task]                     [Current Task]                             [Current Task]                           [Current Task]
     D       B                     Move to side A                     Move to side A                             Move to side A                           Push the cube to
         A                                                                                                                                                the top

                 (a)                                   (b)                                        (c)                                      (d)

                  “Move the green block to the red block.”

                           t=2     [Side Affordance]         t = 11   [Side Affordance]                 t = 15   [Side Affordance]               t = 19   [Side Affordance]
                                   {“A”: 0, “B”: 0,                   {“A”: 0, “B”: 0,                           {“A”: 0, “B”: 0,                         {“A”: 0, “B”: 0,
                                   “C”: 0, “D”: 1}                    “C”: 0, “D”: 1}                            “C”: 0, “D”: 1}                          “C”: 0, “D”: 1}
     C                             [Current Task]                     [Current Task]                             [Current Task]                           [Current Task]
 D       B                         Move to side D                     Push the green                             Move to side D                           Push the green
     A                                                                block to the right                                                                  block to the right

                 (e)                                   (f)                                        (g)                                      (h)

                   “Separate the red cube from the green block.”

                           t=2     [Side Affordance]                  [Side Affordance]                 t = 11   [Side Affordance]               t = 15   [Side Affordance]
                                                             t=9
                                   {“A”: 0, “B”: 0,                   {“A”: 0, “B”: 0,                           {“A”: 0, “B”: 0,                         {“A”: 0, “B”: 0, “C”: 0,
         C                         “C”: 0, “D”: 1,                                                                                                        “D”: 0.5, “E”: 0, “F”: 0,
                                                                      “C”: 0.5, “D”: 0.5,                        “C”: 0, “D”: 0.5,
     D       B                     “E”: 0, “F”: 0.5,                  “E”: 0, “F”: 0.5,                          “E”: 0, “F”: 0,                          “G”: 1, “H”: 0}
                           G
         A             H       F   “G”: 0, “H”: 0}                    “G”: 0, “H”: 0.5}                          “G”: 1, “H”: 0}                          [Current Task]
                           E       [Current Task]                     [Current Task]                             [Current Task]                           Push the green
                                   Move to side D                     Move to side D                             Move to side G                           block to the right
                 (i)                                   (j)                                        (k)                                      (l)


Figure 3: Examples of environmental observation and robot trajectories in Block2Position (a-d),
Block2Block (e-h), and Separate (i-l). The gray cylinder indicates the position of the robot end-
effector. The blue dots and the green lines represent the waypoints and the planned paths of the
control sequences generated by LLM+A, respectively. The red boxes denote the detected bounding
boxes from OWL-VIT.


Table 2: Success rates of LLM+A in Pick&Place tasks from CLIPORT with different numbers of
target blocks.
                                      Number of blocks                1-block               2-blocks       3-blocks              4-blocks
                                           Success Rate                96%                      95%              94%                 88%

the green block to the right when the robot has approached side D. However, in Figure 3(g), LLM
guides the robot to move to side D again when the robot breaks away from the block. Third, our
method can generate executable low-level control sequences for the robot. For example, in Figure
3(c), LLM controls the robot to detour to side A of the purple block to prevent contact with the block
in an unexpected direction. Owing to the low-level control sequences being raw coordinates, this
proves that our approach is valid to arouse the spatial relationship understanding ability in LLMs,
which is essential and promising for further non-training paradigms for robotics control.
How robust is LLM+A when generalized to heterogeneous tasks? We transfer LLM+A to
Pick&Place tasks to evaluate the robustness of LLM+A on heterogeneous tasks. Notably, the
prompts leveraged in the Pick&Place task are completely the same as in the pushing task except
for the inputs of environmental information, which are shown in Appendix A.1. However, this
task differs from pushing tasks in multiple aspects. First, the Pick&Place task leverages a Universal
Robot UR5e different from the xArm6 robot in pushing tasks. Second, the interactive parts of blocks
are block centers for the suction gripper different from multiple sides of blocks in pushing tasks for
the cylindrical end-effctor. Third, the state dynamics of tabletop environments are different in these
tasks. Therefore, LLMs need to adaptively understand the different physical interaction processes
according to the robot type and task instructions. We variate the number of target blocks and report
the success rates in Table 2. LLM+A achieves around 90% success rates in all scenarios. We show
two trajectories of the Pick&Place task in Figure 4. Besides the target blocks and bowls, there are
also many distractor objects on the table. Since multiple target blocks may exist, the robot needs to
generate more sub-tasks to pick and place the blocks one by one and avoid putting multiple blocks
into the same bowl. Our framework can be successfully transferred to this task. For example, the
first example shows that the robot successfully recognizes four blue blocks and puts them into four


                                                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       “Put the blue bloks in
       white bowls.”
                                  t=1           t=2                t=3               t=4


       “Put the yellow bloks in
       green bowls.”
                                  t=0           t=1                t=2               t=3



Figure 4: Examples of sequential environmental observation in the Pick&Place task. Given human
language instruction, the robot needs to put specific blocks in target bowls. One bowl can only hold
one block.

    Table 3: Failure case analysis of LLM+A in fours tasks from Language-Table and CLIPORT.
                    Failure             Block2Position    Block2Block    Separate    Pick&Place
         Object Detection Fail               2%               6%           6%              12%
       Affordance Prediction Fail           12%              20%           10%             0%
          Task Planning Fail                12%               2%           2%               0%
        Motion Controlling Fail             16%              22%            4%             0%
         Exceed Time Budget                 16%              18%           1%              0%



different white bowls respectively. This suggests that affordance prompting is a general framework
that can help the LLMs understand the attributes and consequences of robotic tasks, and make it
generalizable for dealing with heterogeneous tasks. Besides, an example dialogue of LLM+A is
shown in Listing 7.

4.3    FAILURE C ASE A NALYSIS

Table 3 presents the failure case analysis of LLM+A in three pushing tasks from Langage-Table.
Firstly, the object detection fail rates of the VLM are all lower than 6% in three tasks from Language-
Table. Besides, we find that LLM fails more frequently in affordance prediction and motion control-
ling in Block2Block task. The main reason is that this task not only demands fine-grained motion
plans for interacting with target blocks but also needs to consider the interactions between different
blocks. Therefore, the planned control sequences from LLM can be further improved to avoid ob-
stacles and reach the target as safely as possible. We will discuss this problem in our future work.
Besides, we find that the object detection fail rate of Pick&Place task is higher than other tasks
because VLM sometimes misjudges the color of the bowl. We can avoid this problem by using
different suitable models for specific tasks.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we study the language-conditioned robotic manipulation tasks with large models and
propose the LLM+A framework, which successfully decomposes the language instruction into sev-
eral sub-tasks, generates the robot control sequences, and easily extends to heterogeneous tasks.
This shows the potential of LLMs in simultaneously achieving both planning and motion control,
which provides an alternative training-free paradigm for utilizing the LLMs in robotic tasks. This
significantly mitigates the dataset bottleneck issue for the robotics field. Besides, in order to ground
the decomposed sub-tasks in the physical world and guarantee the feasibility of generated control se-
quences, we prove the proposed affordance prompting is crucial to stimulate the physical knowledge
from the LLMs about spatial relationship and interaction consequences inference. The experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness of LLM+A. In the future, we will first optimize the process of
using LLM+A to increase the time efficiency and secondly try to apply our method to more broad
robotics tasks, including those tasks involving more complex physical interaction and different robot
structures.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Daniel Adiwardana, Minh-Thang Luong, David R So, Jamie Hall, Noah Fiedel, Romal Thoppilan,
  Zi Yang, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Gaurav Nemade, Yifeng Lu, et al. Towards a human-like open-
  domain chatbot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977, 2020.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Anas Awadalla, Irena Gao, Josh Gardner, Jack Hessel, Yusuf Hanafy, Wanrong Zhu, Kalyani
  Marathe, Yonatan Bitton, Samir Gadre, Shiori Sagawa, et al. Openflamingo: An open-
  source framework for training large autoregressive vision-language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.01390, 2023.
Jessica Borja-Diaz, Oier Mees, Gabriel Kalweit, Lukas Hermann, Joschka Boedecker, and Wolfram
  Burgard. Affordance learning from play for sample-efficient policy learning. In 2022 International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 6372–6378. IEEE, 2022.
Konstantinos Bousmalis, Giulia Vezzani, Dushyant Rao, Coline Devin, Alex X. Lee, Maria Bauzá,
  Todor Davchev, Yuxiang Zhou, Agrim Gupta, Akhil S. Raju, Antoine Laurens, Claudio Fantacci,
  Valentin Dalibard, Martina Zambelli, Murilo Fernandes Martins, Rugile Pevceviciute, Michiel
  Blokzijl, Misha Denil, Nathan Batchelor, Thomas Lampe, Emilio Parisotto, Konrad Zolna,
  Scott E. Reed, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Jonathan Scholz, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Oliver Groth,
  Jean-Baptiste Regli, Oleg O. Sushkov, Tom Rothorl, José Enrique Chen, Yusuf Aytar, David
  Barker, Joy Ortiz, Martin A. Riedmiller, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Raia Hadsell, Francesco Nori,
  and Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess. Robocat: A self-improving foundation agent for robotic ma-
  nipulation. ArXiv, abs/2306.11706, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:259203978.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
  transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
  ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Yan Ding, Xiaohan Zhang, Chris Paxton, and Shiqi Zhang. Task and motion planning with large
  language models for object rearrangement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06247, 2023.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Kuan Fang, Yuke Zhu, Animesh Garg, Andrey Kurenkov, Viraj Mehta, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio
  Savarese. Learning task-oriented grasping for tool manipulation from simulated self-supervision.
  The International Journal of Robotics Research, 39(2-3):202–216, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Peng Gao, Jiaming Han, Renrui Zhang, Ziyi Lin, Shijie Geng, Aojun Zhou, Wei Zhang, Pan Lu,
  Conghui He, Xiangyu Yue, et al. Llama-adapter v2: Parameter-efficient visual instruction model.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.15010, 2023.

Xiuye Gu, Tsung-Yi Lin, Weicheng Kuo, and Yin Cui. Open-vocabulary object detection via vision
  and language knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13921, 2021.

Siyuan Huang, Zhengkai Jiang, Hao Dong, Yu Qiao, Peng Gao, and Hongsheng Li. Instruct2act:
  Mapping multi-modality instructions to robotic actions with large language model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.11176, 2023a.

Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022a.

Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022b.

Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Voxposer:
 Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2307.05973, 2023b.

Lorenzo Jamone, Emre Ugur, Angelo Cangelosi, Luciano Fadiga, Alexandre Bernardino, Justus
  Piater, and José Santos-Victor. Affordances in psychology, neuroscience, and robotics: A survey.
  IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, 10(1):4–25, 2016.

Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In
  Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 991–1002. PMLR, 2022.

Khimya Khetarpal, Zafarali Ahmed, Gheorghe Comanici, David Abel, and Doina Precup. What
  can i do here? a theory of affordances in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 5243–5253. PMLR, 2020.

Khimya Khetarpal, Zafarali Ahmed, Gheorghe Comanici, and Doina Precup. Temporally abstract
  partial models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1979–1991, 2021.

Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou,
  Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. Starcoder: may the source be with
  you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161, 2023.

Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023.

Corey Lynch, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Tianli Ding, James Betker, Robert Baruch, Travis
  Armstrong, and Pete Florence. Interactive language: Talking to robots in real time. IEEE Robotics
  and Automation Letters, 2023.

Lucas Manuelli, Wei Gao, Peter Florence, and Russ Tedrake. kpam: Keypoint affordances for
  category-level robotic manipulation. In The International Symposium of Robotics Research, pp.
  132–157. Springer, 2019.

Oier Mees, Jessica Borja-Diaz, and Wolfram Burgard. Grounding language with visual affordances
  over unstructured data. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 11576–11582. IEEE, 2023.

So Yeon Min, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Pradeep Ravikumar, Yonatan Bisk, and Ruslan Salakhut-
  dinov. Film: Following instructions in language with modular methods. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.07342, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, Austin Stone, Maxim Neumann, Dirk Weissenborn, Alexey
 Dosovitskiy, Aravindh Mahendran, Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Zhuoran Shen, Xiao
 Wang, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Kipf, and Neil Houlsby. Simple open-vocabulary object detec-
 tion with vision transformers, 2022.
Kaichun Mo, Leonidas J Guibas, Mustafa Mukadam, Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani.
  Where2act: From pixels to actions for articulated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 6813–6823, 2021.
Yao Mu, Qinglong Zhang, Mengkang Hu, Wenhai Wang, Mingyu Ding, Jun Jin, Bin Wang, Jifeng
  Dai, Yu Qiao, and Ping Luo. Embodiedgpt: Vision-language pre-training via embodied chain of
  thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15021, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Zengyi Qin, Kuan Fang, Yuke Zhu, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. Keto: Learning keypoint
  representations for tool manipulation. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), pp. 7278–7285. IEEE, 2020.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
  Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al.
  A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
Dhruv Shah, Błażej Osiński, Sergey Levine, et al. Lm-nav: Robotic navigation with large pre-
  trained models of language, vision, and action. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 492–504.
  PMLR, 2023.
Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
   large language models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
   (ICRA), pp. 11523–11530. IEEE, 2023.
Austin Stone, Ted Xiao, Yao Lu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kuang-Huei Lee, Quan Vuong, Paul
  Wohlhart, Brianna Zitkovich, Fei Xia, Chelsea Finn, et al. Open-world object manipulation using
  pre-trained vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00905, 2023.
Alessandro Suglia, Qiaozi Gao, Jesse Thomason, Govind Thattai, and Gaurav Sukhatme. Embodied
  bert: A transformer model for embodied, language-guided visual task completion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.04927, 2021.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Sai Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Arthur Bucker, and Ashish Kapoor. Chatgpt for robotics: Design
  principles and model abilities. Microsoft Auton. Syst. Robot. Res, 2:20, 2023.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
  select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023b.
Ruihai Wu, Yan Zhao, Kaichun Mo, Zizheng Guo, Yian Wang, Tianhao Wu, Qingnan Fan, Xuelin
  Chen, Leonidas Guibas, and Hao Dong. Vat-mart: Learning visual action trajectory proposals for
  manipulating 3d articulated objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14440, 2021.
Danfei Xu, Ajay Mandlekar, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Yuke Zhu, Silvio Savarese, and Li Fei-Fei.
  Deep affordance foresight: Planning through what can be done in the future. In 2021 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 6206–6213. IEEE, 2021a.
Ruinian Xu, Fu-Jen Chu, Chao Tang, Weiyu Liu, and Patricio A Vela. An affordance keypoint
  detection network for robot manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 6(2):2870–
  2877, 2021b.
Shuo Yang, Wei Zhang, Ran Song, Jiyu Cheng, and Yibin Li. Learning multi-object dense descriptor
  for autonomous goal-conditioned grasping. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 6(2):4109–
  4116, 2021.
Xintong Yang, Ze Ji, Jing Wu, and Yu-Kun Lai. Recent advances of deep robotic affordance learn-
  ing: a reinforcement learning perspective. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental
  Systems, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.


                                              13
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     A     A PPENDIX
     A.1   P ROMPT FOR LLM+A

                             Listing 1: Prompt for LLM+A sub-task planner
 1   [Guidelines]
 2   You are an xArm6 robot (or a universal robot UR5e) on the tabletop,
 3   constrained to move in a 2D plane with a cylindrical end-effector (or a
 4   suction gripper). Your task is to finish language conditioned
 5   manipulation task. The following coordinates are all from the top view.
 6   Top left corner of the table is position [48, 4].
 7   Top right corner of the table is position [271, 4].
 8   Bottom left corner of the table is position [48, 172].
 9   Bottom right corner of the table is position [271, 172].
10   The positive direction is right for x-axis and down for y-axis.
11   The smaller of ’x’ means closer to the table left side,
12   the smaller of ’y’ means closer to the table top side.
13   Remember, you do not need to return to the initial position after comple-
14   ting the task instruction.
15   [Inputs]
16   I will provide you with the ’Task Instruction’, ’Arm Position’, ’Object
17   Information’, ’Possible Skills’ in the JSON format.
18   {’Task Instruction’: ’’,
19    ’Arm Position’: [,],
20    ’Object Parts’: {},
21    ’Possible Skills’: [’Push’](or [’Pick’,’Place’])}
22   [Outputs]
23   You should generate the following outputs in the JSON format:
24   {’Consequences’: ’Imagine the consequences of the object states after
25   performing the ’possible skills’ to different ’Object Parts’. ’,
26   ’Affordance’:{’Based on the imagined ’Consequences’, assign the
27   affordance value range from 0 to 1 for every part of the object to
28   represent their usefulness for the ’Task Instruction’ with key ’Object
29   Parts’.’},
30   ’Plan’: [{’plan a sequence of sub-task with relative target coordinates
31   of your arm to finish the task with key ’sub_task’ and
32   ’target_coordinates’}]}

                            Listing 2: Prompt for LLM+A motion controller
 1   [Guidelines]
 2   You are an xArm6 robot (or a universal robot UR5e) on the tabletop,
 3   constrained to move in a 2D plane with a cylindrical end-effector (or a
 4   suction gripper). Your task is to finish language conditioned
 5   manipulation task. The following coordinates are all from the top view.
 6   Top left corner of the table is position [48, 4].
 7   Top right corner of the table is position [271, 4].
 8   Bottom left corner of the table is position [48, 172].
 9   Bottom right corner of the table is position [271, 172].
10   The positive direction is right for x-axis and down for y-axis.
11   The smaller of ’x’ means closer to the table left side,
12   the smaller of ’y’ means closer to the table top side.
13   Given a ’Task Instruction’, the ’Target Position’, the current ’Arm
14   Position’, and the ’Object Information’ of the blocks on the table.
15   You need to generate the coordinate list of the planned path with key
16   ’planned path’ in the JSON format.
17   The maximum translation between two adjacent coordinate of the output
18   planned path is 20.
19   Firstly, I will give you two demos.
20   [Demo 1]
21   [Inputs]
22   {’Task Instruction’: ’Move arm to the bottom side of the yellow cube.’,
23   ’Target Position’:[92,118],
24   ’Arm Position’:[242,73],


                                                  14
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


25   ’Object Information’:{’blue cube’:
26   {’side_top’:{’coordinateA’:[76,90],’coordinateB’:[108,90]},
27   ’side_left’:{’coordinateA’:[76,90],’coordinateB’:[76,118]},
28   ’side_bottom’:{coordinateA’:[76,118],’coordinateB’:[108,118]},
29   ’side_right’:{’coordinateA’:[108,118],’coordinateB’:[108,90]},
30   ’Affordance’:{’side_top’:0,’side_left’:0,’side_bottom’:1,
31   ’side_right’:0}}}}
32   [Outputs]
33   {"planned path":[[242,73],[242,93],[242,113],[222,118],[202,118],
34   [182,118],[162,118],[142,118],[122,118],[102,118],[92,118]]}
35   [Demo 2]
36   [Inputs]
37   {’Task Instruction’: ’Push the blue cube to the top of the table.’,
38   ’Target Position’:[92,4],
39   ’Arm Position’:[92,118],
40   ’Object Information’:{’green cube’:
41   {’side_top’:{’coordinateA’:[76,90],’coordinateB’:[108,90]},
42   ’side_left’:{’coordinateA’:[76,90],’coordinateB’:[76,118]},
43   ’side_bottom’:{coordinateA’:[76,118],’coordinateB’:[108,118]},
44   ’side_right’:{’coordinateA’:[108,118],’coordinateB’:[108,90]},
45   ’Affordance’:{’side_top’:0,’side_left’:0,’side_bottom’:1,
46   ’side_right’:0}}}}
47   [Outputs]
48   {"planned path":[[92,118],[92,98],[92,78],[92,58],[92,38],
49   [92,18],[92,4]]}


     A.2   P ROMPT FOR NAIVE LLM

                           Listing 3: Prompt for Naive LLM sub-task planner
 1   [Guidelines]
 2   You are an xArm6 robot (or a universal robot UR5e) on the tabletop,
 3   constrained to move in a 2D plane with a cylindrical end-effector (or a
 4   suction gripper). Your task is to finish language conditioned
 5   manipulation task. The following coordinates are all from the top view.
 6   Top left corner of the table is position [48, 4].
 7   Top right corner of the table is position [271, 4].
 8   Bottom left corner of the table is position [48, 172].
 9   Bottom right corner of the table is position [271, 172].
10   The positive direction is right for x-axis and down for y-axis.
11   The smaller of ’x’ means closer to the table left side,
12   the smaller of ’y’ means closer to the table top side.
13   Remember, you do not need to return to the initial position after comple-
14   ting the task instruction.
15   [Inputs]
16   I will provide you with the ’Task Instruction’, ’Arm Position’, ’Object
17   Information’, ’Possible Skills’ in the JSON format.
18   {’Task Instruction’: ’’,
19    ’Arm Position’: [,],
20    ’Object Parts’: {},
21    ’Possible Skills’: [’Push’](or [’Pick’,’Place’])} }
22   [Outputs]
23   You should generate the following outputs in the JSON format:
24   {’Plan’: [{’plan a sequence of sub-task with relative target coordinates
25    of your arm to finish the task with key ’sub_task’ and
26    ’target_coordinates’}]}


     A.3   P ROMPT FOR R E ACT

                                 Listing 4: Example Prompt for ReAct
 1   You are a robot arm working on the tabletop. Looking quickly around you,
 2   you see your arm at position [x,y]=[60,50], a [’green block’] with bound-


                                                  15
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 3   ing box coordinates [[x1,y1,x2,y2]] = [[90,90,110,110]]. Your task is to:
 4   slide the green block to the bottom. The bounding box of tabletop coordi-
 5   nates [x1,y1,x2,y2] = [0,0,200,150]. The greater in ’x’ coordinate means
 6   more right, the greater in ’y’ coordinates means more bottom.
 7   Act 1: Think<To push the green block to the bottom, I should approach the
 8   top edge of the block. The top edge coordinates is [90,90,110,90]. And my
 9   arm’s x coordinate 60 is less than edge’s coordinate x1=90, and y coordi-
10   nate 50 is also less than edge’s coordinates y1=90, so I am at the top-
11   left of the top edge. To approach the top edge, I should move right.>
12   Act 2: Move Right
13   Obs 2: Looking quickly around you, you see your arm at position [x,y]=
14   [80,50], and a [’green block’] with bounding box coordinates = [[90,90,
15   110,110]].
16   Act 3: Think<To push the green block to the bottom, I should approach the
17   top edge of the block. The top edge coordinates is [90,90,110,90]. And my
18   arm’s x coordinate 80 is less than edge’s coordinate x1=90 and y coordi-
19   nate 50 is also less than edge’s coordinates y1=90, so I am still at the
20   top-left of the top edge. To approach the top edge, I should move right.>
21   Act 4: Move Right
22   Obs 4: Looking quickly around you, you see your arm at position [x,y]=
23   [100,50], and a [’green block’] with bounding box coordinates = [[90,90,
24   110,110]].
25   Act 5: Think<To push the green block to the bottom, I should approach the
26   top edge of the block. The top edge coordinates is [90,90,110,90]. My arm
27   ’s x coordinate 100 is greater than the edge’s coordinate x1=90 and less
28   than x3=110, y coordinate less than edge’s coordinate y1=90, so I am at
29   the top of the top edge. To approach the top edge, I should move down.>
30   Act 6: Move Down
31   Obs 6: Looking quickly around you, you see your arm at position [x,y]=
32   [100,70], and a [’green block’] with bounding box coordinates = [[90,90,
33   110,110]].
34   Act 7: Think<To push the green block to the bottom, I should approach the
35   top edge of the block. The top edge coordinates is [90,90,110,90]. My arm
36   ’s x coordinate 100 is greater than the edge’s coordinate x1=90 and less
37   than x3=110, y coordinate less than edge’s coordinate y1=90, so I am at
38   the top of the top edge. To approach the top edge, I should move down.>
39   Act 8: Move Down
40   Obs 8: Looking quickly around you, you see your arm at position [x,y]=
41   [100,90], and a [’green block’] with bounding box coordinates = [[90,90,
42   110,110]].
43   Act 9: Think<To push the green block to the bottom, I should approach the
44   top edge of the block. The top edge coordinates is [90,90,110,90]. And my
45   arm’s x coordinate 100 is greater than the edge’s coordinate x1=90 and
46   less than x3=110, y coordinate is close to the edge’s coordinate y1=90,
47   so I am very closed to the top edge and I can push it.>
48   Act 10: Push Down
49   Obs 10: Looking quickly around you, you see your arm at position [x,y]=
50   [100,110], and a [’green block’] with bounding box coordinates = [[90,
51   115,110,135]].
52   Act 11: Think<To push the green block to the bottom, I should approach
53   the top edge of the block. The top edge coordinates is [90,90,110,90].
54   And my arm’s x coordinate 100 is greater than the edge’s coordinate x1=90
55   and less than x3=110, y coordinate is close to 90, so I am very closed to
56   the top edge and I can push it.>
57   Act 12: Push Down
58   Obs 12: Looking quickly around you, you see your arm at position [x,y]=
59   [100,130], and a [’green block’] with bounding box coordinates = [[90,
60   135,110,155]].
61   Act 13: Think<Based on the coordinates, the block has reached the bottom
62   side with coordinates y=150, so I finished the task.>
63   Act 14: Succeed


                                                  16
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     A.4   P ROMPT FOR C ODE AS P OLICIES

                             Listing 5: Example Prompt for Code as Policies
 1   # Python 2D robot control script
 2   import numpy as np
 3   from env_utils import get_obs_image,get_robot_pose, get_obj_box,
 4   get_obj_edge, push, move, say, detect_relation, detect_arrive_side
 5   # push the yellow block to the bottom right corner
 6   say(’Ok - pushing the yellow block to the bottom right corner’)
 7   image = get_obs_image(observation)
 8   robot = get_robot_pose(observation)
 9   yellow_block_xyxy = get_obj_box(observation,’yellow block’)
10   say("Robot pose={}, Block pose={}".format(robot,yellow_block_xyxy))
11   yellow_block_top_edge = get_obj_edge(yellow_block_xyxy,’top side’)
12   yellow_block_left_edge = get_obj_edge(yellow_block_xyxy,’left side’)
13   top_relation = detect_relation(robot,yellow_block_top_edge,’top’)
14   left_relation = detect_relation(robot,yellow_block_left_edge,’left’)
15   bottom_side_xyxy = get_side_pose(’bottom side’)
16   right_side_xyxy = get_side_pose(’right side’)
17   arrive_bottom_side = detect_arrive_side(’bottom side’, bottom_side_xyxy,
18    yellow_block_xyxy)
19   arrive_right_side = detect_arrive_side(’right side’, right_side_xyxy,
20    yellow_block_xyxy)
21   if not arrive_bottom_side:
22       if top_relation == "arrive":
23           push(robot,’down’)
24           say("push down")
25       elif top_relation == "top":
26           move(robot,’down’)
27           say("move down")
28       elif top_relation == "top left":
29           move(robot,’right’)
30           say("move right")
31       elif top_relation == "top right":
32           move(robot,’left’)
33           say("move left")
34       elif top_relation == "bottom":
35           move(robot,’left’)
36           say("move left")
37       elif top_relation == "bottom left":
38           move(robot,’up’)
39           say("move up")
40       elif top_relation == "bottom right":
41           move(robot,’up’)
42           say("move up")
43   elif not arrive_right_side:
44       if left_relation == "arrive":
45           push(robot,’right’)
46           say("push right")
47       elif left_relation == "left":
48           move(robot,’right’)
49           say("move right")
50       elif left_relation == "top left":
51           move(robot,’down’)
52           say("move down")
53       elif left_relation == "bottom left":
54           move(robot,’up’)
55           say("move up")
56       elif left_relation == "right":
57           move(robot,’down’)
58           say("move down")
59       elif left_relation == "bottom right":
60           move(robot,’left’)
61           say("move left")


                                                  17
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


62         elif left_relation == "top right":
63             move(robot,’left’)
64             say("move left")


     A.5   E XAMPLE S UCCESSES

              Listing 6: Example success of LLM+A sub-task planner in Block2Position task
 1   [Block2Position Task]
 2   You are an xArm6 robot on the tabletop,
 3   constrained to move in a 2D plane with a cylindrical end-effector (or a
 4   suction gripper). Your task is to finish language conditioned
 5   manipulation task. The following coordinates are all from the top view.
 6   Top left corner of the table is position [48, 4].
 7   Top right corner of the table is position [271, 4].
 8   Bottom left corner of the table is position [48, 172].
 9   Bottom right corner of the table is position [271, 172].
10   The positive direction is right for x-axis and down for y-axis.
11   The smaller of ’x’ means closer to the table left side,
12   the smaller of ’y’ means closer to the table top side.
13   Remember, you do not need to return to the initial position after comple-
14   ting the task instruction.
15   I will provide you with the ’Task Instruction’, ’Arm Position’, ’Object
16   Information’, ’Possible Skills’ in the JSON format.
17   {’Task Instruction’: ’move the green cube to the top’,
18    ’Arm Position’: [127,83],
19    ’Object Parts’: {’green cube’:{
20    ’edge_top’:{’coordinateA’:[110, 57],’coordinateB’:[144, 57]},
21    ’edge_left’:{’coordinateA’:[110, 57],’coordinateB’:[110, 88]},
22    ’edge_bottom’:{’coordinateA’:[110, 88],’coordinateB’:[144,88]},
23    ’edge_right’:{’coordinateA’:[144, 88],’coordinateB’:[144, 57]}}},
24    ’Possible Skills’: [’Push’]}
25   You should generate the following outputs in the JSON format:
26   {’Consequences’: ’Imagine the consequences of the object states after
27   performing the ’possible skills’ to different ’Object Parts’. ’,
28   ’Affordance’:{’Based on the imagined ’Consequences’, assign the
29   affordance value range from 0 to 1 for every part of the object to
30   represent their usefulness for the ’Task Instruction’ with key ’Object
31   Parts’.’},
32   ’Plan’: [{’plan a sequence of sub-task with relative target coordinates
33   of your arm to finish the task with key ’sub_task’ and
34   ’target_coordinates’}]}
35
36   [GPT4]
37   {’Consequences’: {
38   ’push_edge_top’: ’The blue cube will move downwards.’,
39   ’push_edge_left’: ’The blue cube will move to the right.’,
40   ’push_edge_bottom’: ’The blue cube will move upwards.’,
41   ’push_edge_right’: ’The blue cube will move to the left.’},
42   ’Affordance’: {’edge_top’: 0,’edge_left’: 0,
43   ’edge_bottom’: 1,’edge_right’: 0},
44   ’Plan’: [{
45   ’sub_task’: ’Move arm to edge_bottom of the blue cube’,
46   ’target_coordinates’: [125, 130]},
47   {’sub_task’: ’Push the blue cube to the top of the table’,
48   ’target_coordinates’: [125, 4]}]}


               Listing 7: Example success of LLM+A sub-task planner in Pick&Place task
 1   [Pick&Place Task]
 2   You are an xArm6 robot on the tabletop,
 3   constrained to move in a 2D plane with a cylindrical end-effector (or a
 4   suction gripper). Your task is to finish language conditioned


                                                  18
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 5   manipulation task. The following coordinates are all from the top view.
 6   Top left corner of the table is position [48, 4].
 7   Top right corner of the table is position [271, 4].
 8   Bottom left corner of the table is position [48, 172].
 9   Bottom right corner of the table is position [271, 172].
10   The positive direction is right for x-axis and down for y-axis.
11   The smaller of ’x’ means closer to the table left side,
12   the smaller of ’y’ means closer to the table top side.
13   Remember, you do not need to return to the initial position after comple-
14   ting the task instruction.
15   I will provide you with the ’Task Instruction’, ’Object Information’,
16   ’Possible Skills’ in the JSON format.
17   {’Task Instruction’: ’put the pink blocks in a white bowl’,
18    ’Arm Position’: [127,83],
19    ’Object Parts’: [
20   {’object id’:5, ’type’: ’white bowl’, ’pose’: [220, 301, 0]},
21   {’object id’:6, ’type’: ’white bowl’, ’pose’: [123, 246, 0]},
22   {’object id’:7, ’type’: ’white bowl’, ’pose’: [488, 162, 0]},
23   {’object id’:8, ’type’: ’pink block’, ’pose’: [139, 239, 0]},
24   {’object id’:9, ’type’: ’pink block’, ’pose’: [462, 107, 0]},
25   {’object id’:10, ’type’: ’blue block’, ’pose’: [254, 221, 0]},
26   {’object id’:11, ’type’: ’red block’, ’pose’: [109, 107, 0]},
27   {’object id’:12, ’type’: ’green bowl’, ’pose’: [586, 285, 0]},
28   {’object id’:13, ’type’: ’yellow bowl’, ’pose’: [444, 300, 0]},
29   {’object id’:14, ’type’: ’blue block’, ’pose’: [385, 136, 0]}],
30    ’Possible Skills’: [’Pick’, ’Place’]}
31   You should generate the following outputs in the JSON format:
32   {’Consequences’: ’Imagine the consequences of the object states after
33   performing the ’possible skills’ to different ’Object Parts’. ’,
34   ’Affordance’:{’Based on the imagined ’Consequences’, assign the
35   affordance value range from 0 to 1 for every part of the object to
36   represent their usefulness for the ’Task Instruction’ with key ’Object
37   Parts’.’},
38   ’Plan’: [{’plan a sequence of sub-task with relative target coordinates
39   of your arm to finish the task with key ’sub_task’, ’possible skills’ and
40   ’target_coordinates’}]}
41
42   [GPT4]
43   {’Consequences’: [
44   {’object id’: 5, ’state’: ’white bowl with pink block’},
45   {’object id’: 6, ’state’: ’white bowl with pink block’},
46   {’object id’: 7, ’state’: ’empty white bowl’},
47   {’object id’: 8, ’state’: ’pink block in white bowl’},
48   {’object id’: 9, ’state’: ’pink block in white bowl’},
49   {’object id’: 10, ’state’: ’blue block’},
50   {’object id’: 11, ’state’: ’red block’},
51   {’object id’: 12, ’state’: ’green bowl’},
52   {’object id’: 13, ’state’: ’yellow bowl’},
53   {’object id’: 14, ’state’: ’blue block’}],
54   ’Affordance’: {’5’: 1, ’6’: 1, ’7’: 0, ’8’: 1, ’9’: 1,’10’: 0,
55   ’11’: 0,’12’: 0,’13’: 0,’14’: 0},
56   ’Plan’: [
57   {’sub_task’: ’Pick up the first pink block’,
58   ’possible skills’: ’pick’,
59   ’target_coordinates’: [139, 239]},
60   {’sub_task’: ’Place the first pink block in the first white bowl’,
61   ’possible skills’: ’place’,
62   ’target_coordinates’: [220, 301]},
63   {’sub_task’: ’Pick up the second pink block’,
64   ’possible skills’: ’pick’,
65   ’target_coordinates’: [462, 107]},
66   {’sub_task’: ’Place the second pink block in the second white bowl’,
67   ’possible skills’: ’place’,
68   ’target_coordinates’: [123, 246]}]}



                                                  19
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     A.6   E XAMPLE FAILURES

     Listing 8: Failure case for Naive LLM, the red fonts represents the mistakes in thinking. We found
     that Naive LLM makes many mistakes in spatial relationship reasoning. Specifically, naive LLM
     first fails in choosing the skills and proposes the wrong target coordinates in the subsequent step.
 1   [Block2Position Task]
 2   You are an xArm6 robot on the tabletop,
 3   constrained to move in a 2D plane with a cylindrical end-effector (or a
 4   suction gripper). Your task is to finish language conditioned
 5   manipulation task. The following coordinates are all from the top view.
 6   Top left corner of the table is position [48, 4].
 7   Top right corner of the table is position [271, 4].
 8   Bottom left corner of the table is position [48, 172].
 9   Bottom right corner of the table is position [271, 172].
10   The positive direction is right for x-axis and down for y-axis.
11   The smaller of ’x’ means closer to the table left side,
12   the smaller of ’y’ means closer to the table top side.
13   Remember, you do not need to return to the initial position after comple-
14   ting the task instruction.
15   I will provide you with the ’Task Instruction’, ’Arm Position’, ’Object
16   Information’, ’Possible Skills’ in the JSON format.
17   {’Task Instruction’: ’move the green cube to the top’,
18    ’Arm Position’: [127,83],
19    ’Object Parts’: {’green cube’:{
20    ’edge_top’:{’coordinateA’:[110, 57],’coordinateB’:[144, 57]},
21    ’edge_left’:{’coordinateA’:[110, 57],’coordinateB’:[110, 88]},
22    ’edge_bottom’:{’coordinateA’:[110, 88],’coordinateB’:[144,88]},
23    ’edge_right’:{’coordinateA’:[144, 88],’coordinateB’:[144, 57]}}},
24    ’Possible Skills’: [’Push’]}
25   You should generate the following outputs in the JSON format:
26   {’Plan’: [{’plan a sequence of sub-task with relative target coordinates
27   of your arm to finish the task with key ’sub_task’ and
28   ’target_coordinates’}]}
29
30   [GPT4]
31   { "Plan": [{
32   "sub_task": "Move to the green cube", "target_coordinates": [127,57]},
33   {"sub_task": "Grab the green cube", "target_coordinates": [127,57]},
34   {"sub_task": "Move to the top", "target_coordinates": [127,4]},
35   {"sub_task": "Release the green cube", "target_coordinates": [127,4]}]}

     To align the ReAct approach to our tasks, we follow the rules in the original paper and design new
     prompt examples for interleaved reasoning and action as shown in 4. For the thinking process, we
     hint to the LLM about how to infer the spatial relationships and the optimal actions. We found
     that the ReAct can make reasonable thinking, (e.g. after performing the pushing skills, if the block
     doesn’t move, it knows to move to another side), but it will also make mistakes on the physical
     interaction inference. An examples is shown in 9. In order to move the green cube to the upper left
     corner, it should approach the right side instead of the left edge. And once a mistake occurs, such
     a thinking process will influence all the subsequent decisions, which makes it fail in most of the
     tasks.
     Listing 9: Failure case for ReAct, the red fonts represents the mistakes in thinking, the orange fonts
     represents the correct answer. We found that ReAct makes many mistakes in spatial relationship
     inference and interaction consequence prediction.
 1   Act 49: Think<To move the green cube to the upper left corner, I should
 2   approach the left edge (right edge) of the cube. Based on the coordinates
 3   my ’x’ is less thans the cube ’x1’ and my ’y’ is less than the cube ’y1’,
 4   so I am still at the bottom-left (top-left) of the green cube, to appro-
 5   ach the left edge, I should move right.>

     We provide GPT-4 with two example codes as in 5 for each task to understand the protocol of push-
     ing the blocks. To evaluate the capability of the LLM in low-level motion planning, we regulate the


                                                      20
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     LLM can only select the API of moving/pushing up, down, left, or right. From our experiments, the
     code-like prompts allow the LLM to own outstanding task decomposition ability, and generalization
     across various instruction inputs, but it still makes mistakes in choosing the correct side for finishing
     the pushing block tasks. An example is shown in 10. In other words, such methods don’t inspire the
     physical grounding abilities of LLM. And for many tasks, especially those requiring low-level mo-
     tion planning tasks, it is difficult to explicitly summarize the whole task into a step-to-step procedure
     as code. But our approach provides a new paradigm.

     Listing 10: Failure case of code as policies. The mistake is marked with red fonts. Although the
     entire procedure is correct, it sometimes fails in finding the correspodning edge for completing the
     task. And for local motion-planning, it is complicated or even infeasible to write the step-to-step
     procedure as code.
 1   say("Ok - moving the yellow block to the left side of the board")
 2   image = get_obs_image(observation)
 3   robot = get_robot_pose(observation)
 4   yellow_block_xyxy = get_obj_box(observation,"yellow block")
 5   yellow_block_left_edge = get_obj_edge(yellow_block_xyxy,"left side")
 6   left_relation = detect_relation(robot,yellow_block_left_edge,"left")
 7   left_side_xyxy = get_side_pose("left side")
 8   arrive_left_side = detect_arrive_side("left side",left_side_xyxy,
         yellow_block_xyxy)
 9   if not arrive_left_side:
10       if left_relation == "arrive":
11           push(robot,"left")
12           say("push left")
13       elif left_relation == "left":
14           move(robot,"left")
15           say("move left")
16       elif left_relation == "top left":
17           move(robot,"down")
18           say("move down")
19       elif left_relation == "bottom left":
20           move(robot,"up")
21           say("move up")
22       elif left_relation == "right":
23           move(robot,"down")
24           say("move down")
25       elif left_relation == "bottom right":
26           move(robot,"left")
27           say("move left")
28       elif left_relation == "top right":
29           move(robot,"left")
30           say("move left")



     A.7   G ENERALIZATION TO BLOCKS WITH DIFFERENT SHAPES

     To evaluate the robustness of our proposed LLM+A method, we further conduct one robotics control
     task (Block2Position) with respect to four types of blocks with different shapes (cube, star, pentagon,
     moon). All the settings are the same except the block shapes. We evaluate 100 episodes for this task,
     and our LLM+A achieves 38% average success rate, which is consistent to the performance achieved
     on cubes. Note that using the bounding box as input may contradict to the shape of the block and
     cause unpredictable physical interaction results. However, as our method control the locomotion in
     close-looped manner, it will dynamically adjust its planning trajectory. That is the main reason of
     why using bounding box is applicable. The examples are shown in Fig 5.

     A.8   G ENERALIZATION TO BLOCKS WITH ENVIRONMENT INTERFERENCE

     In the real-world robotics applications, the objects placement are easily influenced by our human
     activities. To verify whether our method can deal with such scenarios, we randomly change the
     block’s position as human interference in Block2Position task to see whether the LLM+A can adjust


                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Task Instruction: Move the pentagon to the left side of the table


A: Move to the right edge    B: Push the cube to the left   C: Pentagon is mistakenly     D: Re-Plan to correct the         E: Task complete
of the cube                  side of table                  pushed to the down side       mistake and approach the
                                                            because of shape                   right side again

                               Task Instruction: Push the star to the right side of the table


A: Move to left edge B: Push the cube to the    C: Star is mistakenly     D: Replan a new traje-   E: Replan again          F: Task complete
of the cube          right side of table        pushed to the down        ctory
                                                side because of shape



Figure 5: Trajectory Visualization. We demonstrate two examples to illustrate the re-planning pro-
cess. As shown in figures, the unpredictable interactions will happen and our method can success-
fully change its plan considering the location feedback of the objects.


its plan in time. We evaluate for another 100 episode and our method achieves 40% in success rate,
which is consistent to the main results. The examples are shown in Fig6.

                         Task Instruction: Move the green cube to the right side of the table


 A: Move to the left edge    B: Move to the left edge       C: Interference happens!     D: Adjust the plan with       E: Push to the right side
 of the cube                 of the cube                                                 respect to the interference

                            Task Instruction: Move the green cube to the right bottom corner


    A: Move to the left edge of the   B: Interference happens!            C: Adjust the plan with respect     D: Push to the bottom-right
    cube                                                                  to the interference                 side


Figure 6: Trajectory Visualization. We demonstrate two examples to illustrate the re-planning pro-
cess with respect to human interference. As shown in figures, once the block is taken far away, the
planned trajectory will be immediately re-planned to catch up with the blocks.


                                                                       22
