Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CODA: T EMPORAL D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION VIA
C ONCEPT D RIFT S IMULATOR
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT

          In real-world applications, machine learning models are often notoriously blamed
          for performance degradation due to data distribution shifts. Temporal domain
          generalization aims to learn models that can adapt to “concept drift” over time
          and perform well in the near future. To the best of our knowledge, existing works
          rely on model extrapolation enhancement or models with dynamic parameters to
          achieve temporal generalization. However, these model-centric training strate-
          gies may involve the unnecessarily comprehensive interaction between data and
          model to train the model for distribution shift, accordingly.1 To this end, we aim
          to tackle the concept drift problem from a data-centric perspective and naturally
          bypass the cumbersome interaction between data and model. Developing the
          data-centric framework involves two challenges: (i) existing generative models
          struggle to generate future data with natural evolution, and (ii) directly captur-
          ing the temporal trends of data with high precision is daunting 2 . To tackle these
          challenges, we propose the COncept Drift simulAtor (CODA) framework incor-
          porating a predicted feature correlation matrix to simulate future data for model
          training. Specifically, the feature correlations matrix serves as a delegation to
          represent data characteristics at each time point and the trigger for future data
          generation. Experimental results demonstrate that using CODA-generated data as
          training input effectively achieves temporal domain generalization across differ-
          ent model architectures with great transferability. Our source code is available at:
          https://anonymous.4open.science/r/coda-D648


1       I NTRODUCTION
The remarkable progress in machine learning has spurred many applications in real-world scenarios
(Wei et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2020; Strudel et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2021;
Dai et al., 2021; Joseph et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2021). Typically, the historical training data is
assumed with the same distribution as future data. However, this assumption is not usually satisfied
in real-world settings due to practical data evolving. In other words, the trained model may show
performance degradation due to the temporal distribution drift between the training and near-future
testing data. Distribution drift hereby poses substantial challenges for researchers to perfectly exploit
data on model training. In this manner, Domain Adaptation (DA) (Lu et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020;
Balaji et al., 2019; Kang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021), Domain Generalization (DG) (Xu et al., 2020;
Yan et al., 2020; Qiao et al., 2020; Chattopadhyay et al., 2020; Piratla et al., 2020; Cha et al., 2022),
and Temporal Domain Generalization (TDG) (Bai et al., 2022; Nasery et al., 2021) are proposed to
address the distribution shift with different settings.
In contrast to DA, which requires access to unlabeled data in the target domain, DG and TDG
are more practical in real-world scenarios where feature information about the target domain is
typically unavailable. Existing DG methods aim to improve generalization ability across “distinct”
categorical domains, such as different datasets and sources. However, in real-world applications,
data may naturally evolve over time, leading to the emergence of temporal domains. For instance,
in predicting seasonal flu trends using Twitter data (Bai et al., 2022), as the platform gains more
    1
     The fundamental cause in concept drift arises only from data perspective.
    2
     Directly predicting a whole dataset requires data distribution estimation, leading to prohibitive computa-
tional costs. (Please see Section 3.1 for more details.)


                                                      1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


users, forms new connections, and experiences demographic shifts, the correlation between user
profiles and flu predictions changes, leading to outdated models. Therefore, temporal distribution
shift, a commonly observed phenomenon in the real world, brings significant changes in the joint
distribution of features and labels with smooth data shift over time, known as “concept drift”. While
DA and DG methods are designed to bridge the gap between different data distributions, they do
not consider the chronological domain indices and smooth drift with the underlying pattern. Such a
unique challenge of temporal distribution shift requires further research towards TDG.
To alleviate concept drift for achieving TDG, Gradient Interpolation (GI) (Nasery et al., 2021) and
DRAIN (Bai et al., 2022) introduced model-centric strategies, either incorporating specialized reg-
ularization or parameter forecasting techniques, and may involve unnecessary interaction between
data and model. Noticed that the temporal distribution shift issue is purely from a data perspective,
a natural question is raised: Can we achieve TDG via a data-centric approach without involving
data-model interaction? Our pioneer research aims to address concept drift from a novel data-
centric angle rather than against the parallel model-centric strategy.
We provide a positive answer to this question and propose a data-centric approach to simulate future
data via out-of-distribution (OOD) data generation. However, it is non-trivial to generate OOD data
reflecting the concept drifts from historical data. A naive approach is to directly capture the temporal
trends to predict future data using the sequential model. However, this approach is demonstrated to
be problematic in our preliminary analysis (see Section 3.1). Specifically, we leverage an LSTM
unit for simulating future samples, where the model is trained with dataset-level Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence. The results demonstrate poor performance in the TDG setting due to the limited
model prediction capacity. To further develop an effective data-centric framework for future data
generation, there are two main challenges: (i) Generating out-of-distribution future data is beyond
the capacity of many existing generative models. Most generative models aim to generate the data
following the same distribution of observed training data and therefore are not able to extrapolate
the future data distribution. (ii) Directly capturing the temporal trends along chronological source
domains with high precision is daunting (the arduousness is demonstrated in Section 3.1).
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, we propose COncept Drift simulAtor (CODA), a data
simulation framework incorporating feature correlation matrices to capture temporal trends within
the historical source domains for generating future data. Specifically, CODA consists of two steps:
(i) Extracting a dynamic feature correlation matrix from source domains, which is utilized to learn
an informative one for the upcoming domain, and (ii) Simulating future training data based on the
predicted future feature correlation. Subsequently, the generated future data can be utilized as the
training data for prediction models, such as MLP-based or tree-based classifiers, enhancing the
performance on the unseen future domain. Theoretical analysis ensures that under practical assump-
tions, the predicted correlation is dependable. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
CODA in TDG by providing high-quality simulated data. Our contributions are as follows:

       • CODA designs a novel model-agnostic approach to tackle the issue of concept drift. We
         design the feature correlation matrix as a data delegation and future data generation trigger
         to enhance OOD generation quality.
       • Theoretical and experimental analysis indicates that CODA can be facilitated for future
         data generation by considering the temporal trends of feature correlations.
       • Experimental results demonstrate that the simulated future dataset can be leveraged as train-
         ing data with transferability for various model architectures.

2     P RELIMINARY
2.1   T EMPORAL D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We consider temporal prediction tasks with evolved data distribution. In the training stage, given T
observed continuous source domains D1 , D2 , . . . , DT , the data instance within domain Dt , sampling
from distributions at distinct time points t, is defined as {(xti , yit ) ∈ Xt ×Yt }N t
                                                                                    i=1 , where domain index
t = 1, 2, . . . , T . Here, xti and yit represent the input features and labels, respectively, Nt denotes
the sample size, and Xt × Yt signifies the feature and label spaces at time t. The ultimate goal is to
train a model generalized well on some target (test) domain in the future, i.e., DT +1 . In the temporal


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           …



                                                                                          Data
                                                                                       Simulator G

                                                           …


      Correlation        Correlation        Correlation            Correlation         Correlation
      Predictor H        Predictor H        Predictor H            Predictor H         Predictor H


Figure 1: An overview of the proposed framework CODA, consisting of a Correlation Predictor (see
Section 3.2) and a Data Simulator (see Section 3.3). In the first stage, the Correlation Predictor is
trained on feature correlation matrices at each time point Ci . In the second stage, the predicted cor-
relation matrix CˆT +1 served as prior knowledge for Data Simulator G to be updated by Equation 5.


domain generalization problem, the concept drift across different domains is commonly assumed,
i.e., the data distribution smoothly evolved across time (domain index) following underlying but
unknown patterns. The notations are summarized in Table 4 in the Appendix.

2.2   R ELATED W ORKS

Domain Generalization (DG). The goal of DG is to enhance model generalization ability to the
open unordered target domains given multiple domains data without accessing target domains. Sev-
eral methods have been proposed for this task in recent years (Muandet et al., 2013; Cha et al.,
2022; Chattopadhyay et al., 2020; Qiao et al., 2020; Motiian et al., 2017; Nasery et al., 2021; Dou
et al., 2019). Existing DG methods can be categorized into three branches (Wang et al., 2022): (1)
Data manipulation; The input data can be manipulated to learn a general representation via gen-
erating diverse data, including data augmentation (e.g., randomization, and transformation) (Tobin
et al., 2017; Tremblay et al., 2018) and diverse data generation (Liu et al., 2018; Qiao et al., 2020).
(2) Representation learning. The generalized representation learning can be pursued by domain-
invariant property via adversarial training, invariant risk minimization, or feature alignments across
domains (Ganin et al., 2016; Gong et al., 2019). Another way is feature disentanglement with
domain-shared and domain-specific features for better generalization (Li et al., 2017). (3) General
learning strategy. The learning strategy for generalization consists of ensemble learning (Mancini
et al., 2018), meta-learning (Dou et al., 2019), and gradient operation (Huang et al., 2020), et al.

Temporal Domain Generalization (TDG). TDG is a promising yet challenging problem. The
difference with DG (categorical domain index) falls in the ordered (continuous) time domain index
and thus meticulously requires distribution evolving pattern capture. Unfortunately, there are only
a few existing model-centric works on TDG. E.g., Gradient Interpolation (GI) (Nasery et al., 2021)
explicitly chases model extrapolation to the near future via the first-order Taylor expansion in the de-
signed loss function; Drift-Aware Dynamic Neural Network (DRAIN) (Bai et al., 2022) formulates
a Bayesian probability framework to represent the concept drift over domains and build a recurrent
graph to capture dynamic model parameters for the temporal shift. These methods are model-centric
and counter the temporal data shift via enhancing model extrapolation or generalization ability or
adjusting model parameters accordingly. However, the model may be infeasible to counter all pos-
sible future temporal drifts due to limited model capacity. To this end, we proposed a brand-new
model-agnostic approach, named COncept Drift simulAtor (CODA), for achieving TDG via out-of-
distribution (OOD) generation. In this way, the future data can be simulated and then leveraged into
model training to enhance generalization. The data-centric approach CODA is model-agnostic with
transferability, i.e., you only simulate once for any possible model architectures.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     C ONCEPT D RIFT S IMULATOR (CODA)

This section presents a comprehensive overview of our proposed CODA framework, as depicted in
Figure 1. Specifically, starting with the feature correlation matrices at various time points, CODA
identifies evolving trends to extrapolate the feature correlation matrix for future domains. Leverag-
ing the predicted correlation matrix, CODA subsequently synthesizes future data for model training.
The details and pseudo-code of the CODA workflow can be found in Appendix B.

3.1   L IMITATION OF DYNAMICALLY G ENERATING F UTURE DATA

To tackle the challenge of the concept drifts through a data-
centric lens, our goal is to model the underlying distribution      40
shift by capturing temporal trends within historical datasets.      30


                                                                         McE (%)
A straightforward approach is to employ a naive RNN-based
architecture for learning temporal patterns from chronologi-        20
cal datasets, named Prelim-LSTM. Given T source domains             10
from the Elec2 dataset, D1 , D2 , . . . , DT , we employ an LSTM
                                                                     0     GI       DRAIN   Prelim-LSTM
unit to generate the synthetic future domain D̂T +1 . To capture                  Algorithm
the temporal trend of the probability distribution with limited
samples at each time point, we employ Kullback-Leibler (KL) Figure 2: Misclassification Er-
divergence as the objective loss. Specifically, we first approx- ror (McE) rates comparison of
imate the conditional distributions P(Xt |Yt ) for both the pre- the preliminary experiment, where
dicted and ground truth features via Kernel Density Estimation we compare the preliminary data-
(KDE). Utilizing the prior probability of labels P(Y), we pro- centric setting, Prelim-LSTM, to
ceed to compute the joint distribution probability P(Xt , Yt ) the two model-specific SOTAs.
between all features and labels. In each training time point,
the KL-divergence loss is calculated between the approximated joint distributions of the predicted
and ground truth datasets across all features. The objective function is formulated as:
                                     I
                                     X
                            LKL =          LiKL [P(Xti , Yt )pred ∥P(Xti , Yt )gt ],                  (1)
                                     i=1

where LiKL denotes the KL-divergence of the ith feature, P(Xti , Yt )pred represents the predicted
joint distribution between ith feature and the labels, and P(Xti , Yt )gt is the joint distribution of the
ground truth dataset for the same feature. The objective is to minimize LKL to align the predicted
joint distribution of each feature as closely as possible with the ground truth. Ideally, given the
distribution at the latest observed time point DT , the trained LSTM model tends to predict the
pseudo future data distribution D̂T +1 , leveraging the temporal relationships among D1 to DT .
However, our preliminary experiments demonstrate that it is difficult to directly capture the tempo-
ral trends of underlying joint distribution between X and Y through chronological data. As shown
in Figure 2, despite independently approximating the KDE of each feature to the ground truth dis-
tribution, the MLP trained on the data predicted by the Prelim-LSTM falls to achieve comparable
performance to the two model-specific SOTAs, GI (Nasery et al., 2021) and DRAIN (Bai et al.,
2022). It also indicates the necessity of considering feature correlations for capturing concept drift
data distribution. Ideally, one would consider all features X concurrently to achieve a more ac-
curate approximation of the data distribution at each temporal instance. However, this becomes
computationally infeasible in high-dimensional spaces. To be more specific, grid sampling in an n-
dimensional space incurs a time complexity of O(k n ), where k represents the number of grid points
along each dimension. As n increases, the computational cost becomes prohibitive. Therefore, we
propose CODA to tackle the aforementioned challenges by breaking down the future distribution
generation process into two manageable components and addressing each in a sequential manner.

3.2   C ORRELATION P REDICTOR UNDER T EMPORAL T RENDS

Instead of directly predicting the data distribution for future domains, CODA begins with the Cor-
relation Predictor component to capture the temporal trends of concept drift, as shown in Figure 1.
In the first stage of CODA, the Correlation Predictor is specifically designed to discern evolving


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


trends in feature correlations across chronological time domains. Given the observed source do-
mains D1 , D2 , . . . , DT , we extract the feature correlation matrices from each domain to serve as
meta-data. These matrices can be computed using either traditional statistical approaches, such
as Pearson Correlation (Pearson, 1895), or learning-based methods like Self-attention mechanisms
(Song et al., 2019) and Graph-based Adjacency Matrix learning (Liu et al., 2022). Armed with these
chronological feature correlation matrices, the Correlation Predictor H(·) is trained to capture the
evolving trends in correlation matrices under the influence of concept drift:
                                          CˆT +1 = H(C1 . . . CT ).                                    (2)

The objective loss of the Correlation Predictor LCP is formulated as follows:
                               T
                               X
                      LCP =           ∥Cˆt , Ct ∥2 + ∥Cˆt , Ct ∥1 + λCE LCE (Cˆt , Ct ) ,              (3)
                               t=1

where ∥ · ∥2 and ∥ · ∥1 are the l2 -norm and l1 -norm regularization, λCE denotes the weight of LCE ,
and LCE is the Cross Entropy loss between the predicted correlation matrix Cˆt and the ground truth
feature correlation matrix Ct . It’s worth noting that the Correlation Predictor component is modular
and can be implemented or substituted with any RNN-based neural network architecture.

3.3   DATA S IMULATOR FOR C ONCEPT D RIFT DATA G ENERATION

Upon completion of training the Correlation Predictor H(·), the second stage of CODA utilizes the
feature correlation matrix CˆT +1 estimated by H(·) for the unseen future domain simulation. This
estimated correlation matrix CˆT +1 serves as a prior knowledge in the Data Simulator G(·) to predict
the future domain dataset D̂T +1 :
                                       D̂T +1 = G(DT ; CˆT +1 |θG ).                                   (4)

By incorporating CˆT +1 and aligning with the data distribution of the current domain DT , G(·) aims
to approximate both the observed data distribution and the underlying feature correlations. The
objective function of the Data Simulator G(·) is updated by minimizing the following loss:
      LG = ELBO(DT , D̂T +1 ; θG ) + λC RC (CˆT +1 )
           = Eq(z|(x,y)) [ln pθ ((x, y)|z; θG )] − LKL [q(z|(x, y))||p(z)] + λC ∥(CˆG − CˆT +1 )∥1 ,   (5)
where ELBO represents the classic reconstruction loss, CˆG denotes the correlation matrix of the
CODA-generated dataset, RC serves as a regularization term that ensures G(·) following the prior
predicted feature correlation matrix CˆT +1 , and λC denotes the weight of RC . It is noteworthy that
the Data Simulator component is designed to be modular, allowing for instantiation or replacement
with any generative model capable of incorporating prior knowledge.

3.4   A NALYSIS ON THE P RIOR K NOWLEDGE IN DATA S IMULATOR

In the data simulator, the estimated correlation matrix CˆT +1 serves as prior knowledge and enhances
the quality of concept drift data generation. Notice that the high-quality concept drift data generation
is critical to guarantee the well-performed model in TDG, the analysis of the prior knowledge (i.e.,
low feature correlation matrix distance) in Eq. (5). In this subsection, we provide Theorem 1 to
investigate the rationale of this prior knowledge. The proof of Theorem 1 is provided in Appendix A.
Theorem 1. Considering two d-dimensional variables U = (U1 , U2 , · · · , Ud ) and V =
(V1 , V2 , · · · , Vd ), assume (i) bounded variable: |Ui | ≤ A and |Vi | ≤ A for any i = 1, 2, · · · , d,
where A is the maximum value of variable; (ii) positive variance: min{D[Ui ], D[Vi ]} ≥ δ, where
D[·] represents the variance of random variable, and δ is the lower bound of variance; (iii) Similar
distribution of multi-variables: T V (U, V) ≤ ϵ, where T V (·, ·) represents total variation distance,
and ϵ is the distribution distance tolerance. Under assumptions (i), (ii), and (iii), the relation be-
tween the feature correlation matrices CU and CV is given by
                                                          1 A2
                                     ∥CU − CV ∥1 ≤ 6dϵA2 ( + 2 ).                                      (6)
                                                          δ δ

                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Discussion on assumptions (i), (ii), (iii). We clarify that these assumptions can be easily satisfied
in the real world. The assumption (i) of a bounded variable is naturally satisfied and can be easily
reshaped by feature normalization pre-processing. The assumption (ii) of positive variance is also
naturally satisfied by pre-processing. The constant variable (feature) represents there is not any
information for such a feature and should be filtered out. As the assumption (iii), the data distribution
shift is usually smoothed and the distribution of data collected within a short time period should be
similar.

Remarks. Theorem 1 demonstrates that the prior knowledge in Eq. (5) can be guaranteed under
assumptions (i), (ii), (iii), which serves as the theoretical foundation for the usage of prior knowledge
in data simulator. The derived bound is tight when the data shift is zero, i.e., ϵ = 0. Furthermore, our
analysis suggests that prior knowledge, such as a correlation matrix, may not effectively represent
high-dimensional data, and generating such high-dimensional data poses a significant challenge.

4     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the performance of CODA, aiming to answer
the following three research questions: RQ1: How effective is the simulated future data by CODA
to train different model architectures for temporal domain generalization? RQ2: How is the quality
of the simulated future data by CODA? RQ3: Does the predicted feature correlation contribute to
generating concept drift future data?

4.1   E XPERIMENT S ETTING

Datasets. To evaluate the efficacy of our proposed model-agnostic framework, CODA, we conduct
experiments on four classification datasets—Rotated Moons (2-Moons), Electrical Demand (Elec2),
Online News Popularity (ONP), and Shuttle—as well as one regression dataset, Appliances Energy
Prediction (Appliance). While the 2-Moons is a synthetic dataset with rotation angle acting as a
temporal proxy, the remaining four datasets are real-world, temporally evolving collections. More
details about the datasets can be found in Appendix C.
Baseline Methods. We compare our data-centric approach with three groups of methods: Time-
Oblivious Baselines: These methods disregard concept drift, including the strategies Offline
(trained on all source domains) and LastDomain (trained on the last source domain); Continu-
ous Domain Adaptation: These algorithms focus on transporting either the last or historical source
domains to future domains, including CDOT (Ortiz-Jimenez et al., 2019), CIDA (Wang et al., 2020),
and Adagraph (Mancini et al., 2019); and Temporal Domain Generalization: These approaches
specifically tackle temporal distribution shifts, including GI (Nasery et al., 2021) and DRAIN (Bai
et al., 2022). More baseline details can be found in Appendix D.
Implementation Details. In the CODA framework, we employ LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997) for the Correlation Predictor and instantiate the Data Simulator component with GOGGLE
(Liu et al., 2022). To enhance the compatibility of prior knowledge with the Data Simulator, we
extract Feature Correlation matrices from each source domain dataset using GOGGLE’s learnable
relational structure. All the experiments of CODA are repeated five times on each dataset, with
the average results and standard deviation in Table 1. To evaluate the capability of CODA in gen-
erating concept-drift data for model training, we implement three predictive architectures: Mul-
tilayer Perceptron (MLP), the tree-based LightGBM (Ke et al., 2017), and the Transformer-based
FT-Transformer (Gorishniy et al., 2021). More implementation details are elaborated in Appendix D.

4.2   Q UANTITATIVE A NALYSIS (RQ1)

To assess the generalization efficacy of CODA in the presence of concept drift across temporal do-
mains, we employ CODA to generate future data, matching the sample size of the unseen domains
across five datasets. Subsequently, we compare the performance of models trained on this generated
data with other baseline methods. To further assess the advantage of our model-agnostic approach,
we utilize three different model architectures for the evaluation. For the Data Simulator component’s
model selection, we employ MLPs with hyperparameters aligned to those of the baseline methods.
Subsequently, we fine-tune the hyperparameters of LightGBM and FT-Transformer based on the


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Performance comparison: Misclassification error rates (in %) for classification tasks and
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for regression tasks, both are lower the better. Results of all methods,
excluding “Shuttle,” are reported from Bai et al. (2022).

                                                           Classification (in %)                Regression
                                          2-Moons           Elec2         ONP        Shuttle    Appliance
      Offline                             22.4 ± 4.6   23.0 ± 3.1      33.8 ± 0.6   7.2 ± 0.1   10.2 ± 1.1
      LastDomain                          14.9 ± 0.9   25.8 ± 0.6      36.0 ± 0.2   6.7 ± 0.0    9.1 ± 0.7
      IncFinetune                         16.7 ± 3.4   27.3 ± 4.2      34.0 ± 0.3   7.0 ± 0.1    8.9 ± 0.5
      CDOT (Ortiz-Jimenez et al., 2019)    9.3 ± 1.0   17.8 ± 0.6      34.1 ± 0.0   6.5 ± 0.2        -
      CIDA (Wang et al., 2020)            10.8 ± 1.6   14.1 ± 0.2      34.7 ± 0.6       -        8.7 ± 0.2
      Adagraph (Mancini et al., 2019)      8.0 ± 1.1   20.1 ± 2.2      40.9 ± 0.6   6.9 ± 0.2        -
      GI (Nasery et al., 2021)             3.5 ± 1.4   16.9 ± 0.7      36.4 ± 0.8   7.0 ± 0.1    8.2 ± 0.6
      DRAIN (Bai et al., 2022)             3.2 ± 1.2   12.7 ± 0.8      38.3 ± 1.2   7.4 ± 0.3    6.4 ± 0.4
      CODA (MLP)                          2.3 ± 1.0    10.3 ± 1.1      36.5 ± 0.4   6.3 ± 0.1    4.6 ± 0.5
      CODA (LightGBM)                     1.4 ± 0.4    10.6 ± 0.6      41.8 ± 0.3   6.1 ± 0.2    5.3 ± 0.2
      CODA (FT-Transformer)               0.5 ± 0.2    11.0 ± 0.4      42.1 ± 0.4   6.6 ± 0.1    5.3 ± 0.3


             (a) Training Domain              (b) Testing Domain             (c) Generated Testing Domain

Figure 3: Visualization of generated future domain data in 2-Moons dataset, where D8 is the last
source domain, D9 is the unseen test domain, and D̂9 is the synthetic domain generated by CODA.

validation set within the generated future data. The comparison results are summarized in Table 1.
Overall, the three architectures trained on data generated by CODA achieve the best Misclassifica-
tion Error rates (McE) in three of the four classification datasets and the best Mean Absolute Error
(MAE) in the regression dataset. The only exception is the ONP dataset, where the Offline method
outperforms all other approaches. This is consistent with previous research indicating that the ONP
dataset exhibits relatively weak concept drift (Nasery et al., 2021).
Moreover, the results demonstrate that the future data generated by CODA is amenable to training
across different model architectures. It also demonstrates that the optimal architecture might intrin-
sically depend on the specific data modality. As shown in Table 1, distinct model architectures excel
in different datasets. For instance, LightGBM and FT-Transformer surpass MLP in performance on
the 2-Moons dataset, yet fail to achieve the lowest McE on the Elec2 and Appliance datasets.
Observation 1: CODA is free from fixed in specific model architectures by providing temporal
generalization data for training. CODA provides a model-agnostic approach to simulate future
domain data, tackling concept drift at its fundamental cause. Its data-centric manner allows different
architectures to be fine-tuned on the simulated data for achieving temporal domain generalization.

4.3    Q UALITY OF G ENERATED F UTURE DATA (RQ2)

Visualization of the generated future data. As mentioned in Section 3, CODA aims to provide
high-fidelity simulated data. To illustrate the quality of the predicted future data, we compare the
distributions of the generated domain data D̂9 with the unseen domain D9 in the 2-Moon dataset.
Recall that the 2-Moons dataset is synthesized with each domain i characterized by a rotation angle
       ◦
of 18i . Consequently, the generated D̂9 should be rotated by the same angle as D9 . As shown in
Figure 3, D̂9 closely resembles D9 , and both can be distinguished from the last source domain D8
by a specific rotation angle. More visualization analysis are available in Appendix E.


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              Table 2: Ablation study on the exclu-
                                                              sion of the feature correlation matrix
                                                              CˆT +1 . Here, w/o CˆT +1 refers a vari-
                                                              ant of CODA that does not incorporate
                                                              CˆT +1 as prior knowledge.
       (a) Classiﬁcation task.        (b) Regression task.
                                                                         Classification (in %) Regression
Figure 4: Sample rate variations in CODA: Evaluating                 2-Moons     Elec2 Appliance
McE and MAE using MLPs trained on generated samples,
where the sample rate is the percentage of the number of CODA 2.3 ± 1.0 10.3 ± 1.1 4.6 ± 0.5
testing domain samples.                                  w/o CˆT +1 15.6 ± 0.7 26.5 ± 0.8 9.5 ± 0.4



Impact of numbers of the generated future data. As the CODA provides a framework for train-
ing a temporal domain generalization generative model, we can decide the number of generated
samples for model training. Thus, we can investigate the influence of the number of the generated
samples on the trained prediction model, here we use MLP as the prediction model architecture.
CODA provides a framework for training a generative model to achieve temporal domain general-
ization. This data-centric design grants us the ability to modulate the number of generated samples
for model training. Here, we investigate the impacts of varying sample counts on the performance of
an MLP trained with the generated data. As shown in Figure 4, for both classification and regression
datasets, increasing the sample rate reduces performance variances because a larger dataset more
accurately represents the probability distribution learned by the Data Simulator. Regarding perfor-
mance, in the real-world classification dataset, Elec2, increasing the number of generated samples
enhances the trained model’s performance. However, in the low-dimensional toy dataset, 2-Moons,
generating additional data might introduce noise, potentially degrading the performance. This might
indicate the representative of the moderate quantity of the generated samples. On the other hand, in
the real-world regression dataset, Appliance, the generated data with 25% sample rate is represen-
tative enough for achieving stable model performance with marginally higher variance, which also
indicates the quality of the samples simulated by CODA.
Observation 2: CODA is able to simulate high-quality samples for training temporal domain
generalization models. Visualizations and sample rate analyses demonstrate that CODA effectively
generates high-quality future domain data for training, and these generated samples offer a repre-
sentative data distribution in the presence of concept drift.
Cross-Architecture Transferability. Since the outcome of CODA is a dataset for model training,
it can conceptually be employed by any model architecture. Thus, once the hyperparameters of the
Data Simulator are tuned for one architecture, the generated data can readily be utilized to train
other predictive models. To examine such transferability, we conduct experiments where we tune
the Data Simulator using three distinct architectures: MLP, LightGBM, and FT-Transformer (FTT).
Subsequently, we train the other two architectures on the dataset generated by CODA. The results
indicate the generated data is transferable. As shown in Table 3, across the Data Simulator tuned
by three different architectures, LightGBM achieves the best average performance. Interestingly,
LightGBM outperforms FTT even when both are trained on the data generated by the FTT-tuned
Data Simulator, suggesting the advantage of this data-centric approach.
Observation 3: CODA-generated future data is transferable to different model architectures.
The transferability analysis demonstrates that CODA-generated data can be used as training data for
MLP-based, tree-based, and transformer-based models. Additionally, due to the less hyperparam-
eter search space, we suggest utilizing MLP-based models for tuning the Data Simulator and then
training different prediction model architectures on the generated data.


4.4   A BLATION S TUDY ON P RIOR K NOWLEDGE M ATRIX (RQ3)

To further elucidate the impact of the predicted feature correlation matrix CˆT +1 , we conduct ablation
studies on observing the effectiveness of prior knowledge in CODA. Notably, w/o CˆT +1 refers to a
variant of CODA that excludes CˆT +1 during training the Data Simulator component. According to


                                                    8
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      14.0                                        44                                4.6
      13.5                                        43                                4.5
      13.0                                        42
      12.5                                                                          4.4


                                            McE (%)
McE (%)                        Elec2-test         41                   ONP-test     4.3                    Appliance-test


                                                                                  MAE
      12.0                     Elec2-val          40                   ONP-val                             Appliance-val
      11.5                                                                          4.2
      11.0                                        39                                4.1
      10.5                                        38                                4.0
                                                  37
               1     2     3    4       5              1   2       3   4      5           1      2     3        4       5

                   (a) Elec2                               (b) ONP                            (c) Appliance
             Figure 5: Sensitivity analysis on the λC , where the trained model architecture is MLP.

 Equation 4 and 5, w/o CˆT +1 essentially trains the Data Simulator only using the last source domain.
 In Table 2, for every dataset, all results are conducted by using the same MLP architecture, albeit
 trained on different data. The results suggest that the data generated by w/o CˆT +1 closely mirrors the
 characteristics of the last source domain when used as training data, as the LastDomain in Table 1.
 Conversely, CODA is capable of providing a training set that captures the essence of concept drift
 by incorporating the feature correlation CˆT +1 during the training of the Data Simulator. As a result,
 the identical architecture, when trained on the dataset simulated by CODA, demonstrates markedly
 superior temporal domain generalization. More analysis of the predicted feature correlation matrices
 is available in Appendix F.

  4.5        S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS (RQ3)

 To assess the significance of the predicted correlation Table 3: Transferability. Note that “Tune”
 matrix of CODA framework, we analyze the sensi- represents models used for searching hy-
 tivity impact of the weighted hyperparameter λC as perparameter of the Data Simulator, while
 presented in Equation 5 with the MLP architecture. “Train” refers to models trained on the
 As shown in Figure 5, despite the optimal λC varies CODA-generated data.
 among different datasets, the trend of using λC can
 be identified on validation sets, where the trend of Tune\Train MLP LightGBM                    FTT
 obtaining best hyperparameter settings in validation
                                                           MLP        10.3 ± 1.1 10.6 ± 0.4 11.0 ± 0.4
 sets is similar to the one in test sets. In the two real- LightGBM 10.6 ± 0.9 9.1 ± 0.3 12.2 ± 0.5
 world datasets, Elec2 and Appliance, the performance FTT             11.6 ± 1.1 10.3 ± 0.4 10.6 ± 0.4
 trend with respect to λC remains consistent between
 the validation and future testing sets. Conversely, in Avg.          10.8 ± 1.0 10.0 ± 0.4 11.3 ± 0.4
 the ONP dataset, proven to exhibit almost no concept
 drift, there is no specific performance trend. This might suggest no significant concept drift that can
 be captured by CODA.
 Observation 4: The dataset-sensitive hyperparameter λC is identifiable on the concept drift
 datasets. The sensitivity analysis reveals that, in the presence of concept drift, the performance trend
 tied to λC remains consistent between the validation set and the unseen future domain, underscoring
 the feasibility of CODA in real-world settings.

  5       C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
 In this work, we demonstrate the efficacy of tackling the fundamental cause of concept drift from
 a data perspective. To address the limited model prediction ability to capture the underlying tem-
 poral trends among the chronological data distributions of source domains, we propose a two-step
 data simulation framework, CODA, incorporating feature correlation matrices to capture temporal
 trends within the historical source domains. Specifically, CODA extracts the temporal evolving
 of historical feature correlation matrices to predict the correlation matrix for the upcoming future
 domain, and then simulates future training data based on this predicted correlation. Theoretical anal-
 ysis guarantees that the predicted correlation is reliable under practical assumptions. Experimental
 results demonstrate that the CODA-generated data can be used as the training data for different
 model architectures to achieve temporal domain generalization. Regarding future directions, CODA
 framework unveils several potential facets that merit further exploration, such as more accurate fu-
 ture correlation prediction and advanced generative models to utilize predicted prior knowledge.


                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Guangji Bai, Chen Ling, and Liang Zhao. Temporal domain generalization with drift-aware dynamic
  neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10664, 2022.
Yogesh Balaji, Rama Chellappa, and Soheil Feizi. Normalized wasserstein for mixture distributions
  with applications in adversarial learning and domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 6500–6508, 2019.
Luis M Candanedo, Véronique Feldheim, and Dominique Deramaix. Data driven prediction models
  of energy use of appliances in a low-energy house. Energy and buildings, 140:81–97, 2017.
Junbum Cha, Kyungjae Lee, Sungrae Park, and Sanghyuk Chun. Domain generalization by mutual-
  information regularization with pre-trained models. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th Eu-
  ropean Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXIII, pp. 440–457.
  Springer, 2022.
Chia-Yuan Chang, Cheng-Wei Lu, and Chuan-Ju Wang. A multi-step-ahead markov conditional
  forward model with cube perturbations for extreme weather forecasting. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 6948–6955, 2021.
Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Yogesh Balaji, and Judy Hoffman. Learning to balance specificity and
  invariance for in and out of domain generalization. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th Eu-
  ropean Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IX 16, pp. 301–318.
  Springer, 2020.
Bowen Cheng, Alex Schwing, and Alexander Kirillov. Per-pixel classification is not all you need for
  semantic segmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:17864–17875,
  2021.
Xiyang Dai, Yinpeng Chen, Bin Xiao, Dongdong Chen, Mengchen Liu, Lu Yuan, and Lei Zhang.
  Dynamic head: Unifying object detection heads with attentions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7373–7382, 2021.
Qi Dou, Daniel Coelho de Castro, Konstantinos Kamnitsas, and Ben Glocker. Domain generaliza-
  tion via model-agnostic learning of semantic features. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019.
Kelwin Fernandes, Pedro Vinagre, and Paulo Cortez. A proactive intelligent decision support sys-
  tem for predicting the popularity of online news. In Progress in Artificial Intelligence: 17th Por-
  tuguese Conference on Artificial Intelligence, EPIA 2015, Coimbra, Portugal, September 8-11,
  2015. Proceedings 17, pp. 535–546. Springer, 2015.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
  works. The journal of machine learning research, 17(1):2096–2030, 2016.
Rui Gong, Wen Li, Yuhua Chen, and Luc Van Gool. Dlow: Domain flow for adaptation and general-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 2477–2486, 2019.
Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Revisiting deep learning
  models for tabular data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18932–18943,
  2021.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Zeyi Huang, Haohan Wang, Eric P Xing, and Dong Huang. Self-challenging improves cross-domain
  generalization. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK,
  August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 16, pp. 124–140. Springer, 2020.
Zhimeng Jiang, Xiaotian Han, Chao Fan, Fan Yang, Ali Mostafavi, and Xia Hu. Generalized de-
  mographic parity for group fairness. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


KJ Joseph, Salman Khan, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Vineeth N Balasubramanian. Towards open
  world object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 5830–5840, 2021.

Guoliang Kang, Lu Jiang, Yi Yang, and Alexander G Hauptmann. Contrastive adaptation network
  for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4893–4902, 2019.

Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and Tie-
  Yan Liu. Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Wen Li, Zheng Xu, Dong Xu, Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. Domain generalization and adapta-
 tion using low rank exemplar svms. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelli-
 gence, 40(5):1114–1127, 2017.

Alexander H Liu, Yen-Cheng Liu, Yu-Ying Yeh, and Yu-Chiang Frank Wang. A unified feature dis-
  entangler for multi-domain image translation and manipulation. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.

Tennison Liu, Zhaozhi Qian, Jeroen Berrevoets, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Goggle: Generative
  modelling for tabular data by learning relational structure. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2022.

Yuang Liu, Wei Zhang, and Jun Wang. Source-free domain adaptation for semantic segmentation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  1215–1224, 2021.

Ziwei Liu, Zhongqi Miao, Xingang Pan, Xiaohang Zhan, Dahua Lin, Stella X Yu, and Boqing Gong.
  Open compound domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12406–12415, 2020.

Zhihe Lu, Yongxin Yang, Xiatian Zhu, Cong Liu, Yi-Zhe Song, and Tao Xiang. Stochastic classifiers
  for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9111–9120, 2020.

Massimiliano Mancini, Samuel Rota Bulo, Barbara Caputo, and Elisa Ricci. Best sources forward:
 domain generalization through source-specific nets. In 2018 25th IEEE international conference
 on image processing (ICIP), pp. 1353–1357. IEEE, 2018.

Massimiliano Mancini, Samuel Rota Bulo, Barbara Caputo, and Elisa Ricci. Adagraph: Unifying
 predictive and continuous domain adaptation through graphs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6568–6577, 2019.

Saeid Motiian, Marco Piccirilli, Donald A Adjeroh, and Gianfranco Doretto. Unified deep super-
  vised domain adaptation and generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 5715–5725, 2017.

Krikamol Muandet, David Balduzzi, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Domain generalization via invariant
  feature representation. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 10–18. PMLR, 2013.

Anshul Nasery, Soumyadeep Thakur, Vihari Piratla, Abir De, and Sunita Sarawagi. Training for
  the future: A simple gradient interpolation loss to generalize along time. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:19198–19209, 2021.

Guillermo Ortiz-Jimenez, Mireille El Gheche, Effrosyni Simou, Hermina Petric Maretic, and Pas-
  cal Frossard. Cdot: Continuous domain adaptation using optimal transport. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.11448, 2019.

Karl Pearson. Notes on regression and inheritance in the case of two parents. Proceedings of the
  Royal Society of London, 58:240–242, 1895.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vihari Piratla, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Sunita Sarawagi. Efficient domain generalization via
  common-specific low-rank decomposition. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 7728–7738. PMLR, 2020.
Fengchun Qiao, Long Zhao, and Xi Peng. Learning to learn single domain generalization. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12556–
  12565, 2020.
Tiexin Qin, Shiqi Wang, and Haoliang Li. Generalizing to evolving domains with latent structure-
  aware sequential autoencoder. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepes-
  vari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 18062–18082.
  PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.
Weiping Song, Chence Shi, Zhiping Xiao, Zhijian Duan, Yewen Xu, Ming Zhang, and Jian Tang.
 Autoint: Automatic feature interaction learning via self-attentive neural networks. In Proceedings
 of the 28th ACM international conference on information and knowledge management, pp. 1161–
 1170, 2019.
Robin Strudel, Ricardo Garcia, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid. Segmenter: Transformer for
  semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
  vision, pp. 7262–7272, 2021.
Jingru Tan, Changbao Wang, Buyu Li, Quanquan Li, Wanli Ouyang, Changqing Yin, and Junjie Yan.
   Equalization loss for long-tailed object recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
   on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11662–11671, 2020.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Do-
  main randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In
  2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS), pp. 23–30.
  IEEE, 2017.
Jonathan Tremblay, Aayush Prakash, David Acuna, Mark Brophy, Varun Jampani, Cem Anil, Thang
  To, Eric Cameracci, Shaad Boochoon, and Stan Birchfield. Training deep networks with synthetic
  data: Bridging the reality gap by domain randomization. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 969–977, 2018.
Hao Wang, Hao He, and Dina Katabi. Continuously indexed domain adaptation. In Proceedings of
  the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9898–9907, 2020.
Jindong Wang, Cuiling Lan, Chang Liu, Yidong Ouyang, Tao Qin, Wang Lu, Yiqiang Chen, Wenjun
   Zeng, and Philip Yu. Generalizing to unseen domains: A survey on domain generalization. IEEE
   Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2022.
Kun Wei, Muli Yang, Hao Wang, Cheng Deng, and Xianglong Liu. Adversarial fine-grained com-
  position learning for unseen attribute-object recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
  national Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3741–3749, 2019.
Minghao Xu, Jian Zhang, Bingbing Ni, Teng Li, Chengjie Wang, Qi Tian, and Wenjun Zhang.
 Adversarial domain adaptation with domain mixup. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 6502–6509, 2020.
Shen Yan, Huan Song, Nanxiang Li, Lincan Zou, and Liu Ren. Improve unsupervised domain
  adaptation with mixup training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00677, 2020.
Qiuhao Zeng, Wei Wang, Fan Zhou, Charles Ling, and Boyu Wang. Foresee what you will
  learn: Data augmentation for domain generalization in non-stationary environment. In Proceed-
  ings of the Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-Fifth Confer-
  ence on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Thirteenth Symposium on Educa-
  tional Advances in Artificial Intelligence. AAAI Press, 2023. ISBN 978-1-57735-880-0. doi:
  10.1609/aaai.v37i9.26320. URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i9.26320.



                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Before delving into the proof, we would like to introduce some primary knowledge on total variation
distance and its dual-representative format.
Definition 1 (Total variation distance). Let PU , PV be two probability distributions for random
variables U and V over a shared probability space Ω. Then, the total variation distance between
them, denoted T V (U, V ), is given by

                                T V (U, V ) = sup |PU (E) − PV (E)|.                                  (7)
                                               E⊆Ω

Lemma 1 (Dual representation of TV distance). Let PU , PV be two probability distributions for
random variables U and V over a shared probability space Ω, the dual representation of total
variation distance is given by
                                        1
                       T V (U, V ) =         sup EPU [f (x)] − EPV [f (x)] ,                          (8)
                                       2K ∥f ∥∞ ≤K

where l∞ norm for function ∥f ∥∞ represents the maximum value of function, i.e., ∥f ∥∞ = inf{C >
0 : |f (x)| ≤ C for almost everywhere}, and K could be any constant.

Recall that there are three assumptions (i) bounded variable: |Ui | ≤ A and |Vi | ≤ A for any
i = 1, 2, · · · , d; (ii) positive variance: min{D[Ui ], D[Vi ]} ≥ δ; (iii) Similar distribution of multi-
variables: T V (U, V) ≤ ϵ, we aim to prove the upper bound for the feature correlation matrices CU
and CV . In the following part, we use the notation for brevity: ∆Ei ≜ |E[Ui ] − E[Vi ]|, ∆Eij ≜
|E[Ui Uj ] − E[Vi Vj ]|, and ∆Di ≜ |D[Ui ] − D[Vi ]|, where E[·] and D[·] represents the expectation
and variance of random variable, respectively.
Firstly, we can provide the bounds of the expectation and variance difference as follows:
Lemma 2. Under assumptions (i) and (iii), we have the following bounds on the expectation and
variance difference:

                                ∆Ei ≜ |E[Ui ] − E[Vi ]| ≤ 2ϵA,                                        (9)
                                                                       2
                                ∆Eij ≜ |E[Ui Uj ] − E[Vi Vj ]| ≤ 2ϵA ,                               (10)
                                                                 2
                                ∆Di ≜ |D[Ui ] − D[Vi ]| ≤ 6ϵA .                                      (11)


Proof. For the bound on the expectation difference, based on Lemma 1 with f0 (x) = x, it is easy to
obtain
                                    (a)
           ∆Ei ≜ |E[Ui ] − E[Vi ]| ≤ 2T V (Ui , Vi )∥f0 ∥∞ ≤ 2T V (U, V)∥f0 ∥∞ ≤ 2ϵA;                (12)

where inequality (a) is based on dual representation of TV distance (Lemma 1). For the bound on
the covariance difference, based on Lemma 1 with f1 (x) = xi xj , it is easy to obtain

                    ∆Eij ≜ |E[Ui Uj ] − E[Vi Vj ]| ≤ 2T V (U, V)∥f1 ∥∞ ≤ 2ϵA2 ;                      (13)

Similarly, we can also obtain |E[Ui2 ] − E[Vi2 ]| ≤ ϵA2 . Therefore, the bound on the variance differ-
ence is given by

           ∆Di ≜ |D[Ui ] − D[Vi ]| ≤ |E[Ui2 ] − E[Vi2 ]| + |E[Ui ] − E[Vi ]||E[Ui ] + E[Vi ]|,
                 ≤ 2ϵA2 + 2ϵA · 2A = 6ϵA2 .                                                          (14)


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Subsequently, we consider the correlation coefficient distance on the i-row j-column element
                                   E[Ui Uj ]−E[Ui ]E[Uj ]
|CU ,ij − CU ,ij |, where CU ,ij =    √                   . According to basic algebra, we have
                                          D[Ui ]·D[Ui ]

                              E[Ui Uj ] − E[Ui ]E[Uj ] E[Vi Vj ] − E[Vi ]E[Vj ]
          |CU ,ij − CU ,ij | =   p                     −   p                    ,
                                    D[Ui ] · D[Uj ]            D[Vi ] · D[Vj ]
                              E[Ui Uj ] − E[Ui ]E[Uj ] E[Vi Vj ] − E[Vi ]E[Vj ]
                           =     p                     −   p
                                    D[Ui ] · D[Uj ]            D[Ui ] · D[Uj ]
                             E[Vi Vj ] − E[Vi ]E[Vj ] E[Vi Vj ] − E[Vi ]E[Vj ]
                           +   p                     −   p
                                   D[Ui ] · D[Uj ]          D[Vi ] · D[Vj ]
                                   E[Ui Uj ] − E[Vi Vj ] + E[Vi ]E[Vj ] − E[Ui ]E[Uj ]
                           ≤                       p
                                                      D[Ui ] · D[Uj ]
                                 |                         {z                          }
                                                               I1
                                                                         1                 1
                           + E[Vi Vj ] − E[Vi ]E[Vj ] p                             −p                     (15)
                                                                    D[Ui ] · D[Uj ]    D[Vi ] · D[Vj ]
                                 |                                    {z                               }
                                                                      I2

For the first term I1 , we can obtain
                 1
  I1 ≤ p                      E[Ui Uj ] − E[Vi Vj ] + E[Vi ]E[Vj ] − E[Ui ]E[Uj ] ,
            D[Ui ] · D[Uj ]
                 1
     ≤p                       E[Ui Uj ] − E[Vi Vj ] + E[Vi ] E[Uj ] − E[Vj ] + E[Vj ] E[Ui ] − E[Vi ]
            D[Ui ] · D[Uj ]
         1                          1
     ≤ (ϵA2 + ϵA2 + ϵA2 ) = 3ϵA2 .                                                                    (16)
         δ                          δ
For the second term I2 , we can also obtain
              1                     1
I1 ≤ A2 p                 −p
          D[Ui ] · D[Uj ]       D[Vi ] · D[Vj ]
              1                      1                 1                     1
   ≤ A2 p                 −p                    +p                −p
          D[Ui ] · D[Uj ]       D[Vi ] · D[Uj ]   D[Vi ] · D[Uj ]      D[Vi ] · D[Vj ]
                      D[U  j ] − D[V   ]                             D[U i ] − D[Vi ]

   ≤ A2 p                      p j          p      +p                         p        p
          D[Ui ]D[Uj ]D[Vj ]( D[Uj ] + D[Vj ])            D[Vj ]D[Ui ]D[Vi ]( D[Ui ] + D[Vi ])
           6ϵA2    6ϵA2      6ϵA4
   ≤ A2 (      2
                 +     2
                         )= 2 .                                                                (17)
            2δ      2δ         δ
Therefore, we have the correlation coefficient distance on the i-row j-column element as follows:
                                                            1 A2
                                 |CU ,ij − CU ,ij | = 6ϵA2 ( + 2 ).                                        (18)
                                                            δ   δ
Finally, the relation between the feature correlation matrices can be given by
                                              d
                                              X                             1 A2
                   ∥CU − CU ∥1 = max            |CU ,ij − CU ,ij | ≤ 6dϵA2 ( + 2 ).                        (19)
                                      1≤k≤d
                                            i=1
                                                                            δ δ


                                                          14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     A LGORITHM OF CODA
B.1    A LGORITHM OF CODA

The training outline of CODA is given in Algorithm 1. CODA follows equation 3 for capturing
temporal trends of feature correlation (line 5-6). After H(·) is converged for CˆT +1 , the Data Simu-
lator G(DT ; CˆT +1 |θG ) can be updated by Equation 5 and terminated when it is converged. Overall,
G(DT ; CˆT +1 |θG ) learns to approximate both the observed data distribution DT and the predicted
temporal feature correlation CˆT +1 for simulating the future data under concept drift.

Algorithm 1 Two-stage Future Data Generation Training with CODA
 1: Input:
         Feature Correlation Matrices of each source domain time points C1 , C2 , . . . , CT
         Correlation Predictor (an RNN-based model) H(·)
         Current source domain data DT
         Data Simulator (a generative model) G(Di ; Ci+1 |θG)
 2: Output:
         Temporal domain generalization data simulator G(DT ; CˆT +1 |θG)
 3: First stage: Correlation Predictor Training
 4: while not convergence do
 5:    Predict the feature correlation matrix of the next domain data by H(·) and Equation 2.
 6:    Update CˆT +1 = H(C1 , C2 , . . . , CT ) by Equation 3.
 7: end while
 8: Second stage: Data Simulator Training
 9: while not convergence do
10:     Generate future data distribution with CˆT +1 and Data Simulator D̂T +1 = G(DT ; CˆT +1 |θG ).
11:     Update G(DT ; CˆT +1 |θG ) by Equation 5.
12: end while


C     DATASETS D ETAILS
In this section, we provide a detailed description of the five datasets employed in our experiments.

Rotated 2 Moons (2-Moons). This dataset is                        Table 4: Notations in this paper.
a modified version of the 2-entangled moons,
where the lower moon is labeled as 0 and the                Notation                Description
upper moon as 1. Each moon comprises 100
instances. We generate 10 domains by sam-                   Dt            Source domain dataset at time t
pling 200 data points from the 2-Moons distribu-            D̂t          Predicted domain dataset at time t
tion and rotating them counter-clockwise in in-             Nt                  Sample size at time t
crements of 18°. Consequently, domain i under-              Xt , Y t       Feature / label space at time t
                                                            xt , y t           Sample / label at time t
goes a rotation of 18i. Domains 0 through 8 serve
                                                            Ct           Feature correlation matrix at time t
as our training domains, while domain 9 is re-
                                                            Cˆt         Predicted correlation matrix at time t
served for testing.                                         H(·)                Correlation Predictor
Electrical Demand (Elec2).            This dataset          G(·; ·|θG )            Data Simulator
captures the electricity demand in a specific               θG                    Parameters of G
province. It comprises 8 features, including price,         P(·)              Probability Distribution
day of the week, and units transferred. The binary
classification task involves predicting whether the
electricity demand in each 30-minute interval was above or below the average demand of the previ-
ous day. Instances with missing values are excluded. We define two weeks as one time domain. The
model is trained on 29 domains and tested on the 30th domain, resulting in 27,549 training points
and 673 test points.
Online News Popularity (ONP). Originating from Fernandes et al. (2015), this dataset aggregates
a diverse set of features about articles published by Mashable over a two-year span. The objective
is to predict the article’s popularity based on the number of shares in social networks. The dataset


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is temporally split into six domains, with the initial five designated for training. While the concept
drift is manifested through the progression of time, prior studies, such as Nasery et al. (2021), have
demonstrated that the drift is relatively mild.
Shuttle3 . The Shuttle dataset comprises approximately 58,000 data points, each with 9 features,
pertaining to space shuttles in flight. The objective is multi-class classification, characterized by a
pronounced class imbalance. Data points are temporally divided into eight domains based on their
associated timestamps. Specifically, timestamps ranging from 30 to 70 define the training domains,
while those from 70 to 80 delineate the test domain.
Appliances Energy Prediction (Appliance). This dataset Candanedo et al. (2017) is used to create
regression models of appliances energy use in a low energy building. The data set is at 10 min for
about 4.5 months in 2016, and we treat each half month as a single domain, resulting in 9 domains
in total. The first 8 domains are used for training and the last one is for testing. Similar to Elec2,
the drift for this dataset corresponds to how the appliances energy usage changes in a low-energy
building over about 4.5 months in 2016.


D       BASELINES AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

D.1      BASELINES .

Practical Baseline. (i) Offline: A time-oblivious model trained using Empirical Risk Minimization
(ERM) across all source domains. (ii) LastDomain: A time-oblivious model trained using ERM
exclusively on the most recent source domain. (iii) IncFinetune: This approach biases the training
towards more recent data. Initially, the Baseline method is applied to the first time point. Subse-
quently, the model is fine-tuned on successive time points in a sequential manner, using a reduced
learning rate. In this paper, we follow the settings from Nasery et al. (2021) and Bai et al. (2022) for
the implementations of the aforementioned three practical baselines.
Continuous Domain Adaptation Methods. (i) CDOT (Ortiz-Jimenez et al., 2019): This model
transports the most recent labeled examples DT to the future using a learned coupling from past
data, and trains a classifier on them. (ii) CIDA (Wang et al., 2020): This method is representative of
typical domain erasure methods applied to continuous domain adaptation problems. (iii) Adagraph
(Mancini et al., 2019): This approach renders the batch normalization parameters time-sensitive and
applies a specified kernel for smoothing.
Temporal Domain Generalization Method. (i) GI (Nasery et al., 2021): This approach introduces
a training algorithm that encourages models to learn functions capable of extrapolating effectively
to the near future. It achieves this by supervising the first-order Taylor expansion of the learned
function. (ii) DRAIN (Bai et al., 2022): This method presents a framework that predicts MLP
weights for predicting a near-future domain. It does so by leveraging an LSTM unit and considering
the context of chronological source domain MLP weights.


D.2      I MPLEMENTATIONS .

For all the experiments in this paper, we instantiate the two components of CODA, Correlation
Predictor 3.2 and Data Simulator 3.3, with LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and GOGGLE
(Liu et al., 2022). We use Adam optimizer for all the experiments. For hyperparameter tuning of the
Correlation Predictor, we consider the following search ranges: learning rate: 1 × 10−5 to 1 × 10−2 ;
number of LSTM layers: 4 to 16; LSTM latent dimension: 4 to 16; LSTM hidden dimension: 4 to
16; λCE in Equation 3: 0 to 20. For hyperparameter tuning of the Data Simulator, we consider the
following search ranges: learning rate: 1 × 10−5 to 1 × 10−2 ; encoder dimension: 48 to 72; encoder
layer: 2 to 4; decoder dimension: 48 to 72; decoder layer: 2 to 4; λC in Equation 5: 0.1 to 20.
For each dataset, the specific hyperparameters associated with the CODA components are detailed
in Table 5. The hyperparameters for the architectures trained on the CODA-generated data (MLP,

    3
        https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/148/statlog+shuttle


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Hyperparameters of CODA. Here, “L. dim” denotes the latent dimension, “H. dim” repre-
sents the hidden dimension, λCE is the weight from Equation 3, “En. dim” indicates the encoder
dimension, “En. layer” specifies the number of encoder layers, “De. dim” refers to the decoder di-
mensions, “De. layer” signifies the number of decoder layers, and λC is the weight from Equation 5.

                          Correlation Predictor                                  Data Simulator
                  Lr      Layer    L. dim   H. dim   λCE         Lr    En. dim   En. layer   De. dim   De. layer   λC
   2-Moon2     3 × 10−3    8         8        16     20.0   9 × 10−3     64         3          72         3         1.0
   Elec2       1 × 10−4    16        8        16      0.0   2 × 10−2     64         2          64         3         2.0
   ONP         1 × 10−4    10        8         8      5.0   1 × 10−2     72         3          72         3        20.0
   Shuttle     1 × 10−4    10        8         8      1.0   1 × 10−2     64         2          64         2         0.1
   Appliance   5 × 10−3    8         8         8     20.0   5 × 10−3     72         3          72         3         1.0



LightGBM4 , and FT-Transformer5 ) are detailed below. Note that for MLPs, we use the same struc-
tures presented in DRAIN (Bai et al., 2022) to maintain a fair comparison.
Rotated 2 Moons (2-Moons). The MLP is structured with 2 hidden layers, each having a dimension
of 50. Following each hidden layer, we incorporate a ReLU activation function, and after the output
layer, we apply a Sigmoid activation function. The learning rate is set to be 1 × 10−2 . For the
LightGBM, the hyperparameters are set as follows: feature fraction: 1.0; bagging fraction: 0.9;
bagging frequency: 1; lambda l1: 0.1; lambda l2: 0.1; linear lambda: 0.1; learning rate: 1 × 10−2 .
For the FT-Transformer, the hyperparameters are configured as: input embedding dimension: 64;
number of attention heads: 4; number of attention blocks: 4; attention dropout rate: 0.1; batch size:
32; learning rate: 1 × 10−4 .
Electrical Demand (Elec2). The MLP is structured with 2 hidden layers, each having a dimension
of 128. Following each hidden layer, we incorporate a ReLU activation function, and after the
output layer, we apply a Sigmoid activation function. The learning rate is set to be 1 × 10−4 . For
the LightGBM, the hyperparameters are set as follows: feature fraction: 0.9; bagging fraction: 1.0;
bagging frequency: 30; lambda l1: 0.5; lambda l2: 0.9; linear lambda: 0.1; learning rate: 5 × 10−2 .
For the FT-Transformer, the hyperparameters are configured as: input embedding dimension: 128;
number of attention heads: 8; number of attention blocks: 8; attention dropout rate: 0.1; batch size:
128; learning rate: 8 × 10−5 .
Online News Popularity (ONP). The MLP is structured with 2 hidden layers, each having a dimen-
sion of 20. Following each hidden layer, we incorporate a ReLU activation function, and after the
output layer, we apply a Sigmoid activation function. The learning rate is set to be 1 × 10−3 . For
the LightGBM, the hyperparameters are set as follows: feature fraction: 0.8; bagging fraction: 0.9;
bagging frequency: 30; lambda l1: 0.1; lambda l2: 0.1; linear lambda: 0.0; learning rate: 5 × 10−2 .
For the FT-Transformer, the hyperparameters are configured as: input embedding dimension: 64;
number of attention heads: 8; number of attention blocks: 2; attention dropout rate: 0.1; batch size:
256; learning rate: 1 × 10−4 .
Shuttle. The MLP is structured with 3 hidden layers, each having a dimension of 128. Following
each hidden layer, we incorporate a ReLU activation function, and after the output layer, we apply
a Sigmoid activation function. The learning rate is set to be 1 × 10−3 . For the LightGBM, the hy-
perparameters are set as follows: feature fraction: 1.0; bagging fraction: 1.0; bagging frequency: 5;
lambda l1: 0.1; lambda l2: 0.1; linear lambda: 0.0; learning rate: 5 × 10−2 . For the FT-Transformer,
the hyperparameters are configured as: input embedding dimension: 64; number of attention heads:
4; number of attention blocks: 8; attention dropout rate: 0.1; batch size: 128; learning rate: 1×10−4 .
Appliances Energy Prediction (Appliance). The MLP is structured with 2 hidden layers, each
having a dimension of 128. Following each hidden layer, we incorporate a ReLU activation function,
and after the output layer, we don’t apply an activation function. The learning rate is set to be
1 × 10−4 . For the LightGBM, the hyperparameters are set as follows: feature fraction: 1.0; bagging
fraction: 0.8; bagging frequency: 10; lambda l1: 0.5; lambda l2: 0.9; linear lambda: 0.0; learning
rate: 5 × 10−2 . For the FT-Transformer, the hyperparameters are configured as: input embedding
dimension: 64; number of attention heads: 4; number of attention blocks: 2; attention dropout rate:
0.9; batch size: 128; learning rate: 1 × 10−4 .
   4
       https://lightgbm.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
   5
       https://pytorch-tabular.readthedocs.io/en/latest/


                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    Q UALITY A NALYSIS VIA V ISUALIZATION
To investigate the quality of the CODA-generated data, we further provide the data visualizations
in Figure 6 to Figure 8 for comparing the simulated datasets with the ground truth unseen future
domains and the data generated by our preliminary setting (see Section 3.1). As shown in Figure 6,
the Prelim-LSTM can hardly capture the underlying temporal trends from chronological source do-
mains to accurately predict the future data distribution; on the other hand, the distribution of the
CODA-generated data in Figure 6-(c) is similar to the ground truth distribution D9 in Figure 6-(a).
In the Elec2 dataset, Figure 7-(a) demonstrates the impressively closed data distributions between
the ground truth and the data generated by CODA; in contrast, the distribution of the data generated
by Prelim-LSTM is quite different to the ground truth, as we can see in Figure 7-(b). As the chrono-
logical source domains do not manifest strong concept drifts, such as the ONP dataset, both the
CODA and Prelim-LSTM cannot precisely simulate the data distribution in the near-future domain,
as shown in Figure 8.


             (a) Testing Domain                       (b) Prelim-LSTM                 (c) CODA

Figure 6: Visualization of generated future domain data in 2-Moons dataset: (a) Groundtruth of
test domain data D9 ; (b) the synthetic data generated by Prelim-LSTM; (c) the synthetic data D̂9
generated by CODA.


       (a) CODA vs. GT            (b) Prelim-LSTM vs. GT            (a) CODA vs. GT     (b) Prelim-LSTM vs. GT


Figure 7: Visual comparison with the ground Figure 8: Visual comparison with the ground
truth future data (Elec2).                  truth future data (ONP).


F    V ISUALIZATION OF F EATURE C ORRELATION M ATRIX
To delve deeper into whether the feature correlation matrices reflect the temporal shifts between
distinct time points, we visualize the actual feature correlation matrices in Figure 9. We observe that
the inter-feature correlations do change over time. Intriguingly, for the regression dataset, Appliance,
the prediction target (represented by the last column in the correlation matrices) exhibits pronounced
correlations with nearly all features, reflecting the nature of the regression task.
Figure 10. To demonstrate the efficacy of the Correlation Predictor in forecasting the near-future
correlation matrix, we present the error maps depicting the absolute difference between ˆ⌋T +1 and
CT +1 in Figure 10. As we can see, except for the ONP dataset, which does not have strong concept
drifts over chronological source domains, the Correlation Predictor can overall predict the future
feature correlation matrices with decent error levels. However, we can observe that a few cells
in correlation matrices still cannot be precisely predicted. The results unveil the potential future
direction for further improving the performance of feature correlation matrices prediction.



                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2-Moons
Elec2
ONP
Shuttle
Appliance


                Figure 9: Visualization of feature correlation matrices from T − 2 to T + 1.


       (a) 2-Moons              (b) Elec2            (c) ONP            (d) Shuttle         (e) Appliance


                     Figure 10: Visualization of the absolute errors between CˆT +1 and CT +1 .


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     E XPERIMENTS OF C YCLICAL D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT AND
      H IGH -D IMENSIONAL DATASETS
Although we have already considered diverse concept drift patterns, here we add two more types of
concept shift and data, as shown in Table 6. The considered concept shifts are as follows: Synthetic
concept drifts:
       • Cyclical change: the 2-Moons dataset is built with a cyclical concept drift pattern, and we
         conduct Rot-MNIST and Sine datasets as shown in the table above.
       • Abrupt change: this type of temporal trend doesn’t fit our assumption that ”the joint distri-
         bution of features and labels with smooth data shift over time” (refer to Introduction).

Real-world concept drift: The real-world datasets used in our experiments feature various and
unknown patterns of concept drift. They have covered diverse realistic temporal trends, such as
electricity demand changes (Elec2), space shuttle defects (Shuttle), and appliances energy usage
changes (Appliance).

    Table 6: Performance comparisons on Sine, Rot-MNIST, Portraits, and Forest Cover datasets.

              Frameworks               Sine       Rot-MNIST        Portraits    Forest Cover
        LSSAE (Qin et al., 2022)    36.8 ± 1.5      16.6 ± 0.7     6.9 ± 0.3       36.8 ± 0.4
        DDA (Zeng et al., 2023)     1.6 ± 0.9       13.8 ± 0.3     5.1 ± 0.1       34.7 ± 0.5
         GI (Nasery et al., 2021)   33.2 ± 0.7       7.7 ± 1.3     6.3 ± 0.2       36.4 ± 0.4
        DRAIN (Bai et al., 2022)    3.0 ± 1.0        7.5 ± 1.1       -±-              -±-
           CODA (MLP)                2.7 ± 0.9        6.0 ± 1.2    5.1 ± 0.1       34.4 ± 0.4
         CODA (LightGBM)             1.2 ± 0.4        5.8 ± 0.6    6.2 ± 0.1       33.0 ± 0.3
        CODA (FT-Transformer)        1.1 ± 0.4        6.3 ± 0.5    4.9 ± 0.2       33.7 ± 0.3


H     T RAINING T IME C OMPARISONS
In this work, we mainly focus on the effectiveness of achieving TDG rather than on efficiency.
Although efficiency is not our main goal, we would like to justify that our proposed framework
achieves decent efficiency compared to the SOTA method DRAIN.
The reason is that by splitting the whole temporal trend modeling and data generation process into
three sub-processes (learning Correlation Predictor H(·), learning Data Simulator G(·), and predic-
tor training), each of the sub-processes is a manageable sub-problem and takes less training time
than a whole end-to-end model. We demonstrate the training time comparison to the SOTA DRAIN
on Elec2 dataset in Table7, where we train the same MLP structure as the predictor.

               Table 7: Performance comparisons on Sine and Rot-MNIST datasets.

                        Framework & Components                Training Times (s)
                          DRAIN (Bai et al., 2022)                 465.936
                             CODA (Total)                          447.817
                    CODA (Correlation Predictor H(·))              142.110
                      CODA (Data Simulator G(·))                   290.826
                            CODA (MLP)                              14.880


                                                 20
