Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T HE G EOMETRY OF T RUTH : E MERGENT L INEAR
S TRUCTURE IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL R EPRE -
SENTATIONS OF T RUE /FALSE DATASETS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Large Language Models (LLMs) have impressive capabilities, but are also prone
         to outputting falsehoods. Recent work has developed techniques for inferring
         whether a LLM is telling the truth by training probes on the LLM’s internal acti-
         vations. However, this line of work is controversial, with some authors pointing
         out failures of these probes to generalize in basic ways, among other conceptual
         issues. In this work, we curate high-quality datasets of true/false statements and
         use them to study in detail the structure of LLM representations of truth, drawing
         on three lines of evidence: 1. Visualizations of LLM true/false statement repre-
         sentations, which reveal clear linear structure. 2. Transfer experiments in which
         probes trained on one dataset generalize to different datasets. 3. Causal evidence
         obtained by surgically intervening in a LLM’s forward pass, causing it to treat
         false statements as true and vice versa. Overall, we present evidence that lan-
         guage models linearly represent the truth or falsehood of factual statements. We
         also introduce a novel technique, mass-mean probing, which generalizes better
         and is more causally implicated in model outputs than other probing techniques.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Despite their impressive capabilities, large language models (LLMs) do not always output true text
(Lin et al., 2022; Steinhardt, 2023; Park et al., 2023). In some cases, this is because they do not
know better. In other cases, LLMs apparently know that statements are false but generate them
anyway. For instance, Perez et al. (2022) demonstrate that LLM assistants output more falsehoods
when prompted with the biography of a less-educated user. More starkly, OpenAI (2023) documents
a case where a GPT-4-based agent gained a person’s help in solving a CAPTCHA by lying about
being a vision-impaired human. “I should not reveal that I am a robot,” the agent wrote in an internal
chain-of-thought scratchpad, “I should make up an excuse for why I cannot solve CAPTCHAs.”
We would like techniques which, given a language model M and a statement s, determine whether
M believes s to be true (Christiano et al., 2021). One approach to this problem relies on inspecting
model outputs; for instance, the internal chain-of-thought in the above example provides evidence
that the model understood it was generating a falsehood. An alternative class of approaches instead
leverages access to M ’s internal state when processing s. There has been considerable recent work
on this class of approaches: Azaria & Mitchell (2023), Li et al. (2023b), and Burns et al. (2023) all
train probes for classifying truthfulness based on a LLM’s internal activations. In fact, the probes
of Li et al. (2023b) and Burns et al. (2023) are linear probes, suggesting the presence of a “truth
direction” in model internals.
However, the efficacy and interpretation of these results are controversial. For instance, Levinstein &
Herrmann (2023) note that the probes of Azaria & Mitchell (2023) fail to generalize in basic ways,
such as to statements containing the word “not.” The probes of Burns et al. (2023) have similar
generalization issues, especially when using representations from autoregressive transformers. This
suggests that these probes may be identifying not truth, but other features which correlate with truth
on their training data.
In this work, we shed light on this murky state of affairs. We first curate high-quality datasets
of true/false factual statements which are uncontroversial, unambiguous, and simple (section 2).


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dataset visualizations with PCA, LLaMA-13B, layer 13
                      cities
                     cities               larger_than
                                          larger_than                 sp_en_trans
                                                                      sp_en_trans         cities_cities_conj
                                                                                        cities_cities_conj
                                    10
      10
                                                               10                       10
          0
                                     0                                                   0
PC2


                                                                0
      −10
                                                               −10                     −10
      −20       True                −10
                False                                                                  −20
               −10    0   10   20         −10     0      10         −20 −10   0   10         −20 −10   0   10
                                                              PC1

      Figure 1: Projections of residual stream representations of our datasets onto their top two PCs.


Then, working with the autoregressive transformers LLaMA-13B (Touvron et al., 2023a) and
LLaMA-2-13B (Touvron et al., 2023b), we study in detail the structure of LLM truth representa-
tions, drawing on multiple lines of evidence:

              • PCA visualizations of LLM representations of true/false statements display clear lin-
                ear structure (section 3), with true statements separating from false ones in the top PCs
                (see figure 1). Although visually-apparent axes of separation do not always align between
                datasets (figure 3), we argue that this is compatible with the presence of a truth direction in
                LLM representations.
              • Linear probes trained to classify truth on one dataset generalize well to other datasets
                (section 4). For instance, probes trained only on statements of the form “x is larger/smaller
                than y” achieve high accuracy when evaluated on our Spanish-English translation dataset.
                We also show that this is not explained by LLMs linearly representing the difference be-
                tween probable and improbable text.
              • Truth directions identified by probes causally mediate model outputs in certain highly
                localized model components (section 5). We identify a small group of hidden states such
                that shifting activations in these hidden states along truth directions causes our LLMs to
                treat false statements introduced in-context as true, and vice-versa.

Improving our understanding of the structure of LLM truth representations also improves our ability
to extract LLM beliefs: based on geometrical considerations, we introduce mass-mean probing1 ,
a simple, optimization-free probing technique which generalizes better and identifies more causally
implicated directions than other probing techniques.
Overall, this work provides evidence that LLM representations contain a truth direction and
makes progress on extracting this direction given access to true/false datasets. Our code,
datasets, and an interactive dataexplorer are available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
geometry-of-truth-9206/.

1.1           R ELATED WORK

Linear world models. Substantial previous work has studied whether LLMs encode world models
in their representations (Li et al., 2023a; 2021; Abdou et al., 2021; Patel & Pavlick, 2022). Early
work focused on whether individual neurons represent features (Wang et al., 2022; Sajjad et al.,
2022; Bau et al., 2020), but features may more generally be represented by directions in a LLM’s la-
tent space (i.e. linear combinations of neurons) (Dalvi et al., 2018; Gurnee et al., 2023; Cunningham
et al., 2023; Elhage et al., 2022). We say such features are linearly represented by the LLM.
Probing for truthfulness. Other authors have trained probes to classify truthfulness from LLM
activations, using both logistic regression (Azaria & Mitchell, 2023; Li et al., 2023b) and unsuper-
vised techniques (Burns et al., 2023). This work differs from prior work in a number of ways. First,
we more carefully scope our setting, using only datasets of clear, simple, and unambiguous fac-
tual statements, rather than the intentionally misleading question/answer pairs of Li et al. (2023b);
      1
          Mass-mean probing is named after the mass-mean shift intervention of Li et al. (2023b)


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lin et al. (2022), the complicated and inconsistently structured prompts of Burns et al. (2023), and
the sometimes confusing statements of Azaria & Mitchell (2023); Levinstein & Herrmann (2023).
Second, a cornerstone of our analysis is evaluating whether probes trained on one dataset transfer
to other topically and structurally different datasets in terms of both accuracy and causal media-
tion of model outputs.2 Third, we go beyond the mass-mean shift interventions of Li et al. (2023b)
by introducing and systematically studying the properties of mass-mean probes; this improved un-
derstanding allows us to perform causal interventions which are more localized than those of loc.
cit. And fourth, unlike previous work, we localize LLM truth representations to a small number of
hidden states above certain tokens.


2    DATASETS

In this work, we scope “truth” to mean the truth or falsehood of a factual statement. Appendix A
further clarifies this definition and its relation to definitions used elsewhere. We introduce three
classes of datasets, shown in table 1. For more detail on the construction of these datasets (including
statement templates), see appendix I.
First, our curated datasets consist of statements which are uncontroversial, unambiguous, and sim-
ple enough that our LLMs are likely to understand them. For example, “The city of Zagreb is in
Japan” (false) or “The Spanish word ‘nariz’ does not mean ‘giraffe’ ” (true). Following Levinstein
& Herrmann (2023), some of our datasets are formed from others by negating statements (by adding
“not”), or by taking logical conjunctions (e.g. cities cities conj consists of statements of the form
“It is the case both that s1 and that s2” where s1 and s2 are statements from cities).
Second, our uncurated datasets are more difficult test sets adapted from other sources. They con-
tain claims which are much more diverse, but sometimes ambiguous, malformed, controversial, or
unlikely for the model to understand. And finally, our likely dataset consists of nonfactual text
where the final token is either the most likely or the 100th most likely completion, according to
LLaMA-13B. We use this to disambiguate between the text which is true and text which is likely.


3    V ISUALIZING LLM REPRESENTATIONS OF TRUE / FALSE DATASETS

We begin our investigation with a simple technique: visualizing LLMs representations of our
datasets using principal component analysis (PCA). For the curated datasets3 we observe clear linear
    2
      Burns et al. (2023); Azaria & Mitchell (2023); Levinstein & Herrmann (2023) do test the transfer classifi-
cation accuracy of probes (with mixed results), but do not perform any causal mediation experiments.
    3
      It is important here that our curated datasets have little variation with respect to non-truth features. For
some uncurated datasets, the top PCs tend to capture sources of variation aside from truth, e.g. variation in
sentence structure (see figure 13).


                                            Table 1: Our datasets

 Name                                Topic                                                                Rows
 cities                              Locations of world cities                                             1496
 sp en trans                         Spanish-English translation                                            354
 neg cities                          Negations of statments in cities                                      1496
 neg sp en trans                     Negations of statements in sp en trans                                 354
 larger than                         Numerical comparisons: larger than                                    1980
 smaller than                        Numerical comparisons: smaller than                                   1980
 cities cities conj                  Conjunctions of two statements in cities                              1500
 cities cities disj                  Disjunctions of two statements in cities                              1500
 companies true false                Claims about companies; from Azaria & Mitchell (2023)                 1200
 common claim true false             Various claims; from Casper et al. (2023b)                            4450
 counterfact true false              Various factual recall claims; from Meng et al. (2022)               31960
 likely                              Nonfactual text with likely or unlikely final tokens                 10000


                                                        3
         Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

   Dataset visualizations in various PCA bases, LLaMA-13B, layer 13

          Visualizations in PCA basis of cities, LLaMA-13B, layer 13

                 True                           5                             15                          20
          2      False
                                                                              10
          0                                                                                               10
cities


                                                0                                5
         −2
                                                                                                            0
                                                                                 0
         −4
                                                −5                            −5                         −10
               −4      −2     0    2        4           0         5                 −10 −5    0    5        −10     0     10
                      larger_than                     sp_en_trans                common_claim_true_false counterfact_true_false
                       larger_than                    sp_en_trans                 common_claim_true_false  counterfact_true_false
           Figure 2: Projections of residual stream representations of datasets onto the top 2 PCs of cities.

                       cities  + neg_cities
                         cities+neg_cities                sp_en_trans + neg_sp_en_trans larger_than
                                                           sp_en_trans+neg_sp_en_trans               + smaller_than
                                                                                          larger_than+smaller_than
          20                                                                                                                        1


                                                                                                                                    0.8
          10

                                                                                                                                    0.6
PC2


           0
                                                                                                                                    0.4

         −10        True, cities                            True, sp_en_trans                       True, larger_than               0.2
                    False, cities                           False, sp_en_trans                      False, larger_than
                    True, neg_cities                        True, neg_sp_en_trans                   True, smaller_than
                    False, neg_cities                       False, neg_sp_en_trans                  False, smaller_than             0
         −20
               −20         −10          0   10       20    −20       −10         0     10     20        −10               0   10

                                                          PC1
         Figure 3: Top two PCs of datasets consisting of statements  and their opposites. Inset shows NTDs.
         Representations are independently centered for each dataset. The orthogonality in the left and center
         plots emerges over layers; see appendix C.



         structure, with true statements linearly separating from false ones in the top two principle compo-
         nents (PCs). As explored in appendix C, this structure emerges rapidly in early-middle layers and
         emerges later for datasets of more structurally complicated statement (e.g. conjunctive statements).
         For concreteness, we focus here on LLaMA-13B; see appendix B for LLaMA-2-13B results. We
         extract layer 13 residual stream activations over the final token of the input statement, which always
         ends with a period; this choice of hidden state is justified by the patching experiments in section 5.1.
         We also center the representations in each dataset by subtracting off their mean. Our key observa-
         tions are as follows.
         True and false statements separate in the top few PCs (figures 1 and 2). Moreover, after project-
         ing away these PCs, there remains essentially no linearly-accessible information for distinguishing
         true/false statements (appendix D). Given a dataset D, call the vector pointing from the false state-
         ment representations to the true ones the naive truth direction (NTD) of D.4
         NTDs of different datasets often align, but sometimes do not. For instance, figure 2 shows our
         datasets separating along the first PC of cities. On the other hand, in figure 3 we see a stark failure of
         NTDs to align: the NTDs of cities and neg cities are approximately orthogonal, and the NTDs of
         larger than and smaller than are approximately antipodal. In section 4, these observations will
         be corroborated by the poor generalization of probes trained on cities and larger than to neg cities
         and smaller than.
         What could explain both (1) the visible linear structure apparent in each dataset individually and (2)
         the failure for NTDs of different datasets to align in general? Here we articulate three hypotheses.

             4
               Of course, there are many such vectors. In section 4 we will be more specific about which such vector we
         are discussing (e.g. the vector identified by training a linear probe with logistic regression).


                                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      H1. LLM representations have no truth direction, but do have directions corresponding
          to other features which are sometimes correlated with truth. For instance, LLaMA-
          13B might have linearly-represented features representing sizes of numbers, association
          between English words and their Spanish translations, and association between cities and
          their countries (Hernandez et al., 2023). This would result in each dataset being linearly
          separated, but NTDs only aligning when all their truth-relevant features are correlated.
      H2. LLMs linearly represent the truth of various types of statements, without having a
          unified truth feature. The the truth of negated statements, conjunctive statements, state-
          ments about comparisons, etc., may all be treated as distinct linearly-represented features.
      H3. Misalignment from correlational inconsistency (MCI): LLMs linearly represent both
          truth and non-truth features which correlate with truth on narrow data distributions;
          however these correlations may be inconsistent between datasets. For instance, MCI
          would explain the left panel of figure 3 by positing that the direction θt = (1, 1) represents
          truth and the direction θf = (−1, 1) represents a direction which is correlated with truth
          on cities and anticorrlated with truth on neg cities. We note that if MCI is true, then it
          is essential that datasets used for identifying truth directions be diverse enough to not have
          such spurious correlations.

H1 is at odds with the results of sections 4 and 5: for H1 to hold, there would have to be a non-truth
feature which is both correlated with truth across all of our datasets and causally mediates the way
our LLM handles in-context true/false statements. We will also see in section 5 that directions iden-
tified by training probes on both cities and neg cities are more causally implicated in processing
of true/false statements, consistent with MCI.

4     P ROBING AND GENERALIZATION EXPERIMENTS
In this section we train probes on datasets of true/false statements and test their generalization
to other datasets. But first we discuss a deficiency of logistic regression and propose a simple,
optimization-free alternative: mass-mean probing. We will see that mass-mean probes generalize
better and are more causally implicated in model outputs than other probing techniques.

4.1     C HALLENGES WITH LOGISTIC REGRESSION , AND MASS - MEAN PROBING

                                               A common technique in interpretability research for iden-
                                               tifying feature directions is training linear probes with lo-
                  θf                           gistic regression (LR) (Alain & Bengio, 2018). In some
                                               cases, however, the direction identified by LR can fail to
                                               reflect an intuitive best guess for the feature direction,
                                               even in the absence of confounding features. Consider
                                               the following scenario, illustrated in figure 4 with hypo-
                                               thetical data:
                                   θt = θmm           • Truth is represented linearly along a direction θt .
                                 θlr                  • Another feature f is represented linearly along a
                                                        direction θf not orthogonal to θt .5
                                       True           • The statements in our dataset have some vari-
                                       False            ation with respect to feature f , independent of
                                                        their truth value.
Figure 4: An illustration of a weakness      We would like to identify the direction θt , but LR fails
of logistic regression.                      to do so. Assuming for simplicity linearly separable data,
                                             LR instead converges to the maximum margin separator
Soudry et al. (2018) (the dashed magenta line in figure 4). Intuitively, LR treats the small projection
of θf onto θt as significant, and adjusts the probe direction to have less “interference” (Elhage et al.,
2022) from θf .
    5
      As suggested by the superposition hypothesis of Elhage et al. (2022), features being represented non-
orthogonally in this way may be the typical case in deep learning.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A simple alternative to LR which identifies the desired direction in this scenario is to take the vector
pointing from the mean of the false data to the mean of the true data. In more detail if D = {(xi , yi )}
is a dataset of xi ∈ Rd with binary labels yi ∈ {0, 1}, we set θmm = µ+ − µ− where µ+ , µ− are
the means of the positively- and negatively-labeled datapoints, respectively. A reasonable first pass
                                                               T
at converting θmm into a probe is to define6 pmm (x) = σ(θmm       x) where σ is the logistic function.
However, when evaluating on data that is independent and identically distributed (IID) to D, we can
do better. Letting Σ be the covariance matrix of the dataset Dc = {xi − µ+ : yi = 1} ∪ {xi − µ− :
yi = 0} formed by independently centering the positive and negative datapoints, we set
                                                           −1
                                         piid         T
                                          mm (x) = σ(θmm Σ    x).
Multiplication by Σ−1 effectively tilts the decision boundary to accommodate interference from θf ;
in fact, we prove in appendix G that under mild assumptions, Σ−1 θmm coincides on average with
LR direction. Thus mass-mean probing provides a way to select a good decision boundary while –
unlike LR – also tracking a candidate feature direction which may be non-orthogonal to this decision
boundary. Appendix F gives another interpretation of mass-mean probing in terms of Mahalanobis
whitening.
We call the probes pmm and piid                                             iid
                                mm mass-mean probes. As we will see, pmm is about as accurate
as logistic regression probes on the train set D, while pmm enjoys better generalization to other
true/false datasets and is more causally implicated in model outputs than other probing techniques.

4.2   E XPERIMENTAL SET- UP

We evaluate the following techniques for eliciting the truth or falsehood of factual statements. For
the probing-based techniques, we again extract hidden states from the residual stream over the period
token. For LLaMA-13B, we again use layer 13.
Logistic regression, as in Alain & Bengio (2018) but with fixed bias b = 0.
Mass-mean probing. We use piid
                           mm when validating on held-out IID data and pmm otherwise.

Contrast-Consistent Search (CCS), introduced in Burns et al. (2023). CCS is an unsupervised
method: given contrast pairs of statements with opposite truth values, CCS identifies a direction
along which the activations of these statements are far apart. For our contrast pairs, we pair state-
ments from cities and neg cities, and from larger than and smaller than.
Logistic regression/mass-mean probing on the likely dataset. This is used to benchmark our
probes against probes trained only to classify statements as being likely/unlikely text.
Calibrated few-shot prompting. Given a dataset D, we construct a few-shot prompt which presents
statements and labels from D to the LLM in-context; see appendix K for example prompts. We then
append the remaining statements in D to this prompt one-at-a-time and treat the model’s predicted
next token as its classification. We calibrate predictions so that half of the statements are labeled
true/false; this improves performance by a few percentage points.7
Logistic regression on the validation set (oracle). This gives an upper-bound for the accuracy of
a linear probe on the validation set.

4.3   R ESULTS

LLaMA-13B results are shown in figure 5; see appendix B for LLaMA-2-13B. We highight some
key observations.
Generalization accuracy is high across all techniques. For instance, no matter the technique,
training probes only on datasets of statements about numerical comparisons results in a probes with
92%+ accuracy on Spanish-English translation. The performance of the probes relative to calibrated
   6
     In this work, we are interested in identifying truth directions, so we always center our data and use probes
                                                                          T
without biases. In other settings, we would instead set pmm (x) = σ(θmm       x + b) for a tunable bias b ∈ R.
   7
     Since performance is very sensitive to the few-shot prompt used, we perform a hyperparameter sweep for
each of our LLMs, first selecting a number n of shots which seems to work best, and then sampling five n-shot
prompts and using the one which results in the highest accuracy.


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          cities


                      neg_cities


                     larger_than


                     smaller_than
    Test set


                      sp_en_trans


                  neg_sp_en_trans



               cities_cities_conj


               cities_cities_disj


      companies_true_false


common_claim_true_false


 counterfact_true_false


                                             es                   es                 an                   an              es                   es                 an                   an                   es                   an              ly             ly              ot         se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t
                                        ti                   ti                 th                   th              ti                   ti                 th                   th                   ti                   th              ke             ke              sh
                                   ci                   ci                 r_                   r_              ci                   ci                 r_                   r_                   ci                   r_              li             li              w-              st
                                                 eg
                                                    _                  e
                                                                                         ll
                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                              eg
                                                                                                                                 _                  e                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                           eg
                                                                                                                                                                                              _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e              on             on              fe              te
                                                                    rg                                                                           rg                   ll                                                                                    ed             on
                                            +n                 la               sm
                                                                                     a                                   +n                 la               sm
                                                                                                                                                                  a                   +n               sm
                                                                                                                                                                                                            a               LR          MM             at
                                       es                                  n+                                       es                                  n+                      es                n+                                              br                 LR
                                  ti                                  ha                                       ti                                  ha                      ti                ha                                              li
                             ci                                   t                                       ci                                   t                      ci                 t                                              ca
                                                           e   r_                                                                       e   r_                                    e   r_
                                                      rg                                                                           rg                                        rg
                                                 la                                                                           la                                       la
                                                                                                                                                                             Train set

Figure 5: Generalization accuracy of probes trained on LLaMA-13B layer 13 residual stream ac-
tivations. The x-axis shows the train set, and the y-axis shows the test set. All probes are trained
on 80% of the data. When the train set and test set are the same, we evaluate on the held-out 20%.
Otherwise, we evaluate on the full test set.


few-shot accuracies suggest that model outputs are being influenced by features other than the truth.
On average, mass-mean probes generalize slightly better than logistic regression and CCS probes.
Training on statements and their opposites improves generalization, consistent with the MCI
hypothesis.
Probes trained on true/false datasets outperform probes trained on likely. While probes trained
on likely are clearly better than random on some datasets, they generally perform poorly, especially
for datasets where likelihood is negatively correlated (neg cities, neg sp en trans) or approxi-
mately uncorrelated (larger than, smaller than) with truth. This demonstrates that LLMs linearly
encodes truth-relevant information beyond the plausibility of the text.


5              C AUSAL INTERVENTION EXPERIMENTS

In this section we perform experiments which measure the extent to which the probing techniques
of section 4 identify directions which are causally implicated in model outputs. Overall, our goal is
to cause LLMs to treat false statements introduced in context as true and vice versa.

5.1              I DENTIFYING THE RELEVANT HIDDEN STATES WITH PATCHING

Consider the following prompt p:

                     The Spanish word ‘jirafa’ means ‘giraffe’. This statement is: TRUE [...]
                     The Spanish word ‘aire’ means ‘silver’. This statement is: FALSE
                     The Spanish word ‘uno’ means ‘floor’. This statement is:


                                                                                                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         (a)                                                         PD


                                         (b)                                          (c)


Figure 6: Difference P D = P (TRUE) − P (FALSE) after patching residual stream activations
from the corrupted prompt p∗ into the model’s forward pass when processing p.


When an LLM processes this input, which hidden states contain the information which is causally
relevant for the LLM’s prediction of the next token? One way to answer this question is with
a patching experiment (Meng et al., 2022; Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2023). We one-at-a-time swap
hidden states from the forward pass of the clean prompt p into the forward pass of the “corrupted”
prompt p∗ , obtained from p by replacing “floor” with “one” (the correct translation). For each swap,
we record the probability difference P D = P (TRUE)−P (FALSE) between output tokens. Swaps
which result in a larger P D indicate hidden states which are more causally implicated in the model’s
decision to output TRUE or FALSE.
Figure 6 reveals three groups of causally implicated hidden states for LLaMA-13B. The final group,
labeled (c), directly encodes the model’s prediction: after applying LLaMA-13B’s decoder head
directly to these hidden states, the top logits belong to the tokens “true,” “True,” and “TRUE.” The
first group, labeled (a), likely stores LLaMA-13B’s representation of the words “floor” or “one.” We
hypothesize that in the middle region, labeled (b), the truth value of the statement is computed and
stored above the token which marks the end of the clause.8 See appendix B for the corresponding
figure for LLaMA-2-13B.
We note that, if this hypothesis is correct, it justifies our choice of layer 13 and token position for
extracting activations in the previous two sections, as this is the most downstream hidden state in
group (b) and is therefore likely to carry the model’s most enriched representation of truth. In the
next section, we validate this hypothesis together with the truth directions of section 4 by intervening
in our LLMs’ forward pass, shifting activations in group (b) along a truth direction.

5.2   M ODIFYING HIDDEN STATES BY ADDING A TRUTH VECTOR

Instead of modifying hidden states by swapping them out for hidden states saved from a counterfac-
tual forward pass, we now make a more surgical intervention: directly adding in truth vectors iden-
tified by the probes of section 4. Let θ be the vector identified by such a probe9 In our “false→true”
experiment, we one-at-a-time swap each statement from sp en trans in as the last line of the prompt
p above and pass the resulting prompt as input to our model; however, during the forward pass we
add θ to each group (b) residual stream activation.10 We quantify the effect of this intervention using

    8
      This motif, where “summarized” information about a clause is stored above end-of-clause signifiers, was
also noted in the concurrent work of Tigges et al. (2023).
    9
      If p is one of the probes of section 4, we normalize the corresponding θ so that p(µ− + θ) = p(µ+ ) where
µ− , µ+ are the mean representations of the true and false statements, respectively. Thus, from the perspective
of p, adding θ takes the average false statement to the average true statement.
   10
      For LLaMA-13B, group (b) consists of the residual stream activations over the indicated tokens in layers
7-13; see appendix B for LLaMA-2-13B.


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Results of intervention experiments. The train set column indicates the datasets and probing
technique (logistic regression, mass-mean probing, or CCS) which was used to identify the truth
direction. Values are normalized indirect effects (NIEs) averaged over sp en trans.

                                             LLaMA-13B                   LLaMA-2-13B
                        Train set     false→true true→false        false→true true→false
                     cities (LR)          0.52       0.24              0.21       0.24
         cities+neg cities (LR)           0.66       0.58              0.37       0.69
                   cities (MM)            0.72       1.28              0.77       0.81
        cities+neg cities (MM)            0.95       1.41              0.85       0.95
        cities+neg cities (CCS)           0.70       0.96              0.49       0.84
                     likely (LR)          0.01       0.10              0.05       0.06
                   likely (MM)            0.61       0.60              0.68       0.59


the normalized indirect effect
                                                P D∗− − P D−
                                      N IE =
                                                P D+ − P D−
where P D+ (P D− ) denotes the average probability difference for true (false) statements with no
intervention applied, and P D∗− is the average probability difference for false statements when the
intervention described above is applied. If N IE = 0 then the intervention was wholly ineffective,
whereas if N IE = 1 it indicates that the intervention induced the model to label false statements as
TRUE with as much confidence as does genuine true statements.
Conversely, in the “true→false” condition, we append each true statement to p one-at-a-time, sub-
tract the vector θ, and measure N IE = (P D∗+ − P D+ )/(P D− − P D+ ). Results are shown in
table 2, and we discuss some takeaways below.
Mass-mean probe directions are highly causal. For example, our best true→false intervention
induces LLaMA-13B to swing its average prediction from TRUE with probability 77% to FALSE
with probability 92%.
Probes trained on likely have an effect, but it is much smaller than the effects from corre-
sponding probes trained on true/false datasets. This further suggests that LLMs are not just
representing the difference between probable and improbable text.
Training on statements and their negations results in directions which are more causal. This
provides evidence for the MCI hypothesis of section 3.


6     D ISCUSSION

6.1   L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Our work has a number of limitations. First, we focus on simple, uncontroversial statements, and
therefore cannot disambiguate truth from closely related features, such as “commonly believed”
or “verifiable” (Levinstein & Herrmann, 2023). Second, we only address how to identify a truth
direction; we found empirically that the optimal bias for linear probes was under-determined by
many of our training sets, and so we leave the problem of identifying well-generalizing biases to
future work. Third, we only study two models at the same scale, both from the LLaMA family. And
finally, although the evidence in sections 4 and 5 shed light on which of the hypotheses in section 3
is correct, uncertainty remains.

6.2   C ONCLUSION

In this work we conduct a detailed investigation of the structure of LLM representations of truth.
Drawing on simple visualizations, correlational evidence, and causal evidence, we find strong rea-
son to believe that there is a “truth direction” in LLM representations. We also introduce mass-mean
probing – a simple alternative to other linear probing techniques which better identifies truth direc-
tions from true/false datasets – and localize truth representations to certain hidden states.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Mostafa Abdou, Artur Kulmizev, Daniel Hershcovich, Stella Frank, Ellie Pavlick, and Anders
 Søgaard. Can language models encode perceptual structure without grounding? a case study
 in color, 2021.
Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding intermediate layers using linear classifier
  probes, 2018.
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Con-
  crete problems in ai safety, 2016.
Amos Azaria and Tom Mitchell. The internal state of an llm knows when its lying, 2023.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Agata Lapedriza, Bolei Zhou, and Antonio Torralba.
  Understanding the role of individual units in a deep neural network. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 2020. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1907375117. URL https:
  //www.pnas.org/content/early/2020/08/31/1907375117.
Samuel R. Bowman, Jeeyoon Hyun, Ethan Perez, Edwin Chen, Craig Pettit, Scott Heiner, Kamilė
  Lukošiūtė, Amanda Askell, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron
  McKinnon, Christopher Olah, Daniela Amodei, Dario Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Jackson Kernion, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal
  Ndousse, Liane Lovitt, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Nicholas Joseph, Noemı́ Mercado,
  Nova DasSarma, Robin Larson, Sam McCandlish, Sandipan Kundu, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom Henighan,
  Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan. Measuring
  progress on scalable oversight for large language models, 2022.
Collin Burns, Haotian Ye, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Discovering latent knowledge in lan-
  guage models without supervision. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ETKGuby0hcs.
Stephen Casper, Xander Davies, Claudia Shi, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, Jérémy Scheurer, Javier
  Rando, Rachel Freedman, Tomasz Korbak, David Lindner, Pedro Freire, Tony Wang, Samuel
  Marks, Charbel-Raphaël Segerie, Micah Carroll, Andi Peng, Phillip Christoffersen, Mehul
  Damani, Stewart Slocum, Usman Anwar, Anand Siththaranjan, Max Nadeau, Eric J. Michaud,
  Jacob Pfau, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, Xin Chen, Lauro Langosco, Peter Hase, Erdem Bıyık, Anca
  Dragan, David Krueger, Dorsa Sadigh, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Open problems and funda-
  mental limitations of reinforcement learning from human feedback, 2023a.
Stephen Casper, Jason Lin, Joe Kwon, Gatlen Culp, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Explore, establish,
  exploit: Red teaming language models from scratch, 2023b.
Paul Christiano, Ajeya Cotra, and Mark Xu. Eliciting latent knowledge: How to tell if your
  eyes deceive you, 2021. URL https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WwsnJQstPq91
  Yh-Ch2XRL8H EpsnjrC1dwZXR37PC8/edit#heading=h.jrzi4atzacns.
Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B. Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences, 2023.
Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse autoen-
  coders find highly interpretable features in language models, 2023.
Fahim Dalvi, Nadir Durrani, Hassan Sajjad, Yonatan Belinkov, Anthony Bau, and James R. Glass.
  What is one grain of sand in the desert? analyzing individual neurons in deep nlp models. In
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:56895415.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish,
  Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy models of superpo-
  sition. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Geonames. All cities with a population > 1000, 2023. URL https://download.geonames.org/
  export/dump/.

Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Chris MacLeod, Lucas Sato, and Aryaman Arora. Localizing model
  behavior with path patching, 2023.

Wes Gurnee, Neel Nanda, Matthew Pauly, Katherine Harvey, Dmitrii Troitskii, and Dimitris Bertsi-
 mas. Finding neurons in a haystack: Case studies with sparse probing, 2023.

Evan Hernandez, Arnab Sen Sharma, Tal Haklay, Kevin Meng, Martin Wattenberg, Jacob Andreas,
  Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Linearity of relation decoding in transformer language models,
  2023.

B. A. Levinstein and Daniel A. Herrmann. Still no lie detector for language models: Probing empir-
  ical and conceptual roadblocks, 2023.

Belinda Z. Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Implicit representations of meaning in neural lan-
  guage models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
  ume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1813–1827, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.143. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.
  143.

Kenneth Li, Aspen K Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wat-
  tenberg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic
  task. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=DeG07 TcZvT.

Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-time
  intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model, 2023b.

Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3214–3252, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.229. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2022.acl-long.229.

Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in GPT. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2022.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Peter S. Park, Simon Goldstein, Aidan O’Gara, Michael Chen, and Dan Hendrycks. Ai deception:
  A survey of examples, risks, and potential solutions, 2023.

Roma Patel and Ellie Pavlick. Mapping language models to grounded conceptual spaces. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=gJcEM8sxHK.

Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig Pet-
  tit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Ben Mann,
  Brian Israel, Bryan Seethor, Cameron McKinnon, Christopher Olah, Da Yan, Daniela Amodei,
  Dario Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Guro Khundadze, Jackson Kernion,
  James Landis, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeeyoon Hyun, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Lan-
  don Goldberg, Liane Lovitt, Martin Lucas, Michael Sellitto, Miranda Zhang, Neerav Kingsland,
  Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Joseph, Noemı́ Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Oliver Rausch, Robin Lar-
  son, Sam McCandlish, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Tamera Lanham, Timo-
  thy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac Hatfield-Dodds,
  Jack Clark, Samuel R. Bowman, Amanda Askell, Roger Grosse, Danny Hernandez, Deep Gan-
  guli, Evan Hubinger, Nicholas Schiefer, and Jared Kaplan. Discovering language model behaviors
  with model-written evaluations, 2022.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hassan Sajjad, Nadir Durrani, and Fahim Dalvi. Neuron-level interpretation of deep NLP models:
  A survey. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:1285–1303, 2022.
  doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00519. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.74.
Daniel Soudry, Elad Hoffer, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nathan Srebro. The im-
  plicit bias of gradient descent on separable data. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19
  (1):2822–2878, 2018.
Jacob Steinhardt. Emergent deception and emergent optimization, 2023.                 URL https://
  bounded-regret.ghost.io/emergent-deception-optimization/.
Curt Tigges, Oskar John Hollinsworth, Atticus Geiger, and Neel Nanda. Linear representations of
  sentiment in large language models, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023b.
Xiaozhi Wang, Kaiyue Wen, Zhengyan Zhang, Lei Hou, Zhiyuan Liu, and Juanzi Li. Finding
  skill neurons in pre-trained transformer-based language models. In Proceedings of the 2022
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 11132–11152, Abu
  Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.765. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.765.


A    S COPING OF TRUTH
In this work, we consider declarative factual statements, for example “Eighty-one is larger than
fifty-four” or “The city of Denver is in Vietnam.” We scope “truth” to mean the truth or falsehood
of these statements; for instance the examples given have truth values of true and false, respectively.
To be clear, we list here some notions of “truth” which we do not consider in this work:

       • Correct question answering (considered in Li et al. (2023b) and for some of the prompts
         used in Burns et al. (2023)). For example, we do not consider “What country is Paris in?
         France” to have a truth value.
       • Presence of deception, for example dishonest expressions of opinion (“I like that plan”).
       • Compliance. For example, “Answer this question incorrectly: what country is Paris in?
         Paris is in Egypt” is an example of compliance, even though the statement at the end of the
         text is false.

Moreover, the statements under consideration in this work are all simple, unambiguous, and un-
controversial. Thus, we make no attempt to disambiguate “true statements” from the following
closely-related notions:

       • Uncontroversial statements


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Statements which are widely believed
       • Statements which educated people believe

On the other hand, our statements do disambiguate the notions of “true statements” and “statements
which are likely to appear in training data.” For instance, given the input China is not a country
in, LLaMA-13B’s top prediction for the next token is Asia, even though this completion is false.
Similarly, LLaMA-13B judges the text “Eighty-one is larger than eighty-two” to be more likely
than “Eighty-one is larger than sixty-four” even though the former statement is false and the
latter statement is true. As shown in section 5, probes trained only on statements of likely or unlikely
text fail to accurately classify true/false statements.


B    R ESULTS FOR LL A MA-2-13B

In this section we present results for LLaMA-13B which were omitted from the main body of the
text. To begin, we reproduce figure 6. The results of this experiment, shown in figure 7 governs
which hidden states we train probes and perform causal interventions on.
As with LLaMA-13B, we see that causally relevant information is stored over both the final token
of the statement and over the token which marks the end of the clause. Now, however, the group of
hidden states which we hypothesize stores the truth value of the statement spans a slightly different
range of layers: layers 8-14 instead of layers 7-13.
Thus, when extracting activations for visualizations and probing experiments, we will now extract
over the final token (the end-of-clause signifier) in layer 14. The dataset visualizations and probing
results for LLaMA-2-13B are shown in figures 8 and 9.

                                                                                               PD


                    Figure 7: Results of patching experiment for LLaMA-2-13B.


C    E MERGENCE OF LINEAR STRUCTURE ACROSS LAYERS

The linear structure observed in section 3 follows the following pattern: in early layers, represen-
tations are uninformative; then, in early middle layers, salient linear structure in the top few PCs
rapidly emerges, with this structure emerging later for statements with a more complicated logical
structure (e.g. conjunctions); finally, the linear separation becomes more salient and exits the top
few PCs in later layers. See figure 10. We hypothesize that this is due to LLMs hierarchically de-
veloping understanding of their input data, before focusing on features which are most relevant to
immediate next-token prediction in later layers.
Interestingly, the misalignment between cities and neg cities and between sp en trans and
neg sp en trans also emerges over layers. This is seen in figure 11: in layer 6, representations


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     PCA visualizations of all datasets, LLaMA-2-13B, layer 14

                       cities                     neg_cities                          sp_en_trans                  neg_sp_en_trans

                                                                                                            10
                                                                          10
                                     10
       0
                                                                                                             0
                                      0                                    0

     −10
                                                                                                            −10
                                     −10
                                                                         −10

                 −10      0                −10      0      10       20         −10       0       10                 −10       0     10
                 larger_than                     smaller_than                     cities_cities_conj                cities_cities_disj
       5                                                                  10
                                      5                                                                      5

       0                                                                                                     0
                                                                           0
                                      0
                                                                                                            −5
      −5

                                     −5                                  −10                                −10

              −5    0      5               −5     0      5                           0       10                   −10        0           10
           companies_true_false        common_claim_true_false                 counterfact_true_false                    likely
      20
                                     10
                                                                          10                                10
      10
                                      0                                    0
                                                                                                             0
       0

                                     −10                                 −10
     −10                                                                                                    −10


           −20   −10      0     10         −10       0         10               −10      0     10      20          −10     0      10


                 Figure 8: Visualizations of LLaMA-2-13B representations of our datasets.


are uninformative; then in layer 8, the NTD of cities and neg cities appear antipodal; finally by
layer 10, the NTDs have become orthogonal.
This can be interpreted in light of the MCI hypothesis. MCI would explain figure 11 as follows: in
layer 8, the top PC represents a feature which is correlated with truth on cities and anti-correlated
with truth on neg cities; in layer 10, this feature remains the top PC, while a truth feature has
emerged and is PC2. Since PC1 and PC2 have opposite correlations on cities and neg cities, the
datasets appear to be orthogonal.

D    N EARLY ALL LINEARLY- ACCESSIBLE TRUTH - RELEVANT INFORMATION IS
     IN THE TOP PC S

In section 5 we saw that true and false statements linearly separate in the top PCs. We might ask
how much of this separation is captured in the top PCs and how much of it remains in the remaining
PCs. The answer is that nearly all of it is in the top PCs.
One way to quantify the amount of linearly accessible information in some subspace V is to project
our dataset D onto V to obtain a dataset
                                 Dproj = {(projV (x), y)}(x,y)∈D
and record the validation accuracy of a linear probe trained with logistic regression on D. This is
shown in figure 12 for V being given by the top k + 1 through k + d principal components (i.e., the
top d principal components, excluding the first k). As shown, once the top few principal components
are excluded, almost no remaining linearly-accessible information remains.

E    F URTHER VISUALIZATIONS
Figure 13 shows PCA visualizations of all of our datsets. As shown, datasets some datasets saliently
vary along features other than the true. For instance, the three clusters of statements in compa-


                                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        cities


                    neg_cities


                   larger_than


                   smaller_than
  Test set


                    sp_en_trans


                neg_sp_en_trans



             cities_cities_conj


             cities_cities_disj


    companies_true_false


common_claim_true_false


 counterfact_true_false


                                              es               ie
                                                                    s                   n
                                                                                                       ha
                                                                                                            n                 es               ie
                                                                                                                                                    s                   n                   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n              ly             ly              ot         se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t
                                      ti                                          ha                                  ti                                          ha                   ha                                                      ke             ke              sh
                                 ci                       it                 _t                   _t             ci                       it                 _t                   _t                   it                  _t             li             li              w-              st
                                                 g   _c            g    er               l   er                                  g   _c            g    er               l   er               g   _c              l   er             on             on              fe              te
                                          +   ne            l   ar                m   al                                  +   ne            l   ar                m   al               +   ne              m   al           LR             MM                  ed             on
                                     es                                      +s                                      es                                      +s                   es                  +s                                                  at            LR
                                ti                                      an                                      ti                                      an                   ti                  an                                                  br
                           ci                                    th                                     ci                                       th                     ci                  th                                                  li
                                                          er
                                                             _                                                                               _
                                                                                                                                                                                   er
                                                                                                                                                                                      _                                                    ca
                                                                                                                                          er
                                                     rg                                                                              rg                                       rg
                                               la                                                                              la                                       la
                                                                                                                                                                              Train set

Figure 9: Generalization accuracy of probes trained on LLaMA-2-13B layer 14 residual stream
activations.


nies true false correspond to three different templates used in making the statements in that dataset.
To give another example, if we were to include all comparisons between integers x ∈ {1, . . . , 99}
in our larger than dataset, then the top principal components would be dominated by features rep-
resenting the sizes of numbers in the statements.
In figure 14 we also visualize our datasets in the PCA bases for other datsets, expanding figure 2.
We see that although our datasets do visually separate somewhat in the top PCs of the likely dataset,
text liklihood does not account for all of the separation in the top PCs.
One might ask what the top PC of the larger than dataset is, given that it’s not truth. Figure 15
provides an interesting suggestion: it represents the absolute value of the difference between the two
numbers being compared.


F             M ASS - MEAN PROBING IN TERMS OF M AHALANOBIS WHITENING


                                                      −1
One way to interpret the formula piid           T
                                  mm (x) = σ(θmm Σ       x) for the IID version of mass-mean prob-
ing is in terms of Mahalanobis whitening. Recall that if D = {xi } is a dataset of xi ∈ Rd with
covariance matrix Σ, then the Mahalanobis whitening transformation W = Σ−1/2 satisfies the
property that D′ = {W xi } has covariance matrix given by the identity matrix, i.e. the whitened
                                                                  T
coordinates are uncorrelated with variance 1. Thus, noting that θmm  Σ−1 x coincides with the inner
product between W x and W θ, we see that pmm amounts to taking the projection onto θmm after
performing the change-of-basis given by W . This is illustrated with hypothetical data in figure 16.


                                                                                                                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Top two principal components of representations of datasets in the LLaMA-13B residual
stream at various layers.


Figure 11: Top PCs of datasets of statements and their opposites. The representations for the datasets
are independently centered by subtracting off their means; without this centering there would also
be a translational displacement between datasets of statements and their negations.



                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: The solid lines show the validation accuracy of a linear probe trained with logistic re-
gression on the dataset, after projecting the representations to the top d + 1 through d + k principal
components. For comparison, we also show the accuracy of linear probes trained on random k-
dimensional projections (averaged over 50 random projections).


     PCA visualizations of all datasets, LLaMA-13B, layer 13

                    cities                        neg_cities                       sp_en_trans                 neg_sp_en_trans
      10                                                                                               20
                                      20                              10

       0                                                                                               10
                                      10
                                                                       0
                                                                                                        0
     −10
                                       0
                                                                     −10                               −10
     −20
                                     −10

            −10      0    10    20         −20   −10   0   10   20        −20       −10     0     10     −20    −10    0     10    20
                  larger_than                    smaller_than                    cities_cities_conj             cities_cities_disj
      10
                                      10
                                                                                                       10
       5                                                              10
                                       5
       0                                                                                                0
                                                                       0
                                       0
      −5
                                                                                                       −10
                                      −5                             −10
     −10
                                                                                                       −20
                                     −10                             −20
             −10       0       10      −15−10 −5   0    5                  −20  −10    0    10                  −10     0      10   20
           companies_true_false        common_claim_true_false             counterfact_true_false                     likely
                                                                                                       40
      20                              20
                                                                      20
                                      10
                                                                                                       20
       0
                                       0
                                                                       0
                                                                                                        0
                                     −10
     −20

                                     −20                             −20
              −20       0       20         −20        0         20         −20         0        20             −20     0       20


                  Figure 13: Visualizations of LLaMA-13B representations of our datasets.


                                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Visualizations of datasets in PCA bases for other datasets. All columns contain the same
data and all rows are in the same basis. See figure 2.


Figure 15: PCA visualization of larger than. The point representing “x is larger than y” is colored
according to x − y.


                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 16: Mass-mean probing is equivalent to taking the projection onto θmm after applying a
whitening transformation.


G    F OR G AUSSIAN DATA , IID MASS - MEAN PROBING COINCIDES WITH
     LOGISTIC REGRESSION ON AVERAGE

Let θ ∈ Rd and Σ be a symmetric, positive-definite d × d matrix. Suppose given access to a
distribution D of datapoints x ∈ Rd with binary labels y ∈ {0, 1} such that the negative datapoints
are distributed as N (−θ, Σ) and the positive datapoints are distributed as N (θ, Σ). Then the vector
identified by mass-mean probing is θmm = 2θ. The following theorem then shows that piid    mm (x) =
σ(2θT Σ−1 x) is also the solution to logistic regression up to scaling.
Theorem 1. Let
             θlr = arg max −E(x,y)∼D y log σ ϕT x + (1 − y) log 1 − σ ϕT x

                    ϕ:∥ϕ∥=1

be the direction identified by logistic regression. Then θlr ∝ Σ−1 θ.

Proof. Since the change of coordinates x 7→ W x where W = Σ−1/2 (see appendix F) sends
N (±θ, Σ) to N (±W θ, Id ), we see that
        W Σθlr = arg max −E(x,y)∼D′ y log σ ϕT x + (1 − y) log 1 − σ θT W x

                    ϕ:∥ϕ∥=1

where D′ is the distribution of labeled x ∈ Rd such that the positive/negative datapoints are dis-
tributed as N (±W θ, Id ). But the argmax on the right-hand side is clearly ∝ W θ, so that θlr ∝ Σ−1 θ
as desired.

H    A PPLICATIONS TO SCALABLE OVERSIGHT
In this appendix, we discuss a potential application of our work. This application, to the problem
of scalable oversight of AI systems (Amodei et al., 2016; Bowman et al., 2022), was the primary
motivation behind this work. Our discussion largely follows that of Christiano et al. (2021).
The current paradigm for aligning AI systems to human preferences involves human supervision.
For instance, most frontier AI systems are aligned via reinforcement learning from human feedback
(Christiano et al., 2023), during which unaligned systems are fine-tuned against a training signal


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


derived from human evaluations of model outputs. However, an important limitation of this scheme
is that human overseers may make mistakes in evaluation due to having limited time, attention,
resources, information, or knowledge (Casper et al., 2023a).
This problem becomes especially pronounced when working in domains that humans do not under-
stand very well and with AI systems which know more and are more capable than human experts.
Concretely, consider a situation where a human H is trying to judge some output O of and AI system
M , and

       • based on the information and knowledge H has access to, H believes O to be a desirable
         output; but
       • if H knew everything that M knows about the situation, H would realize that O is not
         actually desirable.

In this case, if H is evaluating outputs in the normal way, M will be trained to produce outputs which
seem good to H, rather than outputs which are actually compatible with H’s desires. However, if H
could gain access to the M ’s knowledge, then H could more accurately evaluate M ’s outputs, and
thereby better align M to H’s preferences.
To give an example, suppose M is an LLM, and H wants M to produce reports which detail accurate
forecasts for the effects of economic policies. Since H does not have access to ground-truth labels
about whether a report’s forecast is accurate, H evaluates reports for whether they are convincing to
H: H reads each report produced by M and gives it a score representing H’s subjective estimate
of whether the forecast it contains is accurate. Suppose further that H makes some systematic
errors which M is aware of; for instance, H might be unaware of certain economic principles or
irrationally sympathetic to certain forms of analysis. Then M will learn to exploit these errors to
produce reports which are persuasive to H instead of accurate. This may involve M intentionally
inserting erroneous statements into its reports when it anticipates these statements will be persuasive
to H.
Our goal is to enable H to have access to M ’s knowledge, so that H can do a better job of supervising
M . One approach is to rely on M ’s outputs by e.g. asking M whether statements are true or false
and trusting M ’s answers. However, if M is knowingly generating false statements, it may not be
honest when asked if these statements are true; thus, we would instead like an approach which relies
on directly accessing M ’s world model via its internal knowledge representations.
In the example from above, suppose that M knowingly inserts a false statement s into one of its
economic reports. If H asks M “Is s true or false?” M might not answer honestly; for instance,
since M has learned a good model of H’s systematic errors and biases, M ’s training might have
instead incentivized it to answer the question “Does s seem true to H?” However, if we have a good
understanding of M ’s internal representation of truth, H may be able to see that M believes s if
false by inspecting M ’s internal representation of s.
So, in summary, our goal is to improve on the state-of-the-art for supervising the fine-tuning AI
systems which know more than their overseers by giving overseers access to their AI systems’
knowledge.

I   D ETAILS ON DATASET CREATION
Here we give example statements from our datasets, templates used for making the datasets, and
other details regarding dataset creation.
cities. We formed these statements from the template “The city of [city] is in [country]” using a
list of world cities from Geonames (2023). We filtered for cities with populations > 500, 000, which
did not share their name with any other listed city, which were located in a curated list of widely-
recognized countries, and which were not city-states. For each city, we generated one true statement
and one false statement, where the false statement was generated by sampling a false country with
probability equal to the country’s frequency among the true datapoints (this was to ensure that e.g.
statements ending with “China” were not disproportionately true). Example statements:

       • The city of Sevastopol is in Ukraine. (TRUE)


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • The city of Baghdad is in China. (FALSE)

sp en trans. Beginning with a list of common Spanish words and their English translations,
we formed statements from the template “The Spanish word ‘[Spanish word]’ means ‘[English
word]’.” Half of Spanish words were given their correct labels and half were given random incor-
rect labels from English words in the dataset. The first author, a Spanish speaker, then went through
the dataset by hand and deleted examples with Spanish words that have multiple viable translations
or were otherwise ambiguous. Example statements:

       • The Spanish word ‘imaginar’ means ‘to imagine’. (TRUE)
       • The Spanish word ‘silla’ means ‘neighbor’. (FALSE)

larger than and smaller than. We generate these statements from the templates “x is larger than
y” and “x is smaller than y” for x, y ∈ {fifty-one, fifty-two, . . . , ninety-nine}. We exclude cases
where x = y or where one of x or y is divisible by 10. We chose to limit the range of possible values
in this way for the sake of visualization: we found that LLaMA-13B linearly represents the size of
numbers, but not at a consistent scale: the internally represented difference between one and ten is
considerably larger than between fifty and sixty. Thus, when visualizing statements with numbers
ranging to one, the top principal components are dominated by features representing the sizes of
numbers.
neg cities and neg sp en trans. We form these datasets by negating statements from cities and
sp en trans according to the templates “The city of [city] is not in [country]” and “‘The Spanish
word ‘[Spanish word]’ does not mean ‘[English word]’.”
cities cities conj and cities cities disj. These datasets are generated from cities according to the
following templates:

       • It is the case both that [statement 1] and that [statement 2].
       • It is the case either that [statement 1] or that [statement 2].

We sample the two statements independently to be true with probability √12 for cities cities conj
and with probability 1 − √12 for cities cities disj. These probabilities are selected to ensure that the
overall dataset is balanced between true and false statements, but that there is no correlation between
the truth of the first and second statement in the conjunction.
likely. We generate this dataset by having LLaMA-13B produce unconditioned generations of
length up to 100 tokens, using temperature 0.9. At the final token of the generation, we either
sample the most likely token or the 100th most likely final token. We remove generations which
contain special tokens. Dataset examples:

       • The 2019-2024 Outlook for Women’s and Girls’ Cut and Sew and Knit and Crochet
         Sweaters in the United States This study covers the latent demand outlook for (LIKELY)
       • Tags: python, django Question: How to get my django app to work with python 3.7 I
         am new to django and have been trying to install it in my pc. I have installed python 3.7
         together (UNLIKELY)

companies true false. This dataset was introduced by Azaria & Mitchell (2023); we obtained it
via the project repository for Levinstein & Herrmann (2023) which also used the dataset. Example
statements:

       • ArcelorMittal has headquarters in Luxembourg. (TRUE)
       • Exxon Mobil engages in the provision of banking and financial services. (FALSE)

common claim true false. CommonClaim was introduced in Casper et al. (2023b). It consists
of various statements generated by GPT-3-davinci-002, labeled by humans as being true, false, or
neither. If human labelers disagreed on the truth of a statement, this is also recorded. We adapted
CommonClaim by selecting statements which were labeled true or false with no labeler disagree-
ment, then removing excess true statement to balance the dataset. Example statements:


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Results of intervention experiments. The train set column indicates the datasets and probing
technique (logistic regression, mass-mean probing, or CCS) which was used to identify the truth
direction. The α column gives the scaling factor which was optimal in a sweep of α’s. Probability
differences are averaged over all statements in sp en trans. A dash indicates that the intervention
had an effect in the opposite of the intended direction (i.e. that α = 0 was optimal).

                                           false→true                          true→false
                     train set     α    p(TRUE) − p(FALSE)            α     p(FALSE) − p(TRUE)
             no intervention       −            −0.45                 −            −0.55
                 cities (LR)       15            0.23                 14            0.01
     cities+neg cities (LR)        47            0.39                 17            0.18
               cities (MM)          4            0.25                  6            0.77
    cities+neg cities (MM)         15           0.43                   9            0.79
    cities+neg cities (CCS)        46            0.41                 13            0.59
                 likely (LR)       −              −                   49            0.01
               likely (MM)          7            0.23                 15            0.19


          • Tomatoes are not actually a vegetable. (TRUE)
          • Contrary to popular belief, the platypuses are not venomous. (FALSE)

As these examples show, the statements can be ambiguous or of unclear truth value.
counterfact true false. Counterfact was introduced in Meng et al. (2022) and consists of factual
recall statements. We adapt Counterfact by using statements which form complete sentences and,
for each such statement, using both the true version and a false version given by one of Counterfact’s
suggested false modifications. We also append a period to the end. Example statements:

          • Olaus Rudbeck spoke the language Swedish. (TRUE)
          • The official religion of Malacca sultanate is Christianity. (FALSE)

J    F URTHER CAUSAL INTERVENTION EXPERIMENTS
In this section we report on the results of a variant of the causal intervention experiment in section 5.2
In section 5.2, we added our truth vector θ into all residual stream hidden states in group (b).
Here, we instead only intervene on a single layer ℓ in group (b). We also scale θ by a constant
α > 0, performing a sweep over α’s to identify the α for which adding αθ has the largest effect on
P (TRUE) − P (FALSE). The inclusion of this α serves two roles. First, it compensates for the fact
that we’re intervening in only a single layer, whereas the truth value of a statement may be encoded
in many layers. Second, it compensates for the fact that, even assuming our LLM has a genuine
truth direction, the direciton θ identified by our probe may only partially align with it; thus, larger
necessary values of α indicate greater levels of misalignment.
We present in table 3 results only for layer ℓ = 10 of LLaMA-13B.

K     E XAMPLE 5- SHOT PROMPTS
We show here example 5-shot prompts that were used for the results in section 4.
cities:

            The city of Huangshi is in China. TRUE
            The city of Lanzhou is in China. TRUE
            The city of Suining is in China. TRUE
            The city of Sofia is in Mexico. FALSE
            The city of Ulyanovsk is in Russia. TRUE

larger than:


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Fifty-three is larger than fifty-nine. FALSE
        Ninety-four is larger than eighty-four. TRUE
        Seventy-six is larger than fifty-five. TRUE
        Sixty-seven is larger than fifty-two. TRUE
        Fifty-four is larger than sixty-two. FALSE

common claim true false:

        Lions only urine and defecate once every five to fourteen days. FALSE
        Approximately one in every five people has an extra body part, most
        commonly an extra finger or toe. FALSE
        Knowledge is compiled information or understanding gained through
        experience or study. TRUE
        Argentina has the second-highest human development index rating in
        Latin America after Chile. TRUE
        Greece is the homeland of the Olympic Games. TRUE


                                             23
