Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NRAVELING THE E NIGMA OF D OUBLE D ESCENT:
A N I N - DEPTH A NALYSIS THROUGH THE L ENS OF
L EARNED F EATURE S PACE
 Yufei Gu1,3∗, Xiaoqing Zheng1,2 , and Tomaso Aste3
 1
   School of Computer Science, Fudan University
 2
   Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
 3
   Department of Computer Science, University College London
 {yufei.gu.20, t.aste}@ucl.ac.uk, zhengxq@fudan.edu.cn



                                                  A BSTRACT

             Double descent presents a counter-intuitive aspect within the machine learning
             domain, and researchers have observed its manifestation in various models and
             tasks. While some theoretical explanations have been proposed for this phe-
             nomenon in specific contexts, an accepted theory for its occurring mechanism
             in deep learning remains yet to be established. In this study, we revisit the
             phenomenon of double descent and demonstrate that the presence of noisy data
             strongly influences its occurrence. By comprehensively analysing the feature
             space of learned representations, we unveil that double descent arises in imper-
             fect models trained with noisy data. We argue that while small and intermedi-
             ate models before the interpolation threshold follow the traditional bias-variance
             trade-off, over-parameterized models interpolate noisy samples among robust
             data thus acquiring the capability to separate the information from the noise.
             The source code is available at https://github.com/Yufei-Gu-451/
             double_descent_inference.git.


1       I NTRODUCTION

As a well-known property of machine learning, the bias-variance trade-off suggested that the vari-
ance of the parameter estimated across samples can be reduced by increasing the bias in the es-
timated parameters (Geman et al., 1992). When a model is under-parameterized, there exists a
combination of high bias and low variance. Under this circumstance, the model becomes trapped
in under-fitting, signifying its inability to grasp the fundamental underlying structures present in the
data. When a model is over-parameterized, there exists a combination of low bias and high variance.
This is usually due to the model over-fitting noisy and unrepresentative data in the training set. Tra-
ditional statistical intuition suggests a difficulty in reducing bias and variance simultaneously and
advises finding a ‘sweet spot’ between underfitting and overfitting. This conjugate property pre-
vents machine learning estimators from generalizing well beyond their dataset (Hastie et al., 2009).
However, modern machine learning practices have achieved remarkable success with the training of
highly parameterized sophisticated models that can precisely fit the training data (‘interpolate’ the
training set) while attaining impressive performance on unseen test data.
To reconcile this contradiction between the classical bias-variance trade-off theory and the modern
practice, Belkin et al. (2019) presented a unified generalization performance curve called ‘Double
Descent’. The novel theory posits that, with an increase in model width, the test error initially
follows the conventional ‘U-shaped curve’, reaching an interpolation threshold where the model
precisely fits the training data; Beyond this point, the error begins to decrease, challenging the tra-
ditional understanding and presenting a new perspective on model behavior. Similar behaviour was
previously observed in Vallet et al. (1989); Opper (1995; 2001), but it had been largely overlooked
until the double descent concept was formally raised.
    ∗
        This work was done during the author’s internship at Fudan University.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The double descent phenomenon is prevalent across various machine learning models. In the con-
text of linear models, a series of empirical and theoretical studies have emerged to analyze this phe-
nomenon (Bartlett et al., 2020; Loog et al., 2020; Belkin et al., 2020; Deng et al., 2022; Hastie et al.,
2022). In deep learning, many researchers have offered additional evidence supporting the presence
and prevalence of the double descent phenomenon across a broader range of deep learning models,
including CNNs, ResNets, and Transformers, in diverse experimental setups (Nakkiran et al., 2021;
Chang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022; Gamba et al., 2022). Nakkiran et al. (2021) specifically con-
cluded that this phenomenon is most pronounced when dealing with label noise in the training set,
while can manifest even without label noise for the first time. Despite the widely accepted empirical
observation of the double descent phenomenon within the domain of deep learning, comprehending
the underlying mechanism of this occurrence in deep neural networks continues to pose a significant
question.
It is well-known that deep neural networks accomplish end-to-end learning frameworks through
integrating feature learning with classifier training (Zhou, 2021). A neural network tailored for
classification tasks can be divided into two components. The initial segment is dedicated to a fea-
ture space transformation process by selecting information pertinent to the output while discarding
information associated with the input. Specifically, the conversion of the original feature space rep-
resented by the input layer to the final feature space represented by the final representation layer
is referred to as the learned feature space, which is shaped by the acquired representations within
fully-trained neural networks. The subsequent stage typically entails constructing a classifier based
on this learned feature space, intending to complete machine-learning tasks.
In this paper, we highlight the crucial role that noisy samples play in shaping the behaviour of
deep learning models through a comprehensive exploration of the interplay among model width,
noisy training data, and interpretation of the learned feature space. We demonstrated that while
small and intermediate models follow the traditional bias-variance trade-off, over-parameterized
models which passed the interpolation threshold, interpolate more correct training data around noisy
ones of matching classes. This phenomenon demonstrates a correlation with the double descent
phenomenon, and we propose that this is attributed to models acquiring the ability to effectively
‘isolate’ noise from the information in the training dataset. We posit that this phenomenon has not
been previously documented and could serve to elucidate the internal mechanism of double descent.
The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows. We proposed that there exists a
robust correlation between the neural network’s interpolation strategy of noisy data and the dou-
ble descent phenomenon. Utilizing the k-nearest neighbour algorithm, we indicate that this phe-
nomenon results from broader architectures genuinely interpolating noisy samples among correct
samples of the same original class, showcasing an enhanced capability to isolate noise information.
Through conducting experiments on various neural architectures trained on MNIST and CIFAR-10,
we demonstrated that the label prediction accuracy of noisy samples strongly aligns with the test per-
formance on unseen data. We believe our investigation can shed light on the mechanism by which
over-parameterization enhances generalization.


2   R ELATED W ORK

The initial proposal of the double descent phenomenon as a general concept was made by Belkin
et al. (2019) for increasing model size (model-wise). However, Nakkiran et al. (2021) have also
shown a similar trend w.r.t. size of the training dataset (sample-wise) and training time (epoch-
wise). The research further reports observation of all forms of double descent most strongly in
settings with label noise in the train set. While the double descent phenomenon is widely discussed
in these alternative perspectives, we focus our attention on the original model-wise phenomenon in
this work, briefed as ‘double descent’ in the subsequent discussion.
Double Descent has been shown as a robust phenomenon that occurs over diverse tasks, archi-
tectures, and optimization techniques. Subsequently, a substantial volume of research has been
conducted to investigate the double descent phenomenon regarding its mechanism. A stream of
theoretical literature has emerged, delving into the establishment of generalization bounds and con-
ducting asymptotic analyses, particularly focused on linear functions (Advani et al., 2020; Belkin
et al., 2020; Bartlett et al., 2020; Muthukumar et al., 2021; Mei & Montanari, 2022; Hastie et al.,
2022). Hastie et al. (2022) highlight that when the linear regression model is misspecified, the best


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


generalization performance can occur in the over-parameterized regime. Mei & Montanari (2022)
further concluded that the occurrence of the double descent phenomenon can be attributed to model
misspecification, which arises when there is a mismatch between the model structure and the model
family. While people believe the same intuition extends to deep learning as well, nevertheless, the
underlying mechanism still eludes a comprehensive understanding of ‘deep’ double descent.
The prevailing literature that explores the double descent phenomenon in deep neural networks
learning provides a range of explanations: bias-variance decomposition (Yang et al., 2020); samples
to parameters ratio (Belkin et al., 2020; Nakkiran et al., 2021); decision boundaries (Somepalli
et al., 2022); and the sharpless of interpolation (Gamba et al., 2022). While offering an extensive
array of experimental findings that replicate the double descent phenomenon, Nakkiran et al. (2021)
concluded that the emergence of double descent exhibits a robust correlation with the inclusion of
noisy labels in the training dataset. Somepalli et al. (2022) further studied the decision boundaries
of random data points and established a relationship between the fragmentation of class regions and
the double descent phenomenon. Recently, Chaudhary et al. (2023) revisited the phenomenon and
proposed that double descent may not inherently characterize deep learning.
Beyond the thorough examinations of double descent, an emerging theory of over-parameterized
machine learning (TOPML) is growing, seeking to elucidate the second ‘descent’ in the double
descent phenomenon (Dar et al., 2021). The inquiry posed by Zhou (2021) revolves around the
puzzling aspect of why over-parameterized models do not succumb to overfitting and focus on
the feature space transformation aspect. Chang et al. (2021) analytically identify regimes when
training over-parameterized networks and then pruning is preferable to training small models di-
rectly. Teague (2022) intriguingly explores the concept of implicit regularization arising from over-
parameterization and draws a connection between the generalization capacity and the geometric
properties of volumes within hyperspaces. The work by Liu et al. (2022) introduces a robust train-
ing method for over-parameterized deep networks in classification tasks, specifically when training
labels are corrupted. Although our research shares a thematic connection, our study concentrates
on the implicit mechanisms through which over-parameterized models acquire the ability to discern
and handle label noise. Consequently, our focus differs from their research.
In contrast to existing studies, our approach distinguishes itself by exploring the phenomenon
through the lens of the learned feature space generated by trained models. The most related works to
ours are the concurrent ones by Gamba et al. (2022), which measure sharpness at clean and noisily-
labeled data points and empirically showed that smooth interpolation emerging both for large over-
parameterized networks and trained large models confidently predicts the noisy training targets over
large volumes around each training point. While their study also entailed an analysis involving sep-
arate evaluations of clean and noisily labelled data points, we employed the k-nearest neighbour
algorithm to infer the inter-relationship between these two categories of training data in the learned
feature space and demonstrated that for over-parameterized models, noisy labelled data tends to be
classified alongside its genuine counterparts. Our approach suggests that the double descent phe-
nomenon is a consequence of deep learning models learning how to separate the noise from the
information in the training set.


3   M ETHODOLOGY

We first assess the contribution of data noise to the double descent phenomenon. Bartlett et al. (2020)
describes an intuitive way of understanding properties of significant over-parameterization in linear
regression: fitting the training data exactly but with near-optimal prediction accuracy occurs if and
only if there are many low-variance (and hence, unimportant) directions in parameter space where
the label noise can be hidden. While non-linear models are different from linear models in terms
of parameter space, we propose that neural networks approach optimal prediction through a similar
mechanism of concealing label noise. We hypothesize that the emergence of the double descent
phenomenon can be attributed to the progressively over-parameterized models effectively isolating
noisy data within the training set, thus diminishing the influence of interpolating these noisy data
points.
Since this proposition is inspired by Nakkiran et al. (2021)’s empirical conclusion, we initiate our
experimentation by replicating the double descent phenomenon as per the experimental framework
outlined by this paper. This approach offers a comprehensively manageable setup and establishes


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a comparative analysis of the phenomenon across diverse tasks and optimization techniques. With
an increasing ratio of label noise introduced to the training dataset, the test error peak at the inter-
polation threshold becomes evident, signifying a definite correlation with the pronounced double
descent phenomenon.

3.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We replicate the phenomenon of deep double descent across three frequently employed neural net-
work architectures: Fully Connected NNs, Standard CNNs, and ResNet18, following the experiment
setup of Nakkiran et al. (2021).

   • Fully Connected Neural Networks (FCNN): We adopt a simple two-layer fully connected
     neural network with varying width k on the first hidden layer, for k in the range of [1, 1000].
     The second fully connected layer is adopted as the classifier.
   • Standard Convolutional Networks (CNN): We consider a family of standard convolutional
     neural networks formed by 4 convolutional stages of controlled base width [k, 2k, 4k, 8k], for
     k in the range of [1, 64], along with a fully connected layer as the classifier. The MaxPool is
     [2, 2, 2, 4]. For all the convolution layers, the kernel size = 3, stride = 1, and padding = 1. This
     architecture implementation is adopted from Nakkiran et al. (2021).
   • Residual Neural Networks (ResNet18): We parameterize a family of ResNet18s from He
     et al. (2016) using 4 ResNet blocks, each consisting of two BatchNorm-ReLU-convolution
     layers. We scale the layer width (number of filters) of convolutional layers as [k, 2k, 4k, 8k]
     for a varied range of k within [1, 64] and the strides are [1, 2, 2, 2]. The implementation is
     adopted from https://github.com/kuangliu/pytorch-cifar.git.

We describe the experiment setup along with hyper-parameters we used in the training of all neural
architectures below. All networks are trained using the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) opti-
mizer with zero momentum and Cross-entropy Loss for evaluation. A separate learning rate scheme
is employed for different models: lr = √ 0.05       for FCNNs and lr = √ 0.05           for CNNs
                                           1+[epoch/50]                          1+[epoch∗10]
and ResNet18s. For every model, the learning rate starts with an initial value of 0.05 and updates
every 50 epochs. A batch size of 128 is employed, and no explicit data augmentation or regular-
ization techniques (including dropouts or pruning) are utilized in our experimental setup. Utilizing
a sequence of models trained under a uniform training scheme showcases the double descent phe-
nomenon across different models.

3.2   I NTRODUCTION OF L ABEL N OISE

While the presence of label errors has been established in the majority of commonly used bench-
marking datasets including MNIST and CIFAR-10 (Zhang, 2017; Northcutt et al., 2021b), to fa-
cilitate comparative analysis of our findings, we intentionally introduce explicit label noise. In
our experimental setup, label noise with probability p signifies that during training, samples are
assigned a uniformly random label with probability p, while possessing the correct label with prob-
ability (1 − p) otherwise. We interpret a neural network with input variable x ∈ Rd and learnable
parameter θ, incorporating all weights and biases. The training dataset is characterized as a collec-
tion of training points (xn , yn ), where n ranges from 1 to N . A training dataset with N data points
comprises m = p × N noise labelled data points and m̂ = (1 − p) × N clean data points.
It is important to note that the label noise is sampled only once and not per epoch, and this origi-
nal and random label information is stored before each experiment. Each experiment is replicated
multiple times, and the final result is obtained by averaging the outcomes. Owing to the presence
of inherent label errors, the probability p is solely employed to signify the extent of explicit label
noise and does not reflect the overall noise level present in the dataset. Our primary experimental
conclusion is drawn from comparing results obtained under a dataset with a relatively noisy level.

3.3   L EARNED F EATURE S PACE I NTERPRETATION S TRATEGY

Our primary research inquiry aims to gain insights into the diverse strategies employed by deep neu-
ral networks of various widths in interpolating noisy labelled data in classification tasks. Based on


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the existence of benign over-parameterization, we assume that test images, akin to training images
mislabeled, are more likely to be correctly classified by over-parameterized models. For instance,
we anticipate that an optimal classifier should yield accurate predictions for unseen images, even
if it was trained on similar images with an adversarial label. Thus, we further hypothesize that the
closest neighbours of mislabeled training images are correctly classified for a model with better
generalization performance. To validate our hypothesis, we adopted the k-nearest neighbour algo-
rithm with cosine similarity to interpret the relative locations of clean and noisy labelled data in the
learned feature space. This methodology allows us to delineate the prediction strategy through an in-
direct approach and subsequently compare our findings with the overall generalization performance
of these pre-trained models.
We consider L-layer neural networks, while representations on each layer are represented by fl (X),
for l = [1, ..., L]. Our investigation centred on the penultimate layer representations before clas-
sification denoted as fL−1 (X). Acknowledging the difficulties of interpreting high-dimensional
feature spaces, our approach mainly entails characterizing the relative positioning of training data
points. This involves establishing a connection between the hidden features of noisy data points in
the learned feature space and their k-nearest neighbours within the complementary subset of clean
data. So we calculate the prediction accuracy P of mislabeled training data and the majority of its
nearest neighbours in feature space are in the same class:
                                       Pm
                                               [yi = M (fL−1 (xi,1 ), . . . , fL−1 (xi,k ))]
                               P = i=1                                                       ,                 (1)
                                                              m
In this context, (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xm , ym ) denotes the subset of noisy training data with original labels,
and (xi,1 , yi,1 ), . . . , (xi,m̂ , yi,m̂ )) denotes the subset of clean training data as neighbours to xi for
                                                                                A·B
all i = [1, . . . , m]. Given the cosine similarity SC (A, B) := ∥A∥∥B∥                between two representations
A and B, let fL−1 (xi,1 ), . . . , fL−1 (xi,m̂ ) be a reordering of the representations of the clean training
data such that SC (fL−1 (xi ), fL−1 (xi,1 )) ≤ · · · ≤ SC (fL−1 (xi ), fL−1 (xi,m̂ )). The closest k neigh-
bours are selected, and a Majority function M (fL−1 (xi,1 ), . . . , fL−1 (xi,k )) describes the procedure
for making predictions based on the majority label among the k-nearest neighbours. The predictions
are subsequently compared with the original labels of noisy data, and P denotes the proportion of
accurate predictions among all the noisy data.
In line with our hypothesis, the prediction accuracy P is indicative of the neural architecture’s in-
terpolation approach toward these noisy labelled data points. Due to the uncertain distribution of
data and their representations, the k-NN method functions solely as an estimation technique, and
our comparison focuses on variations in P .
In the next section, we present our empirical study and results of the learned feature space interpre-
tation for trained neural networks of various widths in relationship to double descent.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present our experiment results with a variety of neural architectures of increasing
size trained for image classification tasks on either MNIST or CIFAR-10 datasets.

4.1   MNIST

We commence our exploration by revisiting one of the earliest experiments that revealed the pres-
ence of the double descent phenomenon, as presented in the work of Belkin et al. (2019). This
experiment involved the training of a basic two-layer FCNN on a dataset comprising 4000 samples
from the MNIST dataset (N = 4000). When zero label noise (p = 0%) is introduced, as depicted
in Figure.1(a), both the train and the test error curve decrease monotonically with increasing model
width. The training error exhibits a faster decline and approaches zero at approximately k = 15,
indicating the occurrence of an interpolation threshold under these conditions. The test error still
decreases after this interpolation threshold, demonstrating a benign over-parameterization. This no-
ticeable alteration in the shape of the test error curve at the interpolation threshold may be attributed
to the intrinsic label errors of MNIST (Northcutt et al., 2021a).
With label noise (p = 10%/20%) introduced in the training dataset, a more distinguishable test error
peak starts to form around the interpolation threshold as shown in Figure.1(b, c). Starting with small


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   ‘ (a) FCNN on MNIST (p = 0%)       (b) FCNN on MNIST (p = 10%)       (c) FCNN on MNIST (p = 20%)


Figure 1: The phenomenon of double descent on two-layer FCNNs trained on MNIST (N = 4000),
under varying explicit label noise ratios of p = [0%, 10%, 20%] and the prediction accuracy of noisy
labelled data denoted as P when p > 0. Optimized with SGD for 4000 epochs and decreasing
learning rate. The test error curve of p = [10%, 20%] performs the double descent phenomenon
and the prediction accuracy P of in-context noisy data learning showed a correlation generalization
performance beyond context.


models, the test error curve exhibits a U-shaped pattern in the first half and the bias-variance trade-
off is reached at the bottom of the U-shaped curve. The decrease of both train and test error before
this bias-variance trade-off indicates the model undergoes an under-fitting stage. With the expansion
of the model size, the model transitions into an overfitting regime, leading to a peak in the test error
around the interpolation threshold, while the train error converges to 0. Finally, after surpassing
this test error peak, the testing loss experiences a decline once more, showcasing how highly over-
parameterized models can ultimately yield improved generalization performance. This intriguing
behaviour is referred to as double descent. As the test loss undergoes a pattern of first decreasing,
then increasing, and finally decreasing again, the test accuracy exhibits the opposite trend, i.e., first
increasing, then decreasing, and then increasing once more. As Nakkiran et al. (2021) reported, the
test loss peak is positively correlated with the label noise ratio p. In other words, as the label noise
ratio increases, the peak in the test loss also tends to increase accordingly.
To comprehend the influence of noisy labelled data on the variation of the learned model during the
double descent phenomenon, we examine the percentage P of noisy data, and the majority of its
nearest neighbours in feature space are in the same class. In this experiment setup, as depicted in
Figure.1(b, c), the trajectory of the P curve follows the pattern observed in the test accuracy curve,
indicating a consistent alignment between the two. When test loss first decreases as the model ex-
pands, test accuracy and P both rise. With the introduction of label noise, test accuracy decreases
while P fluctuates around 70%. When passing the interpolation threshold, both the test accuracy and
P significantly rise to 85% and nearly 100%, substantially affirming the validity of our hypothesis.
In the meantime, the trend of test loss is opposite to both test accuracy and P , while changing cor-
respondingly before and after the interpolation threshold. The computation of percentage P relies
solely on the training dataset and does not incorporate unseen data. Consequently, this percent-
age P may be regarded as a weak predictor of generalization performance, though it necessitates
knowledge of the distribution between clean and noisy data.
Recall that the noisy data points will be predicted based on their randomly assigned labels during
this stage as the model fully interpolates the training set, we interpret the ascending P curve in
the over-parameterized region as a valid ‘isolation’ of the noisy labelled data in the learned feature
space. When the neural network positions the learned representation of noisy data points closer to
the class associated with their ‘incorrect’ labels, it results in lower P prediction accuracy. Under
these circumstances, similar test samples also tend to be predicted incorrectly due to the influence
of these noisy labels. If the neural network successfully identifies the underlying data patterns and
interpolates the correct samples around noisy data points, the prediction accuracy P will be high by


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


nearby class members. Consequently, test samples resembling the noisy training data have a higher
likelihood of being accurately identified due to their proximity to the interpolated surrounding clean
data points and becoming less susceptible to the influence of the ‘isolated’ noisy labelled data. This
explanation accounts for the improved generalization performance for over-parameterized models.

4.2   CIFAR-10


   (a) CNN on CIFAR-10 (p = 0%)     (b) CNN on CIFAR-10 (p = 10%)     (c) CNN on CIFAR-10 (p = 20%)


Figure 2: The phenomenon of double descent on five-layer CNNs trained on CIFAR-10 (N =
50000), under varying label noise ratios of p = [0%, 10%, 20%] and the prediction accuracy of
noisy labelled data denoted as P when p > 0. Optimized with SGD for 200 epochs and decreasing
learning rate. The test error curve of p = [0%, 10%, 20%] performs the double descent phenomenon
and the prediction accuracy P of in-context noisy data learning showed a correlation generalization
performance beyond context.

After a baseline case of deep learning with FCNNs on MNIST, we extended the experiment results
to image classification on CIFAR-10, using two famous neural network architectures: CNN and
ResNet. We first visit the experiment when the complete CIFAR-10 dataset (N = 50000) with zero
explicit label noise (p = 0%) is trained with five-layer CNNs: we observe that in Figure.4.2(a), a
proposed double descent peak arises around the interpolation threshold. We posit that the variance in
observations could stem from a higher ratio of label errors in CIFAR-10 compared to MNIST, as sug-
gested by research estimates (Zhang, 2017; Northcutt et al., 2021b). Nevertheless, when additional
label noise (p = 10%/20%) is introduced, the test error peak still increases accordingly, proving
the positive correlation between noise and double descent according to Figure.4.2(b,c). While label
noise increases the difficulties of models fitting the train set and shifts the interpolation threshold
rightwards, the test error peak also shifts correspondingly.
When we review the noisy labelled data prediction test in the learned feature space, we can also
observe an aligned correlation between the trend of generalization performance and prediction accu-
racy P . When test accuracy first increases and then decreases as the model expands, P rises to about
60% and then decreases before the threshold when the peak of test error arises. Then, as the test
error reduces and test accuracy rises, the P curve rises again to about 60% for over-parameterized
models. The observed correlation between the trend of test loss and P remains consistent. The
same conclusion can be derived from the experiment context Figure.3 of ResNet18s trained on the
sample task. An important observation is that the prediction accuracy P demonstrated in the learn-
ing experiments of CIFAR-10 is significantly lower compared to those on MNIST. We attribute this
variance to the intricate feature space representations, which are more challenging to capture us-
ing cosine similarities. Our analysis focused more on how the interpolation strategy varied across
the same neural architecture of different widths, and the k-NN methodology can only serve as an
interpretation technique.
In conclusion, by constructing P to represent the distribution of noisy labelled training data in the
learned feature space, we propose that this k-NN prediction ability of the model is connected to the
size of the model in the same way with double descent. Furthermore, We suggest that this correlation


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


can be attributed to the model’s interpolation of correct samples around the noise labels, effectively
isolating the misleading effect of the latter.


    (a) ResNet18 on CIFAR-10 (p = 0%)   (b) ResNet18 on CIFAR-10 (p = 10%)   (c) ResNet18 on CIFAR-10 (p = 20%)


Figure 3: The phenomenon of double descent on ResNet18s trained on CIFAR-10 (N = 50000),
under varying label noise of p = [0%, 10%, 20%] and the prediction accuracy P when p > 0.
Optimized with SGD for 200 epochs and decreasing learning rate. The test error curve under p =
[0%, 10%, 20%] performs the double descent phenomenon and the prediction accuracy P of in-
context noisy data learning showed a correlation to the generalization performance beyond context.



5    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we have studied the feature space of learned representations projected by various neu-
ral networks. By analyzing the behaviour of the model when achieving a perfect fit on the training
set, we observe that: as the model’s complexity and capacity increase, there is clear and distinctive
isolation of noisy data points within their original ‘class-mates’ in the learned feature space. This
intriguing observation indicates that broader neural networks interpolate correct samples through-
out the vicinity of noisy samples in the learned feature space, effectively ’isolating’ the impact of
introduced label noise without explicit regularization techniques. We believe this implicit property
plays a significant role in understanding how over-parameterization enhances generalization. We
posit that the mechanism behind this phenomenon can be attributed to two key factors. First, the
gradient descent optimization algorithm endeavours to strike a perfect balance among training data
points to minimize the loss function, which can lead to the isolation of noisy data points. Second, the
characteristics of high-dimensional space may facilitate a beneficial separation of noisy data points
from clean data in the learned feature space.
From the perspective of this paper, the observed double decent phenomenon is associated with im-
perfect models, first behaving as predicted by the classical learning theory and increasing their error
on the test set until they reach full interpolation on the train set. Then, they make use of the extra
parameters above the interpolation point to better separate noise from information. We intentionally
referred to ‘imperfect models’ because we claim that double descent should not be observable in
perfect learners where perfect regularization should eliminate the effect. From our perspective, the
double descent phenomenon is strictly related to imperfect models learning from noisy data.
Let’s expand on this by restricting our considerations to supervised learning for classification prob-
lems: For an ideal training set with full information (no noise and no missing cases), a learner will
learn the exact model at the interpolation point where the train set is exactly classified and the error
becomes zero. In this case, at interpolation, also the test set will be exactly classified because the
learner has learned the exact map. Before that interpolation, the error decreases with every new
example. Clearly, this system does not show any double descent. At the interpolation point, the
number of model parameters is approximately equal to the number of examples in the complete
train set (i.e. the model is the matching table).


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Interpolation:                         Noise isolation:                                        Interpolation:                              Noise isolation:
                                           noisy data are fitted                  noisy data are                         more noise       noisy data are fitted                       noisy data are
                                                                                  detected and isolated                                                                               detected and isolated
 Error


                                                                                                              Error
                                                                                                                         less noise

                                                                                                                                           Im
                                                                                                                                             pe
                                                                                                                                                  rfe
                                                                                                                                                        ct l
                                                                                                                                                            ear
                                       well regu                                                                                                                  ne
                                                   larized Im                                                                                                          rs
                                                             perfect le
                                                                          arner
         noise        Perfect
                                learners
         no noise

                 # model parameters ≃ # examples            # model parameters > # examples                           # model parameters ≃ # examples                   # model parameters > # examples

                                    Model complexity                                                                                   Model complexity


Figure 4: Exemplification of the emergence of the double descent effect in the perspective of the
present paper. Starting from the bottom of the left panel: 1. the perfect learner, in the absence
of noise, will learn the perfect model containing several parameters approximately equal to the
number of significant examples; 2. in the presence of noise, the perfect learner needs to learn also to
distinguish information from noise and it will learn a perfect model with several parameters which
is higher the number of noisy examples; 3. the imperfect learner with optimal regularization will
learn a well-performing model which distinguishes information from noise using several parameters
which is higher the number of examples but should not show double descent peak. On the right
panel: 4. the imperfect learner with sub-optimal regularization will learn a well-performing model
first interpolating noise and signal and then learning to distinguish information from noise using
several parameters which is higher the number of examples showing the double descent peak; 5. the
larger is the noise, the higher the double descent peak is, and the larger is the number of parameters
needed to distinguish information from noise.



In the presence of noise, the learner cannot learn the full map by interpolation. Indeed, the bias-
variance trade-off predicts a U-shaped performance curve with first the learner increasing out-of-
sample performances from digesting examples and then losing performances by trying to fit the
in-sample noisy data. However, a learner who makes good use of regularization can do better and
learn how to account for uncertainty. Likely, the number of model parameters needed to learn both
the underlying map and to handle the noise is larger than the number of parameters needed to learn
only the map in the ideal case without noise (the interpolation point). If the model is a perfect
learner with perfect regularization, we do not expect the manifestation of any double descent, but
rather a gradual improvement in out-of-sample performances with the number of parameters until a
saturation point is reached where performances cannot be improved without further examples. We
expect that this saturation point should occur at a number of parameters larger than the interpolation
point. Double descent is instead observed for imperfect learners who at first try to interpolate the
noise and then start an intrinsic regularization via over-parameterization. Our particular model of
the emergence of the double descent phenomenon is illustrated In Fig. 4.
While the present study provides valuable insights into the mechanisms leading to the occurrence
of the double descent phenomenon, a comprehensive theoretical framework is yet to be developed.
Further investigations are needed to unravel the intricate details and offer a deeper understanding of
this intriguing phenomenon. Another aspect that warrants attention is the impact of the architectures
of deep neural networks. Studies have demonstrated that neural networks exhibit diverse behaviours
based on their depth and width, even when the total number of parameters is identical. It piques
our curiosity to investigate whether this variation in network shape could influence the underlying
mechanisms of the double descent phenomenon. Another potential avenue for future exploration
could involve implicit sparsity. We have observed that feature representations tend to exhibit sparsity
in over-parameterized neural networks, particularly when dealing with high-dimensional feature
spaces.

Reproducibility Statement To facilitate reproducibility, we provide a detailed description of the
neural architectures and full training details including exact settings of hyper-parameters in Sec-
tion 3. Our code is provided publicly available at https://github.com/Yufei-Gu-451/
double_descent_inference.


                                                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the discussion with Siddharth Chaudhary, Joe Down, Nathan D’Souza,
and Huijie Yan, all UCL students who took part in the academic year 2022-23 to project COMP0031.
With them, we had invaluable discussions and great inspiration. This paper originated from that
project and would not have been conceived without it. Please see Chaudhary et al. (2023) for
the reference to that work. The author, T.A., acknowledges partial financial support from ESRC
(ES/K002309/1), EPSRC (EP/P031730/1), and EC (H2020-ICT-2018-2 825215). X.Z. knowledges
partial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62076068).

R EFERENCES
Madhu S Advani, Andrew M Saxe, and Haim Sompolinsky. High-dimensional dynamics of gener-
 alization error in neural networks. Neural Networks, 132:428–446, 2020.
Peter L Bartlett, Philip M Long, Gábor Lugosi, and Alexander Tsigler. Benign overfitting in linear
  regression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30063–30070, 2020.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine-
 learning practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences, 116(32):15849–15854, 2019.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, and Ji Xu. Two models of double descent for weak features. SIAM
 Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 2(4):1167–1180, 2020.
Xiangyu Chang, Yingcong Li, Samet Oymak, and Christos Thrampoulidis. Provable benefits of
  overparameterization in model compression: From double descent to pruning neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 6974–6983, 2021.
Siddharth Chaudhary, Joe Down, Nathan D’Souza, Yufei Gu, and Huijie Yan. Parameter-wise dou-
  ble descent-a unified model or not? Available at SSRN 4469495, 2023.
Yehuda Dar, Vidya Muthukumar, and Richard G Baraniuk. A farewell to the bias-variance
  tradeoff? an overview of the theory of overparameterized machine learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.02355, 2021.
Zeyu Deng, Abla Kammoun, and Christos Thrampoulidis. A model of double descent for high-
  dimensional binary linear classification. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 11(2):
  435–495, 2022.
Matteo Gamba, Erik Englesson, Mårten Björkman, and Hossein Azizpour. Deep double descent via
 smooth interpolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10080, 2022.
Stuart Geman, Elie Bienenstock, and René Doursat. Neural networks and the bias/variance dilemma.
  Neural computation, 4(1):1–58, 1992.
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome H Friedman, and Jerome H Friedman. The elements of
  statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction, volume 2. Springer, 2009.
Trevor Hastie, Andrea Montanari, Saharon Rosset, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Surprises in high-
  dimensional ridgeless least squares interpolation. Annals of statistics, 50(2):949, 2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Sheng Liu, Zhihui Zhu, Qing Qu, and Chong You. Robust training under label noise by over-
  parameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 14153–14172. PMLR,
  2022.
Marco Loog, Tom Viering, Alexander Mey, Jesse H Krijthe, and David MJ Tax. A brief prehistory of
 double descent. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(20):10625–10626, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Song Mei and Andrea Montanari. The generalization error of random features regression: Precise
  asymptotics and the double descent curve. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics,
  75(4):667–766, 2022.
Vidya Muthukumar, Adhyyan Narang, Vignesh Subramanian, Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, and
  Anant Sahai. Classification vs regression in overparameterized regimes: Does the loss function
  matter? The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):10104–10172, 2021.
Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak, and Ilya Sutskever. Deep
  double descent: Where bigger models and more data hurt. Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
  Theory and Experiment, 2021(12):124003, 2021.
Curtis Northcutt, Lu Jiang, and Isaac Chuang. Confident learning: Estimating uncertainty in dataset
  labels. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 70:1373–1411, 2021a.
Curtis G Northcutt, Anish Athalye, and Jonas Mueller. Pervasive label errors in test sets destabilize
  machine learning benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14749, 2021b.
Manfred Opper. Statistical mechanics of learning: Generalization. The handbook of brain theory
 and neural networks, pp. 922–925, 1995.
Manfred Opper. Learning to generalize. Frontiers of Life, 3(part 2):763–775, 2001.
Gowthami Somepalli, Liam Fowl, Arpit Bansal, Ping Yeh-Chiang, Yehuda Dar, Richard Baraniuk,
  Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. Can neural nets learn the same model twice? investigating
  reproducibility and double descent from the decision boundary perspective. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13699–13708, 2022.
Nicholas J Teague.    Geometric regularization from overparameterization.            arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.09276, 2022.
F Vallet, J-G Cailton, and Ph Refregier. Linear and nonlinear extension of the pseudo-inverse solu-
  tion for learning boolean functions. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 9(4):315, 1989.
Zitong Yang, Yaodong Yu, Chong You, Jacob Steinhardt, and Yi Ma. Rethinking bias-variance trade-
  off for generalization of neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  10767–10777. PMLR, 2020.
Xinbin Zhang. A method of data label checking and the wrong labels in mnist and cifar10. Available
  at SSRN 3072167, 2017.
Zhi-Hua Zhou. Why over-parameterization of deep neural networks does not overfit? Science China
  Information Sciences, 64:1–3, 2021.


A     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
A.1   S CALING OF M ODEL PARAMETERIZATION

The scaling of model parameterization to the universal layer width unit K is shown in Figure.5.
In our experiment results, we labelled the x-axis scale as the model width parameter k instead of
the scaling of parameterization. However, we believe this labelling does not impact our conclusion
because of the monotonic relationship between these two factors.

A.2   M ODEL P ERFORMANCE IN THE P RESENCE OF H IGH L ABEL N OISE

Here, we provided two additional experiment results when a high label noise ratio p = 40% is
introduced to the training dataset of MNIST and CIFAR-10 that, due to page limitations, could
not be included in the main context. Noise has a substantial impact on the model’s classification
accuracy, leading to a reduction in test accuracy. It is evident that the prediction accuracy curve P
exhibits significant instability when subjected to a high percentage of noisy samples, with correct
samples becoming sparser in the learned feature space. However, the correlation between P and
generalization performance remains consistent.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          ‘ (a) FCNN                  (b) Five-layer CNNs                 (c) ResNet18s

Figure 5: Scaling of the number of parameters as model size with layer width unit k of the three
neural architectures used in our experiments in the Methodology section ??. We apply a logarithmic
scale to the parameter counts P of all neural architectures.


          ‘ (a) FCNN on MNIST (p = 40%)             (b) CNN on CIFAR-10 (p = 40%)

Figure 6: The phenomenon of double descent and the prediction accuracy P when a high label
noise of p = 40% is introduced on the training dataset.


                                               12
