Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C USTOM N ET: Z ERO - SHOT O BJECT C USTOMIZATION
WITH VARIABLE -V IEWPOINTS IN T EXT- TO -I MAGE
D IFFUSION M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



Object Image


                   In the office                  On the beach                     On purple rug


     Multiple Object Images

Figure 1: We proposed CustomNet, a zero-shot customization method that can generate harmonious
customized images with explicit viewpoint, location, and background controls simultaneously, while
ensuring identity preservation.
                                          A BSTRACT
         Incorporating a customized object into image generation presents an attractive
         feature in text-to-image generation. However, existing optimization-based and
         encoder-based methods are hindered by drawbacks such as time-consuming opti-
         mization, insufficient identity preservation, and a prevalent copy-pasting effect. To
         overcome these limitations, we introduce CustomNet, a novel object customiza-
         tion approach that explicitly incorporates 3D novel view synthesis capabilities
         into the object customization process. This integration facilitates the adjustment
         of spatial position relationships and viewpoints, yielding diverse outputs while ef-
         fectively preserving object identity. Moreover, we introduce intricate designs to
         enable location control and flexible background control through textual descrip-
         tions or specific user-defined images, overcoming the limitations of existing 3D
         novel view synthesis methods. We further leverage a dataset construction pipeline
         that can better handle real-world objects and complex backgrounds. Equipped
         with these designs, our method facilitates zero-shot object customization with-


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         out test-time optimization, offering simultaneous control over the location, view-
         points, and background. As a result, our CustomNet ensures enhanced identity
         preservation and generates diverse, harmonious outputs.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recently, there has been an emerging trend of the diffusion model to become the new state-of-the-
art model in text-to-image (T2I) generation (Nichol et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022; Rombach et al., 2022). The society also applies extra diverse control conditions to the T2I
diffusion models (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023; Mou et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023d), such as layout,
style, and depth. Customization, as another control dimension in diffusion models, has received
significant attention. It allows users to incorporate objects from reference images into the generated
images while preserving their identities. Pioneering works such as Dreambooth (Ruiz et al., 2023)
and Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022) use a few images of the same object to finetune the diffu-
sion model parameters or learn concept word embeddings through an iterative optimization process.
Although these optimization-based techniques excel at maintaining object identity, they suffer from
certain drawbacks, such as time-consuming optimization and a tendency to overfit when only a
single image is provided.
Consequently, researchers have started exploring encoder-based methods (Yang et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2023d;a; Wei et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b). These methods only require training an encoder
to explicitly represent visual concepts of objects. Once trained, the concept embeddings obtained by
encoding the image can be directly fed into the denoising process during inference, achieving a speed
comparable to the standard diffusion model sampling process. However, simply injecting an image
into a compressed concept embedding often leads to inadequate identity preservation (Yang et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023a). To address this issue, several methods have been proposed to enhance detail
preservation by introducing local features (Wei et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023) or spatial details (Chen
et al., 2023b). Despite these improvements, a closer examination of the results produced by these
methods reveals a prevalent copy-pasting effect, i.e., the objects in the synthesized image and source
image are identical. The only variations observed stem from basic data augmentations applied during
training, such as flipping and rotation. This limitation makes it difficult to achieve harmonized
results with the background and negatively impacts output diversity.
When generating images with customized objects, it is necessary to consider the spatial position
and viewpoint of the object in relation to the scene, i.e., the 3D properties of the object, in order to
achieve harmonious and diverse results. Following this guidance, we introduce CustomNet, a novel
object customization method that facilitates diverse viewpoints in text-to-image diffusion models.
Unlike previous encoder-based methods that either fail to maintain a strong object identity or suffer
from apparent copy-pasting effects, CustomNet explicitly controls the viewpoint of the customized
object. This capability results in diverse viewpoint outputs while effectively preserving identity.
The primary advantage of CustomeNet stems from its utilization of 3D novel view synthesis, which
allows for the prediction of outputs from other views based on a single image input. A representative
work on 3D novel view synthesis is Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al., 2023a), which employs the massive
synthetic 3D object dataset Objaverse (Deitke et al., 2023) with multiple views to train a viewpoint-
conditioned diffusion model featuring explicit viewpoint control. However, simply incorporating
Zero-1-to-3 into object customization tasks poses several challenges due to its inherent limitations:
1) It is solely capable of generating centrally positioned objects, lacking the ability to place them in
alternative locations; 2) It is unable to generate diverse backgrounds, being restricted to a simplistic
white background. It also lacks the text control functionality to produce desired backgrounds. These
constraints significantly hinder its applicability in object customization tasks.
In this paper, we make delicate designs to incorporate 3D novel view synthesis capability for object
customization while adhering to the requirements of the customization. Our proposed CustomNet
first integrates viewpoint control ability and subsequently supports location control to place objects
in user-defined positions and sizes. The location control is achieved by concatenating the trans-
formed reference object image to the UNet input. For background generation, we introduce a dual
cross-attention module that enables CustomNet to accept both text (for background generation) and
object images (for foreground generation). CustomNet also accommodates user-provided back-
ground images, generating harmonious results. Moreover, we have designed a dataset construction
pipeline that effectively utilizes synthetic multiview data and massive natural images to better han-


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dle real-world objects and complex backgrounds. Built upon those designs, CustomNet supports
fine-grained object and background control within a unified framework and can achieve zero-shot
customization with excellent identity preservation and diverse outcomes, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
We summarize our contributions as follows: (1). In contrast to previous customization approaches
that predominantly rely on 2D input images, we propose CustomNet to explicitly incorporate 3D
novel view synthesis capabilities (e.g., Zero-1-to-3) into the object customization process. This al-
lows for the adjustment of spatial position relationships and viewpoints, leading to improved identity
preservation and diverse outputs. (2). Our approach features intricate designs that enable location
control and flexible background control, addressing inherent limitations in Zero-1-to-3, such as sim-
plistic white backgrounds, exclusively centered objects, and overly synthetic effects. (3). We design
a dataset construction pipeline that effectively utilizes synthetic multiview data and massive natu-
ral images to better handle real-world objects and complex backgrounds. (4). Equipped with the
aforementioned designs, our method enables zero-shot object customization without test-time op-
timization while controlling location, viewpoints, and background simultaneously. This results in
enhanced identity preservation and diverse, harmonious outputs.


2       R ELATED WORKS
Object customization in diffusion models. With the promising progress of text-to-image dif-
fusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019; Nichol et al.,
2021; Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022), researches explore to cap-
ture the information of a reference object image and maintain its identity throughout the diffusion
model generation process, i.e., object customization. These methods can be broadly classified into
optimization-based techniques Ruiz et al. (2023); Gal et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2023a); Liu et al.
(2023b) and encoder-based approaches Yang et al. (2023); Song et al. (2023); Li et al. (2023d;a); Wei
et al. (2023). Optimization-based methods can achieve high-fidelity identity preservation; however,
they are time-consuming and may sometimes result in overfitting. In contrast, current encoder-based
methods enable zero-shot performance but may either lose the identity or produce trivial results re-
sembling copy-pasting. In contrast, our proposed CustomNet aims to preserve high fidelity while
supporting controllable viewpoint variations, thereby achieving more diverse outcomes.
Image harmonization. In image composition, a foreground object is typically integrated into
a given background image to achieve harmonized results. Various image harmonization meth-
ods Sunkavalli et al. (2010); Chen & Kae (2019); Cong et al. (2020); Guo et al. (2021) have been
proposed to further refine the foreground region, ensuring more plausible lighting and color adjust-
ments Xue et al. (2022); Cong et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2022). However, these methods focus
on low-level modifications and are unable to alter the viewpoint or pose of the foreground objects.
In contrast, our proposed CustomNet not only achieves flexible background generation using user-
provided images but also offers additional viewpoint control and enhanced harmonization.
3D novel view synthesis aims to infer the appearance of a scene from novel viewpoints based on one
or a set of images of a given 3D scene. Previous methods have typically relied on classical techniques
such as interpolation or disparity estimation (Park et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2018), as well as genera-
tive models (Sun et al., 2018; Chan et al., 2022). More recently, approaches based on Scene Repre-
sentation Networks (SRN) (Sitzmann et al., 2019) and Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021; Jang & Agapito, 2021) have been explored. Furthermore, diffusion
models have been introduced into novel view synthesis (Liu et al., 2023a; Watson et al., 2022). Zero-
1-to-3 Liu et al. (2023a) propose a viewpoint-conditioned diffusion model trained on large synthetic
datasets, achieving excellent performance in single-view 3D reconstruction and novel view synthe-
sis tasks. Our CustomNet leverages the powerful 3D capabilities of diffusion models for object
customization tasks, generating outputs with diverse viewpoints while preserving the identity


3       P ROPOSED M ETHOD
Overview. Given a reference background-free 1 object image x ∈ RH×W ×3 with height H and
width W , we aim to generate a customized image x̂ where the object of the same identity can

    1
        Background-free images can be easily obtained by segmentation methods, e.g., SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023).


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



   Viewpoint
                                                                                                        “sitting on


                                              Concat
                              (𝑅, 𝑇)                           Cross          Cross      Text Encoder
                                                        MLP
                                                              Attention      Attention                  the beach”
   Object
   Image                  Image Encoder
   Generation


                   location                                          Denoising
                                                                      U-Net
                              object w/ loc            𝒛!"#
   Composition


                 background   object w/ loc            𝒛!"#
Figure 2: Overview of our proposed CustomNet. CustomNet is able to simultaneously control view-
point, location, and background in a unified framework, thereby achieving harmonious customized
image generation while effectively preserving object identity and texture details. The background
generation can be controlled either through textual descriptions (the ‘Generation’ branch) or by pro-
viding a specific user-defined image (the ‘Composition’ branch).

be seamlessly placed in a desired environment (i.e., background) harmoniously with appropriate
viewpoint and location variations.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, we propose CustomNet, a novel architecture designed to achieve this cus-
tomization conditioned on the viewpoint [R, T ] (where R and T represent the relative camera ro-
tation and translation of the desired viewpoint, respectively), object location L, and background
condition B. The background can be controlled either through textual descriptions or by providing
a specific user-defined image xbg . :
                                          x̂ = C USTOM N ET(x, [R, T ], L, B).                                        (1)

Our work is the first attempt to concurrently control viewpoint, location, and background in the
customized synthesis task, thereby achieving a harmonious customized image while effectively
preserving object identity and texture details (see Fig. 1 and Fig. 3 for representative results).
Specifically, we observe that explicit viewpoint control is the missing ingredient for customiza-
tion that enables simultaneous viewpoint alteration and object identity preservation (more details
are in Sec. 4.3). Guided by this insight, our proposed CustomNet builds on the existing powerful
viewpoint-conditioned diffusion model, Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al., 2023a), which facilitates accurate
viewpoint manipulation of the reference object. We further extend the location control by con-
catenating the reference object image transformed by the desired location and size into the UNet
input. Moreover, we offer flexible background control through a textual description or a specific
background image. This leads to improved identity preservation and diverse, harmonious outputs.
Discussions. There also exist simplistic approaches to achieving customization, which involve plac-
ing the object into a specific background while accounting for viewpoint and location variations
in two distinct stages. Firstly, one can synthesize an object from the desired viewpoint using an
existing single image-based novel view synthesis method, such as Zero-1-to-3. Subsequently, the
synthesized object can be placed into a given background at the desired location using textual back-
ground inpainting (e.g., SD-Inpainting model (RunwayML, 2022)) or exemplar image-based object
inpainting (e.g., Paint-by-Example Yang et al. (2023), AnyDoor Chen et al. (2023b)). Blended La-
tent Diffusion(Avrahami et al., 2023) uses text to inpaint a mask region of image. OVTrack(Li et al.,
2023c) employs SD-inpainting for background with foreground objects in multi-object tracking.
However, employing background inpainting often results in suboptimal harmonious outcomes with
obvious artifacts. On the other hand, foreground object-based inpainting is prone to issues such as
copying-and-pasting artifacts and identity loss, and faces challenges in handling view variations (see
Sec. 4.2). Moreover, adopting a two-stage approach necessitates the utilization of distinct methods
to accomplish the desired customization. This requires alternating between multiple tools for refin-
ing effects to enhance performance, thereby exacerbating the complexity of its usage. Instead, our
CustomNet achieves the desired customization in a unified framework with more precise controls.


                                                              4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   C ONTROL THE V IEWPOINT AND L OCATION OF O BJECTS

Viewpoint Control.To enable synthesizing a target customized image complied with the given view-
point parameter [R, T ], we follow the view-conditioned diffusion method introduced by Zero-1-to-3.
As shown in Fig. 2 (the left-top part), we first apply a pre-trained CLIP Radford et al. (2021) image
encoder to encode the reference background-free object image into an object embedding, containing
high-level semantic information of the input object. Then the object embedding is concatenated with
[R, T ] and passed through a trainable lightweight multi-layer perception (MLP). The fused object
embedding further passes to the denoising UNet as a condition with the cross-attention mechanism
to control viewpoints of the synthesized images.
Location Control. We further control the object location in the synthesized image by concatenating
the reference object image with the desired location and size to the UNet input. The process is
illustrated in Fig. 2 (the ‘Generation’ branch). The desired location and size L, represented as a
bounding box [x, y, w, h], are given by the user. Then, we resize the reference object image into the
size of [w, h] and place its left-top corner at the [x, y] coordinate of a background-free image (this
image is the same size as the target image being denoised but without background). The additional
concatenated reference object image helps the model synthesize the desired image while keeping
the identity and the texture details Rombach et al. (2022); Liu et al. (2023a). Note that Zero-1-
to-3 directly concatenates the centrally-located reference object to the UNet input, which can only
synthesize an image where the object is centered. Our method enables synthesizing the target object
at the desired position with the proposed explicit location control.

3.2   F LEXIBLE BACKGROUND C ONTROL BY T EXT OR R EFERENCE I MAGES

Our proposed framework exhibits flexibility in generating backgrounds after positioning the object.
There are two approaches. The first approach, referred to as Generation-based background control,
involves synthesizing a target background using a textual description provided by the user, as shown
in the ‘Generation’ branch in Fig. 2. The second approach, termed Composition-based background
control, employs a specific background image supplied by the user (as illustrated in the ‘Composi-
tion’ branch in Fig. 2).
Generation-based Background Control.                In this mode, the diffusion model takes
[zt−1 , object w/ loc] as inputs, where zt−1 represents the noisy latent at the time step t−1. The
diffusion model is required to generate an appropriate background based on the textual description.
Different from Zero-1-to-3, which solely accepts the object embedding without textual descriptions
for background, we propose a novel dual cross-attention conditioning strategy that accepts both the
fused object embedding with viewpoint control and textual descriptions for background. The dual
cross-attention mechanism integrates the fused object embedding and the textual embedding through
two distinct cross-attention modules. Specifically, we first employ the CLIP text encoder to obtain
the textual embeddings and subsequently inject them into the denoising UNet, along with the fused
object embedding, using the D UAL ATTN:
                                                         QK T                  QK T
            D UAL ATTN(Q, Ko , Vo , Kb , Vb ) = Softmax( √ o )Vo + Softmax( √ b )Vb ,           (2)
                                                             d                     d
where the query features Q come from the UNet, while Ko , Vo are the object features projected
from fused object embeddings with viewpoint control, and Kb , Vb are the background features from
the textural embeddings. d is the dimension of the aforementioned feature embeddings. During
training, we randomly drop the background text description to disentangle the viewpoint control
and background control. This straightforward yet effective design enables us to achieve accurate
background control without affecting the object viewpoint control.
Composition-based Background Control. In many practical scenarios, users desire to seamlessly
insert objects into pre-existing background images with specific viewpoints and locations. Our
proposed CustomNet is designed to accommodate this functionality. More precisely, we extend
the input channels of the UNet by concatenating the provided background image channel-wise,
adhering to the Stable Diffusion inpainting pipeline. Consequently, the diffusion model accepts
[zt−1 , object w/ loc, xbg ] as inputs. Note that in this mode, the textual description is optional, al-
lowing for straightforward input of NULL to the text prompt. In comparison to existing image
composition methods (Yang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b) which often struggle with copy-pasting
artifacts or identity loss issues, our method offers viewpoint and location control over objects.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                   Textual        BLIP-                                    CustomNet   Multiple
 Object Image   Dreambooth                                       ELITE         GLIGEN
                                  Inversion      Diffusion                                  (Ours)      View


                                                  “On top of wooden floor”


                                                        “In the snow”


                                                      “On green grass”
Figure 3: Qualitative comparison. Our CustomNet demonstrates superior capacities in terms of
identity preservation, viewpoint control, and harmony of the customized image.

3.3   T RAINING S TRATEGIES

Data Construction Pipeline. To train the proposed CustomNet, paired data with object image x,
target image xtgt , desired viewpoint parameter [R, T ], location and size L, and background con-
dition B (i.e., a textual description or a background image) are required. Naturally, we can obtain
multi-view object images and corresponding view parameters from existing 3D datasets like Obja-
verse Deitke et al. (2023). However, these datasets only contain object images without a background
(usually with a pure black or white background), which is not appropriate for the customization task.
As a result, we can simply perform mask-blending with the object image and collected background
images. In addition, we use BLIP2 Li et al. (2023b) to caption the textual descriptions of the blended
images for the background control with text prompts. However, since the composition between the
object and background would be unreasonable (i.e., the object is placed into the background dishar-
moniously) and the blended target image is unrealistic, the model trained on them often generates a
disharmonious customized image, e.g., the objects float over the background (see Sec. 4.3).
To alleviate this problem, we propose a training data construction pipeline that is the reverse of
the above-mentioned way, i.e., directly utilizing natural images as the target image and extracting
objects from the image as the reference. Specifically, for a natural image, we first segment the
foreground object using SAM model Kirillov et al. (2023). Then we synthesize a novel view of the
object using Zero-1-to-3 with randomly sampled relative viewpoints. The textual description of the
image can be also obtained using the BLIP2 model. In this way, we can synthesize a large amount
of data pairs from natural image datasets, like OpenImages Kuznetsova et al. (2020). Meanwhile,
the model trained with these data can synthesize more harmonious results with these natural images.
More details are in the Appendix.
Model Training. Given paired images with their relative camera viewpoint, object locations, and
background conditions (textual description or background image) {x, xtgt , [R, T ], L, B}, we can
fine-tune a pre-trained diffusion model condition on these explicit controls. We adopt the viewpoint-
conditioned diffusion model from Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al., 2023a) as our base model, which also
utilizes the latent diffusion model (LDM) (Rombach et al., 2022) architecture. LDM contains a
variational auto-encoder with an encoder E, decoder D and an UNet denoiser ϵθ . It performs the
diffusion-denoising process in the latent space rather than the image space for efficiency. The opti-
mization objective is:

                             min Eztgt ,ϵ,t ∥ ϵ − ϵθ (ztgt , t, c(x, [R, t], L, B)) ∥2 ,                     (3)
                              θ


where ztgt = E(xtgt ), and c(·) is the condition mechanism with explicit controls. Once the de-
noising UNet ϵθ is trained, we can perform harmonious customization conditioned on the target
viewpoint, location, and background with CustomNet.


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

        Object image      SD-Inpainting      Ours         Background image   Paint-by-Example     Ours


                                 “On the beach”


                                “On the mountain”
Figure 4: Comparison to existing textual background inpainting method SD-Inpainting model and
foreground object inpainting model Paint-by-Example. Our CustomNet can achieve a more harmo-
nious output with diverse viewpoint changes while preserving identity.
Table 1: Quantitative Comparison. We compute DINO-I, CLIP-I, CLIP-T following (Li et al.,
2023a). We also conducted a user study to measure subjective metrics: ID, View, Text representing
identity preservation, viewpoints variation, and text alignment, respectively.
    Method                                 DINO-I ↑   CLIP-I ↑       CLIP-T ↑       ID ↑        View ↑   Text ↑
    DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023)          0.6333     0.8019         0.2276       0.1333       0.0822   0.1378
    Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022)    0.5116     0.7557         0.2088       0.0100       0.0944   0.0367
    BLIP-Diffusion (Li et al., 2023a)       0.6079     0.7928         0.2183       0.0522       0.0878   0.0422
    ELITE (Wei et al., 2023)                0.5101     0.7675         0.2310       0.0056       0.0722   0.1056
    GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023d)               0.5587     0.8152         0.1974       0.0111       0.0722   0.0144
    CustomNet (Ours)                        0.7742     0.8164         0.2258       0.7878       0.5912   0.6633

4      E XPERIMENTS
4.1     T RAINING DATASETS AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We use multi-view synthetic dataset Objaverse (Deitke et al., 2023), natural image dataset
OpenImages-V6 (Kuznetsova et al., 2020) filtered as BLIP-Diffusion (Li et al., 2023a) to construct
data pairs with the pipeline introduced in Sec. 3.3. A total of (250+500)K data pairs are constructed
for model training. We exploit the Zero-1-to-3 checkpoint as the model weight initialization. For
training, we employ AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) optimizer with a constant learning rate
2×10−6 for 500K optimization steps. The total batch size is 96, and about 6 days are taken to finish
the training on 8 NVIDIA-V100 GPUs with 32GB VRAM.

4.2     C OMPARISON TO E XISTING M ETHODS

We compare our CustomNet to the optimization-based methods Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022),
Dreambooth (Ruiz et al., 2023), and encoder-based (zero-shot) method GLIGEN Li et al. (2023d),
ELITE Wei et al. (2023), BLIP-Diffusion Li et al. (2023a). We use their official implementation (for
GLIDEN, ELITE, and BLIP-Diffusion) or the diffuser implementations von Platen et al. (2022) (for
Textual Inversion, Dreambooth) to obtain the results. Note that Dreambooth requires several images
of the same object to finetune.
Figure 3 shows the images generated with different methods (more results are in the Appendix).
We see that the zero-shot methods GLIGEN, ELITE, BLIP-Diffusion, and the optimization-based
method Textual Inversion are far from the identity consistent with the reference object. Dreambooth
and the proposed CustomNet achieve highly promising harmonious customization results, while our
method allows the user to control the object viewpoint easily and obatain diverse results. In addition,
our method does not require time-consuming model fine-tuning and textual embedding optimization.
We also evaluate the synthesized results quantitatively. All methods apply 26 different prompts
to perform customizations 3 times randomly on 50 objects. We calculate the visual similarity with
CLIP image encoder and DINO encoder, denoted as CLIP-I and DINO-I, respectively. We measure
the text-image similarity with CLIP directly, denoting CLIP-T. Tab. 1 shows the quantitative results,
where CustomNet achieves better identity preservation (DINO-I and CLIP-I than other methods.
Meanwhile, CustomNet shows comparable capacity to the state-of-the-art methods regarding textual
control (CLIP-T). We also conducted a user study and collected 2700 answers for Identity similar-
ity (ID), View variation (View), and Text alignment (Text), respectively. As shown in the right part
of Tab. 1, most participants prefer CustomNet in all three aspects (78.78%, 64.67%, 67.84%).


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

       Object       w/o RT                 w/ RT           Object       w/o RT                   w/ RT
       Image                                               Image


                       (a) Zero-1-to-3                                           (b) CustomNet
Figure 5: Explicit viewpoints control. Without the explicit viewpoint parameters [R, T ], a) Zero-
1-to-3 tends to generate images that cannot change the viewpoint or have undesired artifacts; b)
CustomNet easily obtains copy-pasting effects, even though it is trained with the multi-view dataset.

         ① Object     ② w/ SD ckpt       ③ w/o Concat ④ w/o DataPipeline ⑤ w/o DualAttn ⑥ Ours (Full)
          Image


                                                     “At Sunset”


                                               “On the top of a purple rug”
Figure 6: Ablation Study. w/ SD ckpt: initialize model weights with Stable-Diffusion pretrained
checkpoints. w/o Concat: do not concatenate object with UNet input. w/o DataPipeline: do not
use the dataset construction pipeline for OpenImages. w/o DualAttn: concatenate image and text
embedding together and use shared cross-attn modules.

Comparison to Inpainting-based Methods Existing inpainting-based methods (SD-Inpainting
model, Paint-by-Example Yang et al. (2023), AnyDoor Chen et al. (2023b)) can also place a ref-
erence object in the desired background in an inpainting pipeline. Given an object, the background
can be inpainted with textual descriptions in the SD-Inpainting model, while this kind of method
easily suffers from unreal and disharmonious results and cannot cast variations to the reference ob-
ject. Our CustomNet can obtain more harmonious customization with diverse viewpoint control.
Another line of methods Paint-by-Example and AnyDoor can inpaint the reference object to a given
background image. AnyDoor has not open-sourced yet and we compare CustomNet with Paint-by-
Example in Fig. 4. From Fig. 4, we see that Paint-by-Example cannot maintain the identity and
differs significantly from the reference object.


4.3   A BLATION S TUDIES AND A NALYSIS

We conduct detailed ablation studies to demonstrate the effectiveness of each design in CustomNet
and the necessity of explicit control for identity preservation in harmonious customization.
Explicit viewpoint control is the key for customization that enables simultaneous viewpoint al-
teration and object identity preservation. We conduct a comparison in terms of with and without
explicit viewpoint control parameters [R, T ] on the original Zero-1-to-3 model. As shown in the
left part of Fig. 5, models trained without viewpoint conditions tend to generate images that cannot
change the viewpoint or have undesired artifacts. The same phenomenon can be observed in our
CustomNet. To to specific, as shown in the right part of Fig. 5, without the explicit camera pose
control, our model can only obtain copying-and-pasting effects, even though it is trained with the
multi-view dataset. Note that in this setting, we also concatenate the object image into the UNet
input, otherwise, the model cannot preserve adequate identity.
Pretraining with massive multi-view data is important to preserve identity in CustomNet. We
adopt Zero-1-to-3 as the initialization, i.e., our CustomNet is pre-trained with massive multi-view
Objarverse data, so that view-consistency information has been already encoded into the model.
When we train CustomNet from the SD checkpoint (see the 2nd column in Fig. 6), the synthesized
images cannot maintain view consistency from other viewpoints and suffer from quality degradation.


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: (a) Diverse background control with textual descriptions. (b) Precise location control with
explicit location condition.

Input concatenation helps better maintain texture details. Previous methods Wei et al. (2023);
Chen et al. (2023b) also try to integrate local features to maintain texture details in synthesized
images. In our method, concatenating the reference object to the UNet input can also preserve
textures. Without the concatenation (see the 3rd column in Fig. 6), the color, shape, and texture
of the generated images differ significantly from the reference object image. We also note that the
model would generate copying-and-pasting images without any view variations when we do not
adopt explicit viewpoint control (see Fig. 5). This is to say, the combination of input concatenation
and explicit view conditions enables precise and harmonious customization.
Our data construction pipeline enables more harmonious outputs. We adopted a new data con-
struction pipeline for utilizing the OpenImages dataset in Sec. 3.3. Without this design, the model
trained with only the data constructed by the naive combination between multi-view object images in
Objaverse and background images can result in unrealistic and unnatural customized results, usually
leading to ‘floating’ artifacts (see the 4th column in Fig. 5).
Dual cross-attention enables disentangled object and background controls. We introduce dual-
attention for the disentangled object-level control and background control with textual descriptions.
When directly concatenating the text embedding and fused object embedding as the condition to be
injected into the UNet, the model tends to learn a coupled control with viewpoint parameters and
textual description. As a result, the viewpoint control capacity would degrade significantly and the
model cannot generate desired background (see 5th column in Fig. 6).

4.4   M ORE A PPLICATIONS

Diverse Background Control. As shown in the first row of Fig. 7, our method can also generate
harmonious results with diverse backgrounds controlled by textual descriptions. Thanks to the dis-
entangled dual-attention design, the viewpoint of the object in the synthesized image can remain the
same under different textual prompts.
Precise Location Control. With explicit location control design, our method also places an object
into the desired location shown in the second row of Fig. 7, where the location is specified by the
user and the background is synthesized directly by the textual description.


5     C ONCLUSION
We present CustomNet, a novel object customization approach explicitly incorporating 3D view
synthesis for enhanced identity preservation and viewpoint control. We introduce intricate designs
for location control and flexible background control through textual descriptions or provided back-
ground images, and develop a dataset construction pipeline to handle real-world objects and complex
backgrounds effectively. Our experiments show that CustomNet enables diverse zero-shot object
customization while controlling location, viewpoints, and background simultaneously.
Limitations. CustomNet inherits Zero-1-to-3’s resolution limitation (256 × 256) restricting the
generation quality. Despite outperforming existing methods, CustomNet cannot perform non-rigid
transformations or change object styles. Future work aims to address these limitations.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended latent diffusion. ACM Transactions
 on Graphics, 42(4):1–11, July 2023. ISSN 1557-7368. doi: 10.1145/3592450. URL http:
 //dx.doi.org/10.1145/3592450.

Eric R Chan, Connor Z Lin, Matthew A Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio
  Gallo, Leonidas J Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, et al. Efficient geometry-aware
  3d generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16123–16133, 2022.

Bor-Chun Chen and Andrew Kae. Toward realistic image compositing with adversarial learning. In
  IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2019.

Haoxing Chen, Zhangxuan Gu, Yaohui Li, Jun Lan, Changhua Meng, Weiqiang Wang, and Huax-
  iong Li. Hierarchical dynamic image harmonization. arXiv:2211.08639, 2022.

Hong Chen, Yipeng Zhang, Xin Wang, Xuguang Duan, Yuwei Zhou, and Wenwu Zhu. Disen-
  booth: Disentangled parameter-efficient tuning for subject-driven text-to-image generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.03374, 2023a.

Xi Chen, Lianghua Huang, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Hengshuang Zhao. Anydoor: Zero-
  shot object-level image customization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09481, 2023b.

Wenyan Cong, Jianfu Zhang, Li Niu, Liu Liu, Zhixin Ling, Weiyuan Li, and Liqing Zhang. Dovenet:
 Deep image harmonization via domain verification. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
 2020.

Wenyan Cong, Xinhao Tao, Li Niu, Jing Liang, Xuesong Gao, Qihao Sun, and Liqing Zhang. High-
 resolution image harmonization via collaborative dual transformations. In IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recog., 2022.

Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig
 Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of anno-
 tated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 13142–13153, 2023.

Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.

Zonghui Guo, Haiyong Zheng, Yufeng Jiang, Zhaorui Gu, and Bing Zheng. Intrinsic image harmo-
  nization. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2021.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Wonbong Jang and Lourdes Agapito. Codenerf: Disentangled neural radiance fields for object
 categories. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
 12949–12958, 2021.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson,
  Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything.
  arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.

Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Neil Alldrin, Jasper Uijlings, Ivan Krasin, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Shahab
  Kamali, Stefan Popov, Matteo Malloci, Alexander Kolesnikov, Tom Duerig, and Vittorio Ferrari.
  The open images dataset v4: Unified image classification, object detection, and visual relationship
  detection at scale. IJCV, 2020.

Dongxu Li, Junnan Li, and Steven CH Hoi. Blip-diffusion: Pre-trained subject representation for
  controllable text-to-image generation and editing. arXiv:2305.14720, 2023a.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv:2301.12597, 2023b.

Siyuan Li, Tobias Fischer, Lei Ke, Henghui Ding, Martin Danelljan, and Fisher Yu. Ovtrack: Open-
  vocabulary multiple object tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5567–5577, 2023c.

Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22511–22521, 2023d.

Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11328, 2023a.

Zhiheng Liu, Ruili Feng, Kai Zhu, Yifei Zhang, Kecheng Zheng, Yu Liu, Deli Zhao, Jingren Zhou,
  and Yang Cao. Cones: Concept neurons in diffusion models for customized generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.05125, 2023b.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.     Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.

Jian Ma, Junhao Liang, Chen Chen, and Haonan Lu. Subject-diffusion: Open domain personalized
   text-to-image generation without test-time fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11410, 2023.

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 405–421. Springer, 2020.

Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023.

Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.

Eunbyung Park, Jimei Yang, Ersin Yumer, Duygu Ceylan, and Alexander C Berg. Transformation-
  grounded image generation network for novel 3d view synthesis. In Proceedings of the ieee
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3500–3509, 2017.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
  Recog., 2022.

Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In IEEE
  Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2023.

RunwayML. Stable diffusion. https://github.com/runwayml/stable-diffusion,
  2022.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Adv. Neural Inform. Process.
  Syst., 2022.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vincent Sitzmann, Michael Zollhöfer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Scene representation networks: Con-
  tinuous 3d-structure-aware neural scene representations. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 32, 2019.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Yizhi Song, Zhifei Zhang, Zhe Lin, Scott Cohen, Brian Price, Jianming Zhang, Soo Ye Kim, and
  Daniel Aliaga. Objectstitch: Object compositing with diffusion model. In IEEE Conf. Comput.
  Vis. Pattern Recog., 2023.
Shao-Hua Sun, Minyoung Huh, Yuan-Hong Liao, Ning Zhang, and Joseph J Lim. Multi-view
  to novel view: Synthesizing novel views with self-learned confidence. In Proceedings of the
  European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 155–171, 2018.
Kalyan Sunkavalli, Micah K Johnson, Wojciech Matusik, and Hanspeter Pfister. Multi-scale image
  harmonization. ACM Trans. Graph., 2010.
Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil, Anton Lozhkov, Pedro Cuenca, Nathan Lambert, Kashif Rasul,
  Mishig Davaadorj, and Thomas Wolf. Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models. https:
  //github.com/huggingface/diffusers, 2022.
Daniel Watson, William Chan, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Jonathan Ho, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Mo-
  hammad Norouzi. Novel view synthesis with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04628,
  2022.
Yuxiang Wei, Yabo Zhang, Zhilong Ji, Jinfeng Bai, Lei Zhang, and Wangmeng Zuo. Elite: Encoding
  visual concepts into textual embeddings for customized text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.13848, 2023.
Ben Xue, Shenghui Ran, Quan Chen, Rongfei Jia, Binqiang Zhao, and Xing Tang. Dccf: Deep
  comprehensible color filter learning framework for high-resolution image harmonization. In Eur.
  Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022.
Binxin Yang, Shuyang Gu, Bo Zhang, Ting Zhang, Xuejin Chen, Xiaoyan Sun, Dong Chen, and
  Fang Wen. Paint by example: Exemplar-based image editing with diffusion models. In IEEE
  Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2023.
Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. pixelnerf: Neural radiance fields from
  one or few images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 4578–4587, 2021.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.
Tinghui Zhou, Richard Tucker, John Flynn, Graham Fyffe, and Noah Snavely. Stereo magnification:
  Learning view synthesis using multiplane images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09817, 2018.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   DATA C ONSTRUCTION P IPELINE

We show our data construction pipeline in Fig. 8. For the 3D object dataset - Objarverse (Deitke
et al., 2023), we can obtain multi-view object images and corresponding view parameters. However,
these datasets only contain object images without a background (usually with a pure white back-
ground), which is not appropriate for the customization task. As a result, we can simply perform
mask-blending with the object image and collected background images. However, since the compo-
sition between the object and background would be unreasonable (i.e., the object is placed into the


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


background disharmoniously) and the blended target image is unrealistic, the model trained on them
often generates a disharmonious customized image, e.g., the objects float over the background.
We show our proposed data construction pipeline for natural images in Fig. 8 (b). It is the reverse of
the first way, i.e., directly utilizing natural images as the target image and extracting objects from the
image as the reference. Specifically, for a natural image, we first use BLIP-2 5T (Li et al., 2023b)
to extract the foreground object with the instruction {”image”: image, ”prompt”: ”Question: What
foreground objects are in the image? find them and separate them using commas. Answer:”}. Then
we feed the object and its corresponding text to SAM, SAM can receive text as input and output
the segmentation mask of the corresponding object. Then we synthesize a novel view of the object
using Zero-1-to-3 with randomly sampled relative viewpoints. In this way, we can synthesize a
large amount of data pairs from natural image datasets, like OpenImages (Kuznetsova et al., 2020).
Fig. 9 shows some data samples from the two dataset construction pipelines.


           Figure 8: Data construction pipeline from 3D objects (a) and single image (b).


A.2    D EFINITION OF CAMERA MODEL

the definition and design of RT is consistent with the setting in Zero-1-to-3. In Zero-1-to-3, they
render 3D objects to images with a predefined camera pose that always points at the center of the
object. This means the viewpoint is actually controlled by polar angle θ, azimuth angle ϕ, and
radius r (distance away from the center), resulting all objects to be central of the rendered image.
Therefore, the rotation matrix R can only control polar angle θ, azimuth angle ϕ, and the translation
vector T can only control the radius r between the object and camera. Thus the Zero-1-to-3 can
only synthesize objects at the image center, lacking the capacity to place the object at the arbitrary
location in the image. We tackle this problem by specifying the bounding box at the desired location
to the latent.



A.3    I MPROVEMENTS OF Z ERO -1- TO -3

We show our improvements of Zero-1-to-3 compared with the limitations of Zero-1-to-3 in Fig. 10.
In the 1st, 2nd row, We compare with Zero-1-to-3 the ability to control the object location generation.
As Zero-1-to-3 can only control polar angle θ, azimuth angle ϕ, and radius r, it can control the object
location directly, so we apply our location control method on Zero-1-to-3. We resize the object and
move it to the location in different bounding boxes (top left and top right in 1st row, bottom left and
bottom right in 2nd row.). We can see that Zero-1-to-3 generate distortion in the generated images.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Object Image
      Target Image


                     (a) Data samples from data construction pipeline 1.
      Object Image
      Target Image


                     (b) Data samples from data construction pipeline 2.
Figure 9: Data samples from our constructed synthetic datasets and real world datasets. (a) shows
synthetic data samples from data construction pipeline 1. (b) shows real world data samples from
data construction pipeline 2.



This is because Zero-1-to-3 only trained on the object centred image, it can not really control the
object location.
In the 3rd, 4th row, We compare with Zero-1-to-3 the ability of novel-view synthesis. We can see
from the figure that Zero-1-to-3 fails to generate the resonable geometry for the dog and cartoon
character. Our CustomNet, training with our real world constructed datasets, have a better com-
prehension of object geometry. We can generate a normal dog and a resonable cartoon chracter in
multi-views.
In all rows, our CustomNet generate harmonious customized image with the control of different text
prompts.


A.4       M ORE C OMPARISON R ESULTS

We provide additional qualitative comparison results to demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
CustomNet shown in Fig. 11.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Object Image            Zero-1-to-3                       Ours


Figure 10: The comparison of CustomNet and Zero-1-to-3. In the 1st, 2nd row, We compare with
Zero-1-to-3 the ability to control the object location generation. As Zero-1-to-3 can only control
polar angle θ, azimuth angle ϕ, and radius r, it can control the object location directly, so we apply
our location control method on Zero-1-to-3. We resize the object and move it to the location in
different bounding boxes (top left and top right in 1st row, bottom left and bottom right in 2nd row.).
We can see that Zero-1-to-3 generate distortion in the generated images. This is because Zero-1-to-
3 only trained on the object centred image, it can not really control the object location.In the 3rd,
4th row, We compare with Zero-1-to-3 the ability of novel-view synthesis. We can see from the
figure that Zero-1-to-3 fails to generate the resonable geometry for the dog and cartoon character.
Our CustomNet, training with our real world constructed datasets, have a better comprehension of
object geometry. We can generate a normal dog and a resonable cartoon chracter in multi-views. In
all rows, our CustomNet generate harmonious customized image with the control of different text
prompts.


A.5   M ORE R ESULTS OF C USTOM N ET

We provide more real world object customized results shown in Fig. 12, Fig. 13 and 14.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Textual       BLIP-                                        CustomNet   Multiple
Object Image   Dreambooth                                       ELITE          GLIGEN
                                Inversion     Diffusion                                       (Ours)     View


                                            “With autumn leaves in the background”


                                             “With a city in the background”


                                                          “In the office”

Figure 11: More qualitative comparison results. Our CustomNet demonstrates superior capacities
in terms of identity preservation, viewpoint control, and harmony of the customized image.


                            In the garden          At sunset                In the office      In outer space


                              In snow            In the bucket              On the moon         In the office


                            On the water       In the exhibition            In the office      On wooden floor


                      With autumn leaves         On dirt road               On the beach         With clouds


         Figure 12: More real world object customized results of the proposed CustomNet.


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       On the street      With mountain       On the moon        In outer space


                      On green grass       On the beach      With mountain     With autumn leaves


                     On wooden floor       On dirt road       In the office      On the beach


                    With autumn leaves     On dirt road     On wooden floor      On the beach


                        On the beach         In desert         On the water       In outer space


                        On the street         In snow          At midnight        On the water



        Figure 13: More real world object customized results of the proposed CustomNet.


                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       On the moon         On dirt road           With city       In the jungle


                       On the beach        At midnight            In snow         On the street


                       On the beach       On the street       In the exhibition   In the jungle


                       In the jungle      On the moon            In desert        Under water


                        On the beach     With autumn leaves     On the street     On dirt road


                         With clouds       On dirt road        With mountain      On the street


        Figure 14: More real world object customized results of the proposed CustomNet.


                                              18
