Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P OSTERIOR P ROBABILITY-BASED L ABEL R ECOVERY
ATTACK IN F EDERATED L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Recent works have proposed analytical attacks that can recover batch labels from
         gradients of a classification model in Federated Learning (FL). However, these
         studies do not explain the essence of label leakage or show the scalability of other
         classification variants. In this paper, we demonstrate the root cause of label leak-
         age from gradients and propose a generalized label recovery attack by estimating
         the posterior probabilities. Beginning with the focal loss function, we derive the
         relationship among the gradients, labels and posterior probabilities in a concise
         form. Then, we explain the essential reasons for such findings from the perspec-
         tive of the exponential family. Furthermore, we empirically observe that positive
         (negative) samples of a class have approximate probability distributions. This key
         insight enables us to estimate the posterior probabilities of the target batch from
         an auxiliary dataset. Integrating the above elements, we finally present our label
         attack that can directly recover the batch labels of each class in realistic FL set-
         tings. Evaluation results show that on an untrained model, our attack can achieve
         over 96% Class-level label Accuracy (ClsAcc) and 95% Instance-level label Ac-
         curacy (InsAcc) on different groups of datasets, models and activations. For a
         training model, our approach reaches more than 90% InsAcc on different batch
         sizes, class imbalance ratios, temperature parameters or label smoothing factors.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Federated Learning (FL) has become a popular paradigm for training machine learning models in
privacy-sensitive applications (McMahan et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2019). In FL, the clients compute
gradients on their local devices and then send the gradients to the server for aggregation and global
model update. Since the private data is preserved on the client side, FL is supposed to offer more
privacy protection than the centralized learning paradigm. However, a category of attacks called
gradient inversion has shown that the shared gradients can be exploited to reconstruct the training
data (Zhu et al., 2019; Geiping et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2021). Moreover, some analytical attacks can
recover the labels from gradients of a classification model by analyzing the relationship between the
gradients and the labels (Zhao et al., 2020; Wainakh et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2023). However, none
of these works explain the nature of label recovery or exhibit the applicability to other classification
problems. We thus raise the following key questions: (i) what is the essence of label leakage from
gradients? and (ii) how to implement a generalized attack for label recovery?
In this paper, we explore and answer these two questions from both theoretical and practical perspec-
tives. In particular, starting from the focal loss function, we first derive an important relationship
among the gradients, labels and posterior probabilities in a concise form. This conclusion can be
applied to a variety of loss functions, which reveals the connection between the gradients and the
labels in a classification model. Then we explain the fundamental reason for our findings from the
exponential family of distributions. We show that the gradient w.r.t. logits is the expectation of the
target labels, which provides a convenient way to reduce computation costs but opens a backdoor
for label leakage. Finally, we propose a generalized attack for label recovery by estimating the pos-
terior probabilities of the target batch from an auxiliary dataset. The key insight is based on our
empirical observation that the positive (negative) samples of a class have approximate probability
distributions. By fitting the auxiliary dataset into the global model, we can estimate the target pos-
terior probabilities, and then recover the labels of a specified class by substituting the gradients and
the posterior probabilities into the derived formula.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

       • For the first time, we investigate the root cause of label leakage from gradients, and find
         the gradient w.r.t. logits is only related to the posterior probabilities and the target labels in
         various loss functions, such as focal loss and binary cross-entropy loss.
       • We explain the intrinsic reason for our findings from the perspective of the exponential
         family, and conclude that the combination of cross-entropy loss and Softmax (or Sigmoid)
         activation function opens a backdoor for the label restoration attacks.
       • We evaluate our attack on a variety of FL settings and classification variants, and demon-
         strate that it outperforms the prior attacks in terms of Class-level label Accuracy (ClsAcc)
         and Instance-level label Accuracy (InsAcc).


2    R ELATED W ORK

Now we review some of the works most related to ours.

Federated Learning. Federated Learning (FL) is a privacy-preserving machine learning paradigm
that enables multiple clients to collaboratively train a global shared model without collecting their
private data (McMahan et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2019). In FL, the clients train the shared model
locally and then send the model update (i.e., the gradient of the model parameters) to the server. The
server aggregates the uploaded gradients from the selected clients and updates the global model. The
training procedure is repeated until the global model converges. Since the private data is preserved
on the client side, FL is widely used in privacy-sensitive applications such as finance (Long et al.,
2020; Shingi, 2020) and healthcare (Xu et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2022).

Gradient Inversion Attacks. Zhu et al. (2019) propose the first gradient inversion attack, which
can reconstruct the training data x and corresponding labels y from the shared gradients in FL. An
honest-but-curious attacker generates a batch-averaged dummy gradient by fitting the global model
with a batch of dummy data, and then iteratively updates the dummy data to minimize the distance
between the dummy gradient and the target gradient. Geiping et al. (2020) use cosine similarity as
the error function and add total variation as a regularization term to improve the quality of recon-
struction. Yin et al. (2021) present group consistency regularization to enhance the restoration of the
object locations in the images. (Jeon et al., 2021) exploit a generative model pre-trained on the data
distribution to improve the quality of the recovered images. Moreover, recent studies also propose
gradient inversion attacks in other tasks, such as natural language processing (Gupta et al., 2022;
Balunovic et al., 2022) and speech recognition (Dang et al., 2022). The success of these attacks is
based on an underlying assumption that the gradient is an approximate bijection of the data. Thus,
decreasing the gap between gradients equals optimizing the dummy data towards the real data.

Analytical Label Attacks. Zhao et al. (2020) propose an analytical label attack named iDLG,
which can directly infer the label from ∇W of the classification layer. They derive that the gradient
w.r.t the logit zj equals to σ(zj ) − 1 if j is the target index c of the one-hot label, and σ(zj ) if j ̸= c,
where σ(·) denotes the Softmax function. When the model uses a non-negative activation, such as
ReLU or Sigmoid, ∇Wc consists of negative values, while the other rows are positive. Thus, the
attacker can extract the label by simply comparing the signs of the gradient ∇W . However, iDLG
only applies to single-batch labels, and the activation of the model must be non-negative. Wainakh
et al. (2022) exploit the direction and magnitude of ∇W to determine how many instances of each
                                                                   PM
class are in the target batch. They formulate the problem as i=1 ∇Wj = λj m + sj , where λj is
the number of batch labels of the jth class, m is the impact factor related to the input features, and
sj is a class-specific offset caused by misclassification. Using known data and labels, impact m and
offset sj can be estimated from multiple sets of gradients, and then λj can be calculated. Ma et al.
(2023) transform the label recovery problem into solving a system of linear equations. For each
class j, they regard σ(zj ) − 1 and σ(zj ) as the coefficients of the target label and the other labels,
respectively. By constructing these coefficients into a matrix A, they can solve the label vector y
from the equation Ay = ∇b, where ∇b is the gradient w.r.t the bias term of the last layer.

                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Target Batch Data                                  Global Model                Obtained Gradients

        Class 1      Class 2            Class k
                                                                                                        FC Layer
                                ···

        #cat: 2      #dog: 4            #bird: 3                                                                   ③


                   Positive           Negative     ①                           ②


       Class 1                 +                                                                 Class 1 (         ):
                                                          Positive                 ···
                                                                                             ③
                               ···                                                               Class 2 (         ):
         ···


                                                                     Class 1   2   ··· k


                                                                                                             ···
       Class k                 +                       Negative                    ···
                                                                                                 Class k (         ):
                                                                     Class 1   2   ···   k

                    Auxiliary Dataset                         Posterior Probabilities             Recovered Labels



Figure 1: Workflow of our label recovery attack. ① Acquire an auxiliary dataset and divide it into
positive and negative subsets for each class. ② Fit the data into the global model for estimating the
posterior probabilities of the target batch. ③ Recover the batch labels by substituting the gradients
and the posterior probabilities into the derived formula.


3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
For a K-class classification task in FL, the FedSGD (McMahan et al., 2017) algorithm is used to
train the global model M. At a given iteration, a victim client v trains the model with its local batch
data x and labels y, where (x, y) ∼ Dv . Here, Dv denotes the data distribution of client v. Then, the
client calculates the batch-averaged gradient G of the model parameters and sends it to the server.
As an honest-but-curious server or attacker, we aim to recover the batch labels y from the shared
gradient G. The knowledge we have includes the global model M, the shared gradient G, and an
auxiliary dataset xa with the same data distribution as Dv .
In our label attack, we mainly utilize the gradient w.r.t. the bias b in the last fully connected layer,
i.e., ∇b, to recover the target batch labels y. From the auxiliary dataset xa , we randomly sample
a portion of instances x̂a , ensuring that the number of instances in each class equals π. Then we
                                                              −
divide x̂a into positive samples x̂+
                                   j and negative samples x̂j for each class j. By fitting the model
M with these samples, we can obtain the averaged posterior probabilities p̂+ and p̂− of the positive
and negative samples. By substituting ∇b, p̂+ and p̂− into our derived formula in Section 5.2, we
can recover the batch labels ŷ. The workflow of our label attack is shown in Figure 1.

4     E SSENCE OF L ABEL L EAKAGE
In this section, we investigate the root cause of label leakage from gradients in FL. We first derive a
generalized relationship between the gradient ∇z and the labels y, which can be applied to various
classification tasks. Then we explain the intrinsic reason for these findings from the perspective
of the exponential family. We conclude that the combination of cross-entropy loss and Softmax is
intended to reduce the amount of computation, but opens a backdoor to potential attacks.

4.1   G ENERALIZED E XPRESSION OF G RADIENTS

Without loss of generality, we consider a multi-class classification task using focal loss as the loss
function and Softmax as the activation function. Focal loss is an extension of the cross-entropy loss,
which is proposed to solve the problem of class imbalance (Lin et al., 2017). The definition of focal
loss in multi-class scenarios can be represented as:
                                                          K
                                                          X
                                          LFL (pt ) = −         αt (1 − pt )γ log pt ,                                  (1)
                                                          t=1


                                                                3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Table 1: Relationships between different loss function and its gradient ∇z.

             Loss function              γ    α      Label       Activation3            Gradient ∇z
                                                                                    1
                Focal loss              -     -     one-hot     Softmax (τ )        τ Φ(αc , pc , γ)(p − y)
                                                                                         1
           Cross-entropy loss           0    1         -        Softmax (τ )             τ (p − y)
       Binary cross-entropy loss        0    1      binary        Sigmoid                   p−y


where pt is the categorical probability of target class t, αt is the weight of the target class, γ is the
focusing parameter that controls the degree of class imbalance, and K is the number of classes.
For the tth class, pt = pi if i = t, and pt = 1 − pi if i ̸= t. Here, pi is the Softmax probability
of the ith class1 , and yi is the corresponding label. If we set γ = 0 and αt = 1, the focal loss is
                                                    PK
equivalent to the cross-entropy loss LCE (pi ) = − t=i yi log pi . Under the same setting, if K = 2,
y ∈ {0, 1} and the activation is Sigmoid2 , the focal loss is also equivalent to the binary cross-entropy
loss LBCE (p) = −y log p − (1 − y) log (1 − p). Thus, analyzing from focal loss allows us to derive
a more general conclusion that can be applied to the other classification variants.
Theorem 1 (Gradient of Focal Loss). For a K-class classification task using the focal loss function
and Softmax activation, we can derive that the gradient of logit zj as follows:
                                              K
                                              X
                                 ∇zj LFL =          Φ(αt , pt , γ) · (pj − δtj ),                               (2)
                                              t=1

where Φ(αt , pt , γ) = αt (1 − pt )γ 1 − γ pt1−p
                                              log pt
                                                 t
                                                       and ∀t ∈ K, we have Φ(αt , pt , γ) ≥ 0. Besides,
δtj is the Kronecker delta, which equals 1 if t = j and 0 otherwise.

Proof. See Appendix C.3.

From Theorem 1, we find that ∇zj LFL is a summation of K terms, where each term is a product of
Φ(αt , pt , γ) and (pj − δtj ). The item Φ(αt , pt , γ) can be regarded as the weight of the tth class,
and (pj − δtj ) indicates the distance between the Softmax probability of the jth class and the target
categorical expectation at the tth class. In particular, an interesting observation can be made from
the latter item is that (pj − δtj ) is only negative when t = j, and positive otherwise, which supports
the following conclusions of different loss functions.
From this generalized relationship, we can also derive the gradient of logits z (i.e., ∇z) in other
classification variants by setting different values for αt or γ, and choosing different label embeddings
or activation functions. We summarize the commonly used loss functions, argument settings and the
corresponding gradients in Table 1. We can find that the gradient ∇z is only related to the posterior
probabilities p and the target labels y. This finding reveals the connection between the gradient ∇z
and the target label y, which is the key to label recovery attacks.

4.2    E XPLANATION FROM E XPONENTIAL FAMILY

As seen from Table 1, item (p − y) exists in different combinations of target labels and activation
functions. In particular, if Φ(αc , pc , γ) in focal loss is treated as a constant, then gradient ∇z of each
loss function is dominated by (p − y). In order to unveil the essential reason for this phenomenon,
we explain it from the perspective of the exponential family (Andersen, 1970). The exponential
family is a class of probability distributions that has the following representation:
                            fx (x|θ) = exp [ η(θ) · T (x) − A(θ) + B(x) ] ,                               (3)
where θ is the parameter, η(θ) is the canonical parameter, T (x) is the sufficient statistic, A(θ) is
the log-partition function, and B(x) is the base measure.
   1
     pi is an instance-wise probability, while pt is a class-wise probability incorporating the target label.
   2                                                    z1
     A special case of Softmax with one neuron: ez1e+ez2 = 1+e−(z1 1 −z2 ) = 1+e1−z , where z = z1 − z2 .
   3
     τ denotes the temperature parameter in Softmax for softness control.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Multi-class in Exponential Form. Take the multi-class classification task as an example, we can
build the probability p(x|θ) from the categorical distribution as follows:
                                        K
                                                       "K              #
                                       Y    xk
                                                         X
                            p(x|θ) =       θk = exp          xk log θk ,                     (4)
                                         k=1               k=1

where K is the number of categories, xk ∈ {0, 1} and xk = 1 if x belongs to the kth category, and
                                              PK                                     PK
θk denotes the probability when xk = 1. Since k=1 xk = 1, we can also derive that k=1 θk = 1.
Replacing xK with the first (K − 1) items of x, we can further express the probability p(x|θ) in the
form of the exponential family:
                                   "K−1                     K−1
                                                                   !         #
                                     X                      X
                     p(x|θ) = exp        xk log θk + 1 −         xk log θK
                                       k=1                       k=1
                                      "K−1                           #
                                       X            θk                                                         (5)
                              = exp          xk log    + log θK
                                                    θK
                                       k=1
                              = exp [η(θ) · T (x) − A(θ)] ,
where η(θ) = [η1 (θ), · · · , ηK−1 (θ)], T (x) = [x1 , · · · , xK−1 ], A(θ) = − log θK and B(x) = 0.

Derivation of Softmax and Cross-entropy. From Equation (5), we obtain ηk = η(θk ) = log θθKk ,
                                                                                  PK
which can be transformed into: θk = eηk · θK . Incorporating the characteristic of k=1 θk = 1, we
                                                                       PK           PK
summarize the K items on both sides of the equation and deduce: θK · k=1 eηk = k=1 θk = 1.
Hence, θK can be represented as θK = PK 1 eηk . Substituting θK into the relationship between θk
                                           k=1
and ηk , we finally derive the Softmax function as follows:
                                                       e ηk
                                      θk = eηk · θK = PK                 .                                     (6)
                                                                    ηj
                                                            j=1 e


Suppose we focus on an individual sample, so the log-likelihood of sample x is:
                                                  K
                                                  X
                        ℓ(θ; x) = log p(x|θ) =          xk log θk = −LCE (x, θ),                               (7)
                                                  k=1

where LCE (x, θ) is the cross-entropy loss, which is equivalent to the negative log-likelihood.
Therefore, we find that Softmax has a very strong connection with cross-entropy loss, which can be
derived from the categorical distribution in the exponential family. This property interprets why the
combination of Softmax and cross-entropy loss is widely used in multi-class classification tasks.

Gradient of Canonical Parameter.         Given that A(θ) = − log θK and θK = PK 1 eηj , we then
                                                                                                 j=1
                                                                     ηk
calculate the derivative of A(θ) w.r.t. ηk , i.e., ∇ηk A(θ) = PKe            eηj
                                                                                   = θk . We proceed to derive the
                                                                    j=1
gradient of the log-likelihood ℓ(θ; x) w.r.t. the canonical parameter ηk as:
                            ∇η ℓ(θ; x) = T (x) − ∇η A(θ) = T (x) − θ.                                          (8)

This formula not only exhibits an important feature of the exponential family, but also discloses why
the combination of Softmax and cross-entropy loss has the relationship in Table 1. For the exponen-
tial family, when parameter θ is determined, the change of ℓ(θ; x) w.r.t. η is determined only by
T (x) and independent of other information about the samples. For a multi-class classification task,
the sufficient statistic T (x) is actually the target label y, the parameter θ denotes the posterior prob-
abilities p, and the canonical parameter η implies the logit z. Therefore, we can naturally obtain
that ∇z = p − y, which is consistent with the previous conclusion.
In summary, the combination of cross-entropy loss and Softmax is derived from the exponential
family, which can reduce the amount of computation. However, it also opens a backdoor for potential
threats, such as label recovery from gradients in FL.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     L ABEL R ECOVERY ATTACK

In this section, we propose our label recovery attack. We first present an important observation that
the positive (negative) samples of a class have approximate probability distributions. Based on this
insight, we exploit an auxiliary dataset for estimating the posterior probabilities of the target batch.
Finally, we propose an analytical method that can directly recover the number of labels of each class
by substituting the probabilities and gradients into the derived formula.

5.1   O UR K EY O BSERVATION

In a multi-class classification task using a neural network, the model first outputs the logits z accord-
ing to forward propagation, and then normalizes the logits into probabilities p through the Softmax
function. By analyzing these posterior probabilities, we empirically observe that different positive
(negative) samples of a class have approximate probability distributions.
We carry out the experiments on MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets, which are trained on the LeNet-5
(LeCun et al., 1998) and ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) models, respectively. To eliminate the influence
of the activation function, we choose Tanh for LeNet-5 and ReLU for ResNet-18. For each class,
we treat the data belonging to this category as positive samples, and the others as negative samples.
Then we aggregate the positive and negative samples from each class during the training procedure to
show the correlations and variations in their corresponding probabilities. For ease of demonstration,
we only display the results of the first 500 training iterations.

                               MNIST on LeNet-5 (Tanh)                                                                 CIFAR10 on ResNet-18 (ReLU)
                                                                      Positive                                                                                   Positive
                                                                      Negative                                                                                   Negative


        0                                                                                         0

       100                                                                                       100
                                                                                 Iteration


                                                                                                                                                                            Iteration
       200                                                                                       200

       300                                                                                       300

       400                                                                                       400

       500                                                                                       500
             0.090   0.095    0.100   0.105   0.110   0.115   0.120     0.125                          0.050   0.075     0.100   0.125   0.150   0.175   0.200   0.225
                                       Probability                                                                                Probability


                             Figure 2: Posterior probability distribution of different iterations.

Figure 2 shows the ridgeline plots of probability distributions from a randomly selected class (class
4 in MNIST and class 7 in CIFAR10) in different iterations. It can be seen that in the initial stages,
the positive and negative probabilities are extremely close and have almost the same mean value. As
the training progresses, the negative probabilities gradually decrease, while the positive probabilities
slowly increase. Although the variance of the probabilities starts to increase, the mean values of the
positive or negative probabilities remain within a small range.
We also exhibit the box plots of the probability distributions of all the classes in Figure 3, whose
training iteration is 100 for MNIST and 200 for CIFAR10. It is shown that the positive or negative
probabilities of each class are gathered around a certain value, although the values are slightly dif-
ferent. For some easily distinguishable classes, the positive and negative probabilities are already
separated, such as class 1 in MNIST and class 4 in CIFAR10.
We can interpret the above observations from the model’s representation capability. For an untrained
model, it cannot discriminate which class the instance belongs to, other than random guesses. Thus,
                                                                                                1
the posterior probabilities of the positive and negative samples are almost the same, equal to K  . As
training proceeds, the model gradually learns the data distribution and can distinguish the positive
(negative) samples per class. Although the degree of learning varies moderately for different classes,
a robust model can give similar confidence scores (i.e., posterior probabilities) for the same class.
This explains why the positive (negative) samples per class have similar probability distributions.


                                                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   01,67 RQ /H1HW    7DQK                                                                               &,)$5   RQ 5HV1HW     5H/8

                                                                                          3RVLWLYH                                                                                                               3RVLWLYH
                                                                                          1HJDWLYH                                                                                                               1HJDWLYH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3UREDELOLW\
                                                                                                             3UREDELOLW\


                                                     &ODVV                                                                                                                      &ODVV



                              Figure 3: Posterior probability distribution of different classes.


5.2   A NALYTICAL L ABEL R ECOVERY

Based on the observation in Section 5.1, we can estimate the posterior probabilities of the target
batch from an auxiliary dataset, whose data distribution is the same as the training data. Hence, we
                                                                                       −
denote the estimated positive and negative probabilities of the jth class as p̂+
                                                                               j and p̂j , respectively.
Combined with the conclusions in Section 4.1, we can derive the following theorem for restoring
the batch labels λj for each class j.
Theorem 2 (Label Recovery Formula). Having an auxiliary dataset with the same distribution of
training data, we can recover the class-wise labels λj in the target batch according to the averaged
                                                                  −
gradient ∇bj and the estimated posterior probabilities p̂+
                                                         j and p̂j as follows:

                                                                                                  (p̂−    −
                                                                                                     j − yj ) − ∇bj /φ̂j
                                                                   λj = B ·                                                                                               ,                                                                                          (9)
                                                                                              (p̂−    −        +    +
                                                                                                 j − yj ) − (p̂j − yj )

where yj+ and yj− are the pre-set label embeddings of class j, φ̂j = τ1 Φ(αj , p̂+
                                                                                 j , γ) is an coefficient
related to the jth class, and B is the batch size.

Proof. See Appendix C.4.

Specifically, the label embeddings are pre-defined by the FL protocol, which could be one-hot labels
or smoothed labels. For one-hot labels, we have yj+ = 1 and yj− = 0. For smoothed labels, we
have yj+ = 1 − ϵ and yj− = K−1  ϵ
                                    , where ϵ is the smoothing factor. Since Φ(αj , pj , γ) is determined
                       +
by pj , we can use p̂j for replacement and obtain φ̂j . By substituting the gradient ∇bj , estimated
                                                 −                            −
coefficient φ̂j , positive probabilities p̂+                             +
                                           j , p̂j and label embeddings yj , yj into the above formula,
we can directly recover the number of labels λj for each class j.

6     E XPERIMENTS
We now evaluate our label recovery attack with the prior works on a variety of settings.

6.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Dataset, Model and Activation. We evaluate our attack on three datasets, including MNIST (Le-
Cun et al., 1998), CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky & Hinton,
2009). These datasets are widely used in FL research and cover a variety of classification tasks, such
as handwritten digit recognition, object recognition and image classification. We choose LeNet-5
(LeCun et al., 1998), VGG-16 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) and ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) as
the models for the above datasets, respectively. In addition, we select a bunch of activation func-
tions, including Sigmoid, Tanh, ReLU (Nair & Hinton, 2010), ELU (Clevert et al., 2016) and SELU
(Klambauer et al., 2017), to verify the universality of our attack.


                                                                                                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                    Table 2: Comparison of our attack with the baselines on diverse scenarios.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LLG                                                                                                 iLRG                                                                       Ours
                                                      Dataset                                                                          Model                                                           Activation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ClsAcc                                                     InsAcc                                             ClsAcc                                                        InsAcc              ClsAcc                            InsAcc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sigmoid                                                                                         0.954                                                    0.973                                              0.946                                                    0.880               1.000                                  1.000
                                                      MNIST                                                                     LeNet-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tanh                                                                                  0.506                                                    0.163                                              1.000                                                    1.000               1.000                                  1.000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ReLU                                                                                  0.995                                                    0.997                                              1.000                                                    1.000               1.000                                  1.000
                                                      CIFAR10                                                                  VGG-16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ELU                                                                                   0.965                                                    0.979                                              1.000                                                    1.000               1.000                                  1.000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ReLU                                                                                  0.937                                                    0.952                                              1.000                                                    1.000               1.000                                  1.000
                                                  CIFAR100                                                                ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SELU                                                                                  0.028                                                    0.005                                              0.922                                                    0.832               0.968                                  0.951



Evaluation Metrics. To quantitatively evaluate the performance of our label recovery attack, we
use the following two metrics: (1) Class-level label Accuracy (ClsAcc): the accuracy measures the
proportion of correctly recovered classes; (2) Instance-level label Accuracy (InsAcc): the accuracy
measures the proportion of correctly recovered labels in the target batch. In particular, both of these
two metrics are realized through Jaccard similarity, which is defined as follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |ŷ ∩ y|          |ŷ ∩ y|
                                                                                                                                                                                                 J(ŷ, y) =                                                                                         =                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |ŷ ∪ y|   |ŷ| + |y| − |ŷ ∩ y|
where ŷ and y denote the sets of recovered labels (or classes) and ground-truth labels (or classes).

Baselines. Since iDLG (Zhao et al., 2020) only applies to single batch training and non-negative
activation functions, we exclude it from the comparison. We mainly compare our attack with LLG
(Wainakh et al., 2022) and iLRG (Ma et al., 2023), which do not limit the batch size or activation
function. For LLG, we generate the dummy data with the same number as the target batch size and
average the results of 10 runs. Since LLG and iLRG are all designed for the untrained models, we
mainly compare our attack with them in the untrained setting to be fair.

6.2                                                       C OMPARISON WITH BASELINES

To exhibit the versatility of our attack, we compare it with the baselines in 3 different groups of
settings. We set the batch size to 32 for MNIST and CIFAR10, and 256 for CIFAR100. Without loss
of generality, we assume that the training data of each class is uniformly distributed, and the auxiliary
dataset is randomly sampled from the validation dataset with 100 samples per class. Furthermore,
since the baselines are designed for untrained models, we also use initialized models for comparison
to be fair. We run each experiment 20 times and report the average results in Table 2.
From the results, we can see that our attack performs better than the baselines and even achieves
100% ClsAcc and 100% InsAcc in most of the scenarios. In addition, the evaluation results also
illustrate that compared with the dataset and model structure, the activation function has a greater
impact on the performance of all label recovery attacks. This could be explained by the fact that some

                                                                  2XUV                         L/5*                          //*                                                                                                                                                 2XUV                         L/5*                            //*


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,QVWDQFH $FFXUDF\
,QVWDQFH $FFXUDF\


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  $FFXUDF\


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &ODVV $FFXUDF\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,QVWDQFH $FFXUDF\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0RGHO $FFXUDF\


                                                                                                                         %DWFK 6L]H                                                                                                                                                                                                  &ODVV 3URSRUWLRQ                                                                                                                           7UDLQLQJ (SRFK


                                                                                             Figure 4: Instance accuracy with different batch sizes and class imbalances.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


activation functions, like SELU, produce high variance, which causes the probability distribution of
positive and negative samples from the same class to diverge significantly. Therefore, the attack
performance of SELU is worse than that of ReLU and ELU. Nevertheless, our attack still shows
good results, which demonstrates its effectiveness and universality.

6.3    C OMPARISON OF VARIOUS FL S ETTINGS

From Table 2, it is shown that the attack baselines have the best performance for CIFAR10 on VGG-
16 with ReLU activation. So we chose this scenario to analyze the effects of batch size and class
imbalance. The batch size varies from 64 to 1024, which is closer to a realistic FL scenario. Class
imbalance is a prevalent issue in FL, typically brought on by the unequal distribution of data across
various clients. We compare the class proportions from 10% to 90% to simulate the class imbalance.
Before launching the attacks, we train the model for 1 epoch with a learning rate of 0.001.
It is shown in Figure 4 that our label recovery is robust to various batch sizes and class imbalance
ratios, which maintains over 90% accuracy in all of these settings. As the batch size increases, the
InsAcc of our attack gradually improves, which is mainly because the larger the batch size, the more
robust the estimation of the averaged posterior probabilities. In addition, since we have the prior
distribution of the training data, we can constrain and regularize the estimated labels to improve the
success rate of label recovery.


                                                              Figure 5: InsAcc with different scales.
                                                                                                                              (SRFK                          (SRFK                              (SRFK

       Table 3: InsAcc with classification variants.



                                                               ,QVWDQFH $FFXUDF\

                    Temperature τ    Label smoothing ε
    Loss function

                     0.8    1.2       0.1      0.25

     Focal loss     1.000   1.000    1.000      1.000

    Cross-entropy   1.000   1.000    1.000      1.000



                                                                                                                                                                 $X[LOLDU\ 'DWD  SHU FODVV


6.4    A BLATION S TUDIES

We conduct ablation studies to analyze the effectiveness of our attack under different classification
variants and scales of auxiliary data. Table 3 shows the InsAcc of our attack on an untrained model
with the focal loss and cross-entropy loss under different hyper-parameters. The results indicate
that our attack is robust to these variants, which can achieve 100% InsAcc in all of these settings.
Moreover, we also show the attack performance with different scales of auxiliary data in Figure 5.
For an untrained model, the attack performance is not sensitive to the scale of auxiliary data per
class, which can achieve 100% InsAcc in all of these settings. For the training models, our attack is
slightly affected by the scale but still maintains a reasonable accuracy. This manifests that estimating
the posterior probabilities from external data is a robust solution.

7     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we explore the potential threats of FL from the perspective of label recovery. We the-
oretically derive the relationships between gradients and labels in different classification tasks, and
then point out the root cause of label recovery from gradients in FL. Based on our key observation
that the positive (negative) samples of a class have approximate probability distributions, we propose
an analytical method to recover batch labels from the estimated posterior probabilities. Extensive
experiments on various datasets and models demonstrate the effectiveness and universality of our
attack. For future work, we will design a defense mechanism to mitigate the label leakage according
to our theoretical analysis.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Erling Bernhard Andersen. Sufficiency and exponential families for discrete sample spaces. Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 65(331):1248–1255, 1970.

Mislav Balunovic, Dimitar Dimitrov, Nikola Jovanović, and Martin Vechev. Lamp: Extracting text
 from gradients with language model priors. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 35:7641–7654, 2022.

Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. Fast and accurate deep network
  learning by exponential linear units (elus). In 4th International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations (ICLR), 2016.

Trung Dang, Om Thakkar, Swaroop Ramaswamy, Rajiv Mathews, Peter Chin, and Françoise Bea-
  ufays. Revealing and protecting labels in distributed training. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:1727–1738, 2021.

Trung Dang, Om Thakkar, Swaroop Ramaswamy, Rajiv Mathews, Peter Chin, and Françoise Bea-
  ufays. A method to reveal speaker identity in distributed asr training, and how to counter it. In
  ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 4338–4342. IEEE, 2022.

Luke N Darlow, Elliot J Crowley, Antreas Antoniou, and Amos J Storkey. Cinic-10 is not imagenet
  or cifar-10. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03505, 2018.

Jonas Geiping, Hartmut Bauermeister, Hannah Dröge, and Michael Moeller. Inverting gradients-
  how easy is it to break privacy in federated learning? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:16937–16947, 2020.

Jiahui Geng, Yongli Mou, Feifei Li, Qing Li, Oya Beyan, Stefan Decker, and Chunming Rong.
   Towards general deep leakage in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09074, 2021.

Samyak Gupta, Yangsibo Huang, Zexuan Zhong, Tianyu Gao, Kai Li, and Danqi Chen. Recovering
  private text in federated learning of language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:8130–8143, 2022.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.

Jinwoo Jeon, Kangwook Lee, Sewoong Oh, Jungseul Ok, et al. Gradient inversion with generative
   image prior. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:29898–29908, 2021.

Günter Klambauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Andreas Mayr, and Sepp Hochreiter. Self-normalizing
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Master’s
  thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2009.

Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.

Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense
  object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  2980–2988, 2017.

Guodong Long, Yue Tan, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi Zhang. Federated learning for open banking. In
  Federated Learning: Privacy and Incentive, pp. 240–254. Springer, 2020.

Kailang Ma, Yu Sun, Jian Cui, Dawei Li, Zhenyu Guan, and Jianwei Liu. Instance-wise batch
  label restoration via gradients in federated learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E Hinton. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. In
  Proceedings of the 27th international conference on machine learning (ICML-10), pp. 807–814,
  2010.
Dinh C Nguyen, Quoc-Viet Pham, Pubudu N Pathirana, Ming Ding, Aruna Seneviratne, Zihuai Lin,
  Octavia Dobre, and Won-Joo Hwang. Federated learning for smart healthcare: A survey. ACM
  Computing Surveys (CSUR), 55(3):1–37, 2022.
Geet Shingi. A federated learning based approach for loan defaults prediction. In 2020 International
  Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), pp. 362–368. IEEE, 2020.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Aidmar Wainakh, Fabrizio Ventola, Till Müßig, Jens Keim, Carlos Garcia Cordero, Ephraim Zim-
  mer, Tim Grube, Kristian Kersting, and Max Mühlhäuser. User-level label leakage from gradients
  in federated learning. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, 2:227–244, 2022.
Jie Xu, Benjamin S Glicksberg, Chang Su, Peter Walker, Jiang Bian, and Fei Wang. Federated
   learning for healthcare informatics. Journal of Healthcare Informatics Research, 5:1–19, 2021.
Qiang Yang, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, and Yongxin Tong. Federated machine learning: Concept
  and applications. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 10(2):1–19,
  2019.
Hongxu Yin, Arun Mallya, Arash Vahdat, Jose M Alvarez, Jan Kautz, and Pavlo Molchanov. See
  through gradients: Image batch recovery via gradinversion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16337–16346, 2021.
Bo Zhao, Konda Reddy Mopuri, and Hakan Bilen. idlg: Improved deep leakage from gradients.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02610, 2020.
Ligeng Zhu, Zhijian Liu, and Song Han. Deep leakage from gradients. Advances in neural infor-
  mation processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E THICS S TATEMENT

This work demonstrates vulnerabilities in Federated Learning that could potentially allow malicious
actors to exploit gradients to recover private batch labels. If deployed irresponsibly, such analytical
attacks could seriously infringe on individuals’ privacy and undermine trust in Federated Learning.
However, we believe that with proper safeguards and oversight, the insights from this work can be
used to improve accountability and integrity.
We recommend developers adopt differential privacy, trusted execution environments, and multi-
party computation techniques to help cryptographically secure sensitive information like gradients
and batch labels. Rigorous auditing and red team testing should be conducted before deployment to
identify and patch vulnerabilities proactively. Policies and procedures governing the appropriate use
of model insights should be established, clearly documenting purposes and ensuring transparency.
Furthermore, while we have developed proof-of-concept attacks in a simulated environment, we
caution against reckless real-world testing which could cause serious harms. This work is meant
to spur improved security practices, not enable adversaries. We advocate for an ethical approach
centered on user empowerment and safeguarding rights. If deployed conscientiously with account-
ability checks, federated learning can offer privacy-preserving capabilities, but we must be vigilant
against misuse. With care, insight and wisdom, we can work towards equitable and trustworthy AI.


B    R ELATED L ABEL R ECOVERY ATTACKS

We introduce the related label recovery attacks in this section, including iDLG (Zhao et al., 2020),
GI (Yin et al., 2021), RLG (Dang et al., 2021), LLG (Wainakh et al., 2022), ZLG (Geng et al., 2021),
and iLRG (Ma et al., 2023), and compare them with our proposed label attack.

iDLG. iDLG (Zhao et al., 2020) mathematically derives the relationship between the gradient of
the cross-entropy loss w.r.t. the output logits ∇z ∈ RK and the ground-truth label y ∈ RK , which
satisfies ∇z = p − y. This relationship reveals that:

       • ∇zj is negative (∇zj ∈ [−1, 0]) for the input samples belonging to class j,
       • ∇zj is positive (∇zj ∈ [0, 1]) for the samples belonging to other classes k ̸= j.

Since ∇z is unavailable in FL, iDLG uses the gradient of the cross-entropy loss w.r.t. the weight
∇W in the last fully connected layer to estimate ∇z. If the non-negative activation function (e.g.,
ReLU or Sigmoid) is used in the model, ∇W has the same sign as ∇z. By summing up the rows
of ∇W , the negative row implies the ground-truth class of the target batch. However, iDLG is only
applicable to single-batch training and non-negative activation functions.

GI. GI (Yin et al., 2021) follows the main idea of iDLG and extends it to the mini-batch training
scenario. GI observes that for an untrained model, the negative values in gradient ∇z possess larger
magnitudes than the positive values, that is ∇zj− ≫ ∇zj+ . This observation indicates that when
                                                    PB        (n)
a training sample of class j is in the target batch, n=1 ∇zj is highly probable to be negative,
where B is the batch size. Therefore, instead of summing up the rows of ∇W , GI obtains the
minimum value in each row of ∇W and then selects the rows with the minimum B values as the
recovered classes of the target batch. However, GI is only applicable to non-repeating classes in the
target batch and non-negative activation functions.

RLG. According to iDLG, for a sample belonging to class j, ∇zj can be distinguished from
∇zk̸=j by its sign. Since ∇z can be estimated by ∇W , RLG (Dang et al., 2021) proposes to recover
the ground-truth classes of the target batch by distinguishing each row of ∇W from the other rows.
RLG first decomposes ∇W ⊤ into P ΣQ, where P ∈ RM ×S and Q ∈ RS×K are orthogonal
matrices, and Σ ∈ RS×S is a diagonal matrix. For each column qj of Q, j corresponds to the target
index c if a hyperplane can be found to separate qj from the other columns. They transform the
problem into finding a classifier to separate qj=c from qj̸=c through linear programming. Although
RLG is suitable for all activation functions, it only applies to non-repeating classes in the batch.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ZLG. The aforementioned attacks exploit the distinguishability of corresponding rows in ∇W ,
where the target class is located, to recover the ground-truth classes of the training batch. Since
∇W = ∇z · o⊤ = (p − y) · o⊤ , ZLG (Geng et al., 2021) presents to restore batch labels by
estimating the posterior probabilities p ∈ RK and input features o ∈ RM of the last layer. ZLG
                                                    PM
assumes that the summations of different features i=1 oi are approximately equal to each other,
            PM (n)
that is Ô ≈ i=1 oi for n ∈ [1, B]. By estimating Ô and p̂ from dummy data or auxiliary data,
ZLG can restore the number of samples in each class j as follows:
                                                      M
                                                               !
                                                  1 X
                                  λj = B p̂j −           ∇Wj,i .
                                                  Ô i=1

LLG. Similar to ZLG, LLG (Wainakh et al., 2022) rewrites ∇W as ∇W = −y · o⊤ + p · o⊤ .
                                                           PM
For each class j, the restoration problem is formulated as i=1 ∇Wj = λj m + sj , where λj is the
number of labels, m is the impact factor related to the input features, and sj is a class-specific offset
caused by misclassification. Instead of directly estimating the posterior probabilities p and input
features o, LLG embeds this information into the gradient and indirectly estimates m and sj . By
fitting dummy data or auxiliary data into the model and producing multiple sets of gradients, LLG
then restores the class-wise labels in the target batch.

iLRG. iLRG (Ma et al., 2023) exploits both gradient ∇W and gradient ∇b of the bias terms in
the last layer to recover the batch labels. According to z = W o + b, it is easy to derive that
∇b = ∇z. Hence, it only needs to estimate the post-softmax probabilities p to recover the batch
labels y through the conclusion ∇b = p − y. iLRG first restores the batch averaged features ō
from ∇W /∇b (Geiping et al., 2020) and then calculates the posterior probabilities p̂ from ō. For
each class j, iLRG regards (pj − 1) and pj as the coefficients and constructs these coefficients into
a matrix A. Then it can solve the label occurrence vector λ from the equation Aλ = ∇b.

Our Attack. In terms of implementation, our attack leverages the gradient ∇b and the estimated
posterior probabilities to recover the batch labels. At a finer granularity, we divide the probabilities
                                                                                   −
into positive and negative ones for each class j, which are denoted as p+  j and pj , respectively. The
                                             +
samples belonging to class j output the pj , while the samples belonging to other classes k ̸= j
output the p− j . Based on the observation that the positive (negative) samples of a class j have
approximate probability distributions, we can estimate the posterior probabilities of the target batch
from an auxiliary dataset. The estimated positive and negative probability of the jth class are denoted
             −
as p̂+
     j and p̂j , respectively. Combined with our theoretical deductions, we can directly restore the
number of labels λj for each class j as Equation (9).


C     D EFINITION AND P ROOFS

C.1   F OCAL L OSS IN M ULTI - CLASS C LASSIFICATION

According to the derivation of the binary Focal Loss in (Lin et al., 2017), we extend it into the multi-
class scenarios. In a multi-class classification task using Cross-entropy (CE) Loss, the CE loss can
be written as follows:
                                                          − log(p1 ) if y1 = 1
                                                        
                                                        
                                     X K                 − log(p2 ) if y2 = 1
                                                        
                     LCE (p, y) = −       yi log(pi ) =        ..
                                      i=1
                                                        
                                                        
                                                               .
                                                          − log(pK ) if yK = 1,
where y is the one-hot embeded label.
For any class i, we use pt to represent the confidence degree of the model’s prediction as the follow-
ing:

                                                pi     if yi = 1
                                      pt =
                                              1 − pi otherwise,

                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where t = i. To be consistent with the original Focal Loss in (Lin et al., 2017), we use t to represent
the class index instead of i, and t is actually identical to i.
In order to solve class imbalance, Focal Loss assigns an auto-determined weight (1 − pt )γ and a pre-
determined weight αt to each class t. Finally, we define the Focal Loss for multi-class classification
tasks as:
                                             XK
                               LFL (pt ) = −     αt (1 − pt )γ log(pt ).
                                                  t=1

Some important points we would like to emphasize:

       • Difference in probabilities: pi is the post-softmax probability, while pt represents the
         automatic determined confidence of the input at class i, where t = i.
       • Mechanism of weight: For an easy-to-learn sample, pt might be close to the target label.
         So, Focal Loss assigns a small coefficient (1 − pt )γ as the weight. However, for a hard-to-
         learn sample, pt may be close to 0. Then (1 − pt )γ a relatively large weight to enhance the
         ratio of these samples in the total loss.
       • Summation sign: Since the binary Focal Loss (Lin et al., 2017) just has one output, the
         summation is not necessary. In the multi-class case, we use the summation to cover all the
         classes t ∈ [1, K], and aim to derive a general conclusion in Theorem 1.
       • Why Focal Loss: To the best of our knowledge, Focal Loss has the general form in the
         cross-entropy loss variants and it can be converted to CE loss or BCE loss by setting differ-
         ent α and γ. We aim to derive a general form of label leakage from gradients, so we choose
         the Focal Loss.

C.2    S UPPLEMENTARY D EFINITIONS

In a multi-class classification problem, each instance in the dataset belongs to one of several classes.
Let’s denote the set of classes as K and a particular class of interest as k ∈ K. In this context, we
can define positive and negative samples for class k.

       • Positive Samples (Xk+ ): The positive samples of class k satisfy that: Xk+ = {xi : yi = k},
         where xi is the input and yi is the corresponding label.
       • Negative Samples (Xk− ): Similarly, the negative samples of class k satisfy that: Xk− =
         {xi : yi ̸= k}

According to the positive and negative samples, we can then get the positive and negative probability
for class k.

       • Positive Probability (p+  k ): When a positive instance is fed into the model, the predicted
         probability of class k is termed the positive probability. Since the Softmax activation func-
         tion is used in the output layer, the output posterior probability p+ is a vector of length k.
         Therefore, the positive probability for class k can be expressed as p+k.
       • Negative Probability (p−    k ): Similarly, when a negative sample is input into the model, the
         kth element of the output probability vector represents the negative probability, denoted as
         p−
          k . It’s essential to note that any negative sample associated with the other (K − 1) classes
         contributes to p− k.

When using an auxiliary dataset to estimate the probabilities of the target training batch in FL, we
                                                                      −
denote the estimated positive and negative probabilities as p̂+
                                                              k and p̂k , respectively.
In a batch size of B, we aim to recover the labels of each instance within the batch, i.e., y =
[y (1) , y (2) , · · · , y (B) ]. As this is a multi-class classification problem, the ground-truth labels y can
also be represented by the occurrences of each class: y = [n1 , n2 , · · · , nK ], where nk is the number
of samples belonging to class k and K is the number of total classes.
                                                                                PB         (i)
       • Class-wise Labels: The class-wise labels can be defined as: nk =          i=1 δ(y     = k).
                                                                                       (i)
         Here, nk is the number of samples belonging to class k, B is the batch size, y is the true


                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         class label of the ith instance in the batch, and δ(·) is the Kronecker delta function, which
         equals 1 if the condition inside is true and 0 otherwise.

C.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Theorem 3 (Gradient of Focal Loss). For a K-class classification task using the focal loss function
and Softmax activation, we can derive that the gradient of logit zj as follows:
                                                 K
                                                 X
                                  ∇zj LFL =            Φ(αt , pt , γ) · (pj − δtj ),
                                                 t=1

where Φ(αt , pt , γ) = αt (1 − pt )γ 1 − γ pt1−p
                                              log pt
                                                 t
                                                       and ∀t ∈ K, we have Φ(αt , pt , γ) ≥ 0. Besides,
δtj is the Kronecker delta, which equals 1 if t = j and 0 otherwise.

                                                                                                     zt
Proof. According to Equation (1), we substitute the last pt with its Softmax formula pt = PKe ezk ,
                                                                                           k=1
and obtain the transformed focal loss function:
                                    K
                                    X                         ezt
                         LFL = −          αt (1 − pt )γ log PK
                                                                           zk
                                    t=1                            k=1 e
                                  K
                                  X                         K
                                                            X             K
                                                                          X
                              =         αt (1 − pt )γ log         ezk −         αt (1 − pt )γ zt .
                                  t=1                       k=1           t=1


Let ℏ = (1 − pt )γ , then we can deduce the gradient of logit zj as follows:
                   K              K          K                      K
                   X     ∂ℏ      X          X                      X        ∂ℏ
      ∇zj LFL =          αt  log     ezk +      αt (1 − pt )γ pj −      αt      zt − αj (1 − pj )γ
                 t=1
                        ∂z j                t=1                    t=1
                                                                           ∂z j
                                 k=1
                  K                 K
                                                !      K
                 X ∂ℏ              X                  X
               =     αt        log     ezk − zt +         αt (1 − pt )γ (pj − δtj )
                 t=1
                        ∂z j                          t=1
                                   k=1
                  K
                 X                         pt log pt
               =     αt (1 − pt )γ 1 − γ               (pj − δtj )
                 t=1
                                            1 − pt
                   K
                   X
               =         Φ(αt , pt , γ) · (pj − δtj ).
                   t=1


C.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 4 (Label Recovery Attack). For the attacker with an auxiliary dataset, he can recover the
class-wise labels λj of the target batch according to the averaged gradient ∇bj and the estimated
                                  −
posterior probabilities p̂+
                          j and p̂j as follows:

                                                   (p̂−    −
                                                      j − yj ) − ∇bj /φ̂j
                                    λj = B ·                                        ,
                                                 (p̂−    −        +    +
                                                    j − yj ) − (p̂j − yj )

where yj+ and yj− are the pre-set label embeddings of class j, φ̂j = τ1 Φ(αj , p̂+
                                                                                 j , γ) is an coefficient
related to the jth class, and B is the batch size.

Proof. Since z = W x+b, we can deduce that ∇b = ∇z and ∇bj = ∇z j . We expand the averaged
                                                                               (n)
gradient ∇z j as a summation of B terms and replace the posterior probability pj of each sample


                                                            15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             −                               (n)
n with its estimated probabilities p̂+
                                     j and p̂j . Because Φ(αj , pj , γ) is only related to the positive
                                                   (n)
samples of the jth class, we can replace pj              with p̂+
                                                                j . So we have:
                                                                                                 !
                        1                  1                                       p̂+       +
                                                                                     j log p̂j
                   φ̂j = Φ(αj , p̂+
                                  j , γ) =   αj (1 − p̂+
                                                       j )
                                                           γ
                                                                           1−γ                       .
                        τ                  τ                                        1 − p̂+
                                                                                          j


Assume that the first λj samples belong to the jth class, and the rest (B − λj ) samples belong to
other classes. Then from the first row of Table 1, we can derive that:
                                                                                        
                   B                   λj                          B
                1 X (n)          1  X (n) h (n)         (n)
                                                             i    X     (n)
                                                                            h
                                                                              (n)   (n)
                                                                                        i
        ∇bj =          ∇bj =              φj pj − yj           +       φj pj − yj
                B n=1
                                 B          n=1
                                                                                         
                                                                             n=λj +1
                                   1                                   −    −
                                      λj φ̂j p̂+    +

                                 ≈             j − yj + (B − λj )φ̂j p̂j − yj   .
                                   B

Therefore, we can finally derive that:

                               φ̂j p̂−     −
                                                                   (p̂−    −

                                     j − yj    − ∇bj                  j − yj ) − ∇bj /φ̂j
            λj = B ·                                       = B ·                        + .
                              p̂−     −
                                          − φ̂j p̂+    +
                                                                 (p̂−     −       +

                        φ̂j     j − yj            j − yj            j − yj ) − (p̂j − yj )


C.5   I NTERPRETATION OF T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS FROM E XPONENTIAL FAMILY

The standard form of exponential family distribution is:

                              fx (x|θ) = exp [ η(θ) · T (x) − A(θ) + B(x) ] .

We know that the likelihood is the joint probability of all samples occurring:

                   L(θ; x) = f (x1 , . . . , xN |θ)
                                   N
                                   Y
                               =         f (xi |θ)
                                   i=1
                                   N
                                   Y
                               =         exp [ η(θ) · T (xi ) − A(θ) + B(xi ) ]
                                   i=1
                                         "           N                             N
                                                                                                 #
                                                     X                             X
                               = exp η(θ) ·                T (xi ) − N A(θ) +            B(xi ) .
                                                     i=1                           i=1


Now let’s add logarithms to the likelihood function to get the log-likelihood function:

                         ℓ(θ; x) = log L(θ; x)
                                                   N
                                                   X                          N
                                                                              X
                                    = η(θ) ·             T (xi ) − N A(θ) +          B(xi ).
                                                   i=1                         i=1


For the exponential family, parameter η and θ are reversible. Hence, the derivative of canonical
parameter η is denote as:
                                                     N
                                                     X
                                   ∇η ℓ(θ; x) =                T (xi ) − N ∇η A(θ).
                                                         i=1


                                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the categorical distribution, we know that ∇η A(θ) = θ, T (x) = x and LCE (θ, x) = −ℓ(θ; x).
Then we can derive the final expression in the following:
                             ∇η LCE (θ, x) = −∇η ℓ(θ; x)
                                                                   N
                                                                   X
                                            = N ∇η A(θ) −                T (xi )
                                                                   i=1
                                                      N
                                                      X
                                            = Nθ −          xi .
                                                      i=1


From this formula, we can observe that the characteristic of the Exponential Family gives an efficient
way for CE loss to calculate the loss of canonical parameter η by just doing a subtraction rather than
complex calculations. In the multi-class scenario, after substituting θ with post-softmax probability
p, η with logits z, and xi with target label yi , we can derive ∇z LCE (reduction in summation) as
follows:
                                                           X N
                                   ∇z LCE (p, y) = N p −        yi .
                                                             i=1

This is what we mean that from an exponential family perspective, the combination of the softmax
and cross-entropy would have reduced computation, but opened a back door to leaking labels from
shared gradients.

D     A BLATION S TUDIES

D.1       ATTACK ON F OCAL L OSS

In this section, we present additional experiments conducted on the Focal Loss. We mainly test
the parameters of τ , γ and ε on an untrained model, and average the experiments over 10 trials.
Focusing on temperature τ , we present several cases where the accuracy is not 100%. In addition,
by varying γ and ε on these settings, the accuracies are not affected. The following table shows the
ClsAcc and InsAcc of our attack on the Focal Loss with different temperatures τ (batch size=64,
activation=ReLU).


                  Table 4: Label recovery accuracies on Focal Loss (γ = 2, ϵ = 0).
                 MNIST (LeNet)            CIFAR-10 (ResNet-18)                 CIFAR-100 (ResNet-50)
      τ
             Our ClsAcc   Our InsAcc     Our ClsAcc     Our InsAcc             Our ClsAcc   Our InsAcc
    0.5        0.980         0.906          0.990            0.960                 1.000      1.000
    0.75       0.980         0.945          1.000            0.994                 1.000      1.000
    0.9        0.990         0.954          1.000            1.000                 1.000      1.000
    1.25       0.990         0.983          1.000            1.000                 1.000      1.000
    1.5        1.000         0.998          1.000            1.000                 1.000      1.000


We have observed that the temperature parameter, τ , significantly impacts smaller datasets. When τ
is smaller, the space of logits expands, complicating the estimation of batch posterior probabilities.
Consequently, as τ decreases, label accuracy deteriorates. For the large datasets with more classes,
such as CIFAR-10, the logit space is hardly influenced by changing different τ .

D.2       AUXILIARY DATASET WITH D IFFERENT ATTACKS

In this section, we compare the label recovery accuracies of ZLG, LLG and our attack on different
settings. We use the training dataset to sample the target batch for label recovery and the validation


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dataset to simulate the auxiliary dataset. This ensures that the auxiliary dataset has the same data
distribution as the training dataset. We compare the label recovery accuracies (ClsAcc and InsAcc)
of different attacks on three groups of experiments, averaging results over 10 trials.
The first group of experiments set the batch size to 64 and the activation function to ReLU. The
second group of experiments set the batch size to 256 and the activation function to ReLU. Finally,
the third group of experiments set the batch size to 64 and the activation function to ELU. The results
are presented in the following tables.


               Table 5: Label recovery accuracies (batch size=64, activation=ReLU).
                                          ZLG                  LLG                     Our
        Dataset        Model
                                    ClsAcc    InsAcc     ClsAcc    InsAcc     ClsAcc     InsAcc
        MNIST           LeNet       1.000      0.996      1.000     1.000      0.995         0.955
       CIFAR-10         LeNet       1.000      0.986      1.000     0.988      1.000         0.969
       CIFAR-10      ResNet-18      1.000      0.916      1.000     0.914      1.000         1.000
      CIFAR-100      ResNet-50      0.985      0.893      0.816     0.633      1.000         1.000



              Table 6: Label recovery accuracies (batch size=256, activation=ReLU).
                                          ZLG                  LLG                     Our
        Dataset        Model
                                    ClsAcc    InsAcc     ClsAcc    InsAcc     ClsAcc     InsAcc
        MNIST           LeNet       1.000      0.977      1.000     0.982      1.000         0.951
       CIFAR-10         LeNet       1.000      0.961      1.000     0.970      1.000         0.956
       CIFAR-10      ResNet-18      1.000      0.905      1.000     0.919      1.000         0.977
      CIFAR-100      ResNet-50      0.998      0.881      1.000     0.868      1.000         1.000



               Table 7: Label recovery accuracies (batch size=64, activation=ELU).
                                          ZLG                  LLG                     Our
        Dataset        Model
                                    ClsAcc    InsAcc     ClsAcc    InsAcc     ClsAcc     InsAcc
        MNIST           LeNet       1.000      0.948      0.580     0.283      0.990         0.969
       CIFAR-10         LeNet       1.000      0.923      0.990     0.743      1.000         0.939
       CIFAR-10      ResNet-18      1.000      0.902      0.980     0.697      1.000         0.972
      CIFAR-100      ResNet-50      0.985      0.897      0.845     0.603      1.000         1.000


From these tables, we can observe that our attack is more robust than ZLG and LLG on complex
datasets like CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100 trained with ResNet-18 or ResNet-50.

       • For the LeNet model with ReLU activation, when the batch size increases from 64 to 256,
         all the attacks have a slight decrease in InsAcc. It is straightforward to understand that a
         larger batch size is much more difficult to attack than a smaller batch size.
       • For the CIFAR-10 dataset trained on LeNet or ResNet-18, we can observe that the InsAcc
         of ZLG and LLG is lower than our attack. When changing the shallow LeNet model to the
         deep ResNet-18 model, the InsAcc of ZLG and LLG decreases significantly. However, the
         InsAcc of our attack is improved, which indicates that our attack is more robust than ZLG
         and LLG on deep neural networks.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • For the CIFAR-100 dataset, it is shown that our attack reaches 100% InsAcc on all the
         settings. We conclude that a dataset with more classes makes it easy for our attack to
         recover the labels. This is because the more classes there are, the estimated probabilities
         are more accurate and concentrated around the ground-truth value.
       • Finally, when changing the activation function from ReLU to ELU, the InsAcc of LLG
         drops dramatically. This is because LLG is based on the assumption that the activation
         function is non-negative. When the activation function is changed to ELU, the assumption
         is violated, and the InsAcc of LLG drops significantly.

D.3    AUXILIARY DATASET WITH D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT

To address concerns about significant distribution shifts, we conducted supplementary experiments,
averaging results over 10 trials.
In the first set of experiments, we alternately used CIFAR-10 and CINIC-10 (Darlow et al., 2018)
as the training and auxiliary datasets. CINIC-10 extends CIFAR-10 by incorporating downsampled
ImageNet images. While there is some overlap in the distributions due to similar object categories,
there is a notable bias in the data features. We employed an untrained VGG model with a batch size
of 64.
Similarly, the second set of experiments involves alternating between MNIST and Fashion-MNIST
as the training and auxiliary datasets. Despite both datasets having 10 classes, the objects they
represent are entirely different. MNIST dataset contains a lot of handwritten digits, while Fashion-
MNIST represents the article of clothing. Employing an untrained LeNet model with a batch size of
64, the results are presented in the table below.


              Table 8: Distribution shift between training dataset and auxiliary dataset.
          Training Dataset      Auxiliary Dataset       Model     Our ClsAcc      Our InsAcc
              CIFAR-10              CINIC-10            VGG          1.000            1.000
              CINIC-10              CIFAR-10            VGG          1.000            1.000
               MNIST                 FMNIST             LeNet        1.000            0.969
              FMNIST                  MNIST             LeNet        1.000            0.948


This phenomenon can be explained as follows: In the initial phase of model training, the model lacks
the ability to differentiate between samples from each class, assigning similar output probabilities
to all fitted samples (i.e., 1/K). For different training datasets like Fashion-MNIST and MNIST, the
model projects input figures to similar output probabilities with slight variations. This benefits our
label recovery attack as it becomes easier to estimate the posterior probabilities of the target batch.
Given that Fashion-MNIST is more intricate than MNIST, utilizing MNIST as the auxiliary dataset
poses challenges in accurately estimating the probability distribution of batch training samples. This
difficulty accounts for the marginal decrease in InsAcc. However, since CIFAR-10 and CINIC-10
exhibit similarities, there is no difference in InsAcc. The outcomes of these experiments illustrate
that if an attacker initiates an attack during the early training stages, having an auxiliary dataset with
an identical distribution to the training dataset may not be essential.


                                                   19
