Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q UICK D ROP : E FFICIENT F EDERATED U NLEARNING
BY I NTEGRATED DATASET D ISTILLATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Federated Unlearning (FU) aims to delete specific training data from an ML model
         trained using Federated Learning (FL). We introduce Q UICK D ROP, an efficient
         and original FU method that utilizes dataset distillation (DD) to accelerate un-
         learning and drastically reduces computational overhead compared to existing ap-
         proaches. In Q UICK D ROP, each client uses DD to generate a compact dataset rep-
         resentative of the original training dataset, called a distilled dataset, and uses this
         compact dataset during unlearning. To unlearn specific knowledge from the global
         model, Q UICK D ROP has clients execute Stochastic Gradient Ascent with sam-
         ples from the distilled datasets, thus significantly reducing computational over-
         head compared to conventional FU methods. We further increase the efficiency
         of Q UICK D ROP by ingeniously integrating DD into the FL training process. By
         reusing the gradient updates produced during FL training for DD, the overhead
         of creating distilled datasets becomes close to negligible. Evaluations on three
         standard datasets show that, with comparable accuracy guarantees, Q UICK D ROP
         reduces the duration of unlearning by 463.8⇥ compared to model retraining from
         scratch and 65.1⇥ compared to existing FU approaches. We also demonstrate
         the scalability of Q UICK D ROP with 100 clients and show its effectiveness while
         handling multiple unlearning operations.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The vast amount of data produced by computing devices is increasingly being used to train large-
scale ML models that empower industrial processes and personal experiences (Mahdavinejad et al.,
2018). However, this data is often privacy sensitive or very large in volume, making it prohibitively
expensive or impossible to upload it to a central server (Yang et al., 2019). To sidestep this issue,
federated learning (FL) is increasingly being applied to collaboratively train ML models in a privacy-
preserving manner (McMahan et al., 2017). FL obviates the need to move the data to a central
location by having participants only exchange model updates with a server. In each round, this
server aggregates all incoming trained models and sends the updated global model to participants.
Recent privacy regulations like the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) grant data owners
with the “right to be forgotten” (European Union, 2018). In the realm of ML, this requires orga-
nizations to remove the influence of this data on the trained model (Zhang et al., 2023). The latter
is called machine unlearning (Bourtoule et al., 2021). For instance, hospitals that collaboratively
trained a model using FL might have to unlearn particular data samples in response to patient re-
quests. However, the distributed nature of FL and the inability to access training data directly makes
federated unlearning (FU) a challenging task.
A naive way to unlearn particular samples is to retrain the model from scratch while omitting these
samples. As the model and data size increase, complete retraining quickly becomes prohibitively
expensive regarding the time and compute resources required. A more effective approach is to use
stochastic gradient ascent (SGA) on the samples being unlearned, i.e., optimizing in the direction
that maximizes the loss function (Wu et al., 2022). However, since SGA updates the entire model,
it also deteriorates the model performance on the remaining samples. Hence, this approach typi-
cally utilizes a recovery phase, which retrains on the remaining samples for a few rounds to restore
performance. While this method is more efficient than full retraining, the unlearning and recovery
phases are still computationally demanding when dealing with a large volume of training data.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Train data                   FL + DD                      Unlearning      Recovery   Unlearned model (θf)
     (D)

              Many less samples
               than train data               Trained
                                            model (θ)
                  Distilled data (S)                             Forgetting     Non-forgetting
                                                                 dataset (Sf)   dataset (S\Sf)


                                              Data fine-tuning


    Figure 1: The workflow of Q UICK D ROP, our efficient unlearning method using distilled data.

This paper presents Q UICK D ROP, a novel FU approach that efficiently performs unlearning and re-
covery. Q UICK D ROP achieves this efficiency by harnessing dataset distillation (DD), a technique to
condense a large training dataset into a compact synthetic dataset that is orders of magnitude smaller
in volume (Wang et al., 2018). This synthetic dataset is generated such that it largely preserves the
features of the original training dataset. Q UICK D ROP then utilizes this compact dataset during the
unlearning and recovery phases. Figure 1 depicts the complete Q UICK D ROP workflow. Clients first
engage in regular FL training with their train dataset to collaboratively produce a trained model.
Each client also generates a compact synthetic dataset using DD. Upon receiving the initial unlearn-
ing request, the network executes unlearning rounds, during which each client performs SGA on
their local distilled dataset. The network then executes recovery rounds, during which they also use
the distilled data. The key to efficiency in Q UICK D ROP is the tiny volume of distilled data, resulting
in efficient downstream unlearning compared to when using the original datasets of clients.
The distilled datasets can be generated independently from the FL training as the distilled dataset be-
comes necessary only after training finishes. More specifically, by leveraging a recent DD technique
based on gradient matching (Zhao et al., 2021), Q UICK D ROP smartly re-uses the gradient updates
produced during FL training for DD, thus significantly reducing the overhead of the DD process.
Contributions. This paper makes the following three key contributions:

      1. We introduce Q UICK D ROP, a novel and efficient federated unlearning approach that lever-
         ages dataset distillation to unlearn specific knowledge from a trained model (Section 3).
      2. To reduce the computational overhead of DD, we seamlessly integrate DD into FL by
         reusing the gradient updates generated during FL training for creating distilled datasets
         (Section 3.3).
      3. We implement and open-source Q UICK D ROP, and evaluate its unlearning performance
         in terms of efficiency and accuracy on three standard datasets (Section 4). We find that
         Q UICK D ROP reduces the duration of class unlearning by 463.8⇥ compared to model re-
         training from scratch and 65.1⇥ compared to state-of-the-art FU approaches.

2    BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
Federated Unlearning. Cao & Yang (2015) first propose the concept of machine unlearning (MU)
to eliminate the contribution of one specific training data sample from a well-trained model. Since
then, many other algorithms for machine unlearning have been introduced (Du et al., 2019; Ginart
et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2019; Golatkar et al., 2020a;b; Bourtoule et al., 2021). These works focus
mainly on unlearning knowledge from linear classification models, e.g., for logistic regression, but
are unsuitable for more complex models, e.g., deep neural networks. Some algorithms have other
restrictions and can only be applied to specific model architectures or scenarios, e.g., (Brophy &
Lowd, 2021) only fits random forests model and (Nguyen et al., 2020) is only for Bayesian learning.
Federated Unlearning FU is a MU technique where knowledge is removed from a trained model in a
distributed and collaborative manner. Generally, FU is more challenging than MU for the following
two reasons. First, the model aggregation of FL intertwines the information of all clients, making it
hard to identify and remove specific data samples. Secondly, client data is only available locally and
cannot be moved to a central server, therefore mandating active participation by clients to perform
unlearning. (Liu et al., 2021) propose FedEraser to achieve client-level unlearning, i.e., eliminating
the impact of data of one FL client from the FL global model. FedEraser reconstructs the global
model by utilizing all historical update gradients of clients stored in the server during training. The


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


key idea here is to trade the additional storage cost for less computation cost (faster unlearning).
(Wang et al., 2022a) mainly focus on class-level unlearning; they measure the class discrimination
of channels in the model, i.e., the relevance of different classes on the model channel) and then
prune the most relevant channel of the target class to unlearn it. (Wu et al., 2022) proposed a more
general federated unlearning framework by inverse gradient ascent, which achieves unlearning on
class, client, and sample levels. However, this process remains inefficient, particularly when the
volume of data is large or when multiple unlearning requests need to be executed.
Dataset Distillation. The goal of DD is to replace a large training dataset with a significantly smaller
one that can substitute the original dataset during model training (Wang et al., 2018). DD can po-
tentially speed up downstream tasks such as continual learning (Hadsell et al., 2020) and neural
architecture search (Ren et al., 2021). Q UICK D ROP employs DD to speed up the unlearning process
significantly. Early DD approaches are based on coreset selection that identifies a subset of influen-
tial samples during training. Sample selection, for example, can aim to maximize diversity (Aljundi
et al., 2019), detect clusters of similar samples (Sener & Savarese, 2017), or identify individual sam-
ples that lead to high accuracy (Lapedriza et al., 2013). Another class of algorithms synthesizes a set
of new samples from the original dataset. The approach described in (Zhao et al., 2021) is to match
the gradients of a model trained on the original and synthetic data. Follow-up work has introduced
distillation techniques based on trajectory gradient matching (Cazenavette et al., 2022), differential
data augmentation functions (Zhao & Bilen, 2021), distribution matching (Zhao & Bilen, 2023) and
feature alignment (Wang et al., 2022b). Other work utilizes DD for one-shot FL, which significantly
reduces communication cost compared to multi-round FL (Song et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2020).

3     D ESIGN OF Q UICK D ROP
In this section, we first formally define our notation and problem setup. We then describe the un-
learning algorithm in Section 3.1. Section 3.2 describes how we leverage DD to unlock efficient
unlearning and presents the DD algorithm. Section 3.3 shows how Q UICK D ROP integrates DD with
FL training before summarizing end-to-end Q UICK D ROP in Section 3.4.
Problem Setup. We consider an FL system containing total N clients (e.g., mobile devices),
where each client i 2 N holds a local training dataset Di . The clients collaboratively train a global
FL model ✓ following a standard FL algorithm (e.g., F EDAVG (McMahan et al., 2017)). Once the
global model ✓ is trained, the federated server may receive an unlearning request for the subset Df .
We refer to Df as the forgetting dataset that needs to be unlearned from the global model ✓. The
characterization of Df defines the type of unlearning performed. For instance, when Df contains the
data of an entire class, we perform class-level unlearning, whereas when Df contains a single client’s
data, we perform client-level unlearning. We define a FU algorithm U as ✓f = U (✓, Df ), where
✓f is the unlearned model. Unlearning aims to obtain a model ✓f that is equivalent in performance
to a model trained only on the remaining dataset D\Df . In other words, the unlearning model ✓f
should achieve good performance on D\Df while showing poor performance on Df .

3.1   T HE UNLEARNING ALGORITHM

When the server receives an unlearning request for Df , it initiates unlearning rounds that resemble
traditional FL training rounds. However, each client now performs SGA instead of regular SGD on
the portion of samples in Df . In each round, the server aggregates the models received from clients.
However, SGA training often introduces noise that affects the performance of remaining data (Wu
et al., 2022). This noise necessitates subsequent recovery rounds during which clients engage in
regular SGD training on the remaining data, i.e., D\Df . We refer to D\Df as the recovery set.
As we experimentally show later, this recovery phase rapidly restores the accuracy of the remaining
classes. The execution of an unlearning request, therefore, encompasses unlearning on Df and
recovery on D\Df , thus updating the model with the entire dataset. Therefore, this process remains
inefficient, in particular with high data volumes or in the presence of many unlearning requests.

3.2   DATASET D ISTILLATION FOR E FFICIENT U NLEARNING

To significantly reduce the volume of data involved when executing an unlearning request, we utilize
DD to condense all critical information from the original training dataset into a significantly smaller


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


synthetic or distilled dataset S. In our FL setting, each client i 2 N independently distills its local
dataset Di into Si such that |Si | ⌧ |Di |. The unlearning algorithm U can thus be modified as
✓f = U (✓, Sf ), where Sf is the counterpart of the unlearning dataset Df in the distilled dataset.
Since the distilled data is orders of magnitude smaller in volume, the unlearning task can be carried
out very efficiently.
Q UICK D ROP adopts the recent algorithm of Zhao et al. (2021) to perform dataset distillation on
each FL client. The primary reason for choosing this algorithm is the striking similarity of the
algorithmic structure to standard FL algorithms. As one of the main contributions in this paper, we
leverage this similarity to integrate the process of distilling data while training the FL model. This
in-situ distillation avoids expensive computational overheads of distilling data separately.
Dataset Distillation. Before describing the algorithm of Zhao et al. (2021), we first formalize
the task of DD. We adopt the DD formulation from Zhao et al. (2021). Suppose we are given a
                                                                                                |D|
training dataset D with |D| pairs of a training images and class labels D = {(xi , yi )}|i=1 where
x 2 X ⇢ R , y 2 {0, . . . , C 1}, X is a d-dimensional input space and C is the number of
               d

classes. The goal is to learn a differentiable function (i.e., a deep neural network) with parameters
✓ that correctly predicts labels of unseen images. One can learn the parameters of this function by
minimizing an empirical loss term over the training set:
                                          ✓ D = arg min LD (✓)                                          (1)
                                                    ✓
                       P
where LD (✓) = |D|  1
                          (x,y)2D `( ✓ (x), y) , `(·, ·) is a task-specific loss (i.e., cross-entropy) and
✓ is the minimizer of LD . The generalization performance of the obtained model ✓D can be
  D

written as Ex⇠PD [`( ✓D (x), y)] where PD is the data distribution. The goal of DD is to generate a
                                                                                  |S|
small set of condensed synthetic samples with their labels, S = {(si , yi )}|i=1 where s 2 Rd and
y 2 Y, |S| ⌧ |D|. Similar to eq. (1), one can train with these synthetic samples as follows:
                                         ✓ S = arg min LS (✓)                                          (2)
                                                       ✓
                      P
where LS (✓) = |S| (s,y)2S `( ✓ (s), y) and ✓ S is the minimizer of LS . The goal of DD is
                    1

to obtain S such that the generalization performance of ✓S is as close as possible to ✓D , i.e.,
Ex⇠PD [`( ✓D (x), y)] ' Ex⇠PD [`( ✓S (x), y)] over the real data distribution PD .
DD with Gradient Matching. The goal of obtaining comparable generalization performance by
training on the condensed data can be formulated in multiple ways. Zhao et al. (2021) formulate
the problem such that the model ✓S trained on S achieves not only comparable generalization
performance to ✓D but also converges to a similar solution in the parameter space (i.e., ✓ S ⇡ ✓ D ).
This is achieved by matching gradients obtained over training and synthetic data over several time
steps, thereby making ✓ S follow a similar path to ✓ D throughout the optimization. Precisely, S is
obtained as minimizer of the following:

                                              T
                                              X1
                             min E✓0 ⇠P✓0 [         d(r✓ LS (✓t ), r✓ LD (✓t ))]                       (3)
                              S
                                              t=0
where d(.; .) is a function that measures the distance between the gradients for LS and LD w.r.t ✓.
Since deep neural are sensitive to initialization, the optimization in Equation (3) aims to obtain an
optimum set of synthetic images to generate samples that can work with a distribution of random
initializations P✓0 . At each time step, the synthetic data samples are updated by running a few local
steps of an optimization algorithm opt-alg (e.g., SGD):

                       S     opt-algS (d(r✓ LS (✓t ), r✓ LD (✓t )), &S , ⌘S ),                     (4)
where &S and ⌘S correspond to the number of steps and the learning rate. The model parameters are
then updated through the loss on the updated synthetic data:
                                      ✓t+1    ✓t ⌘✓ rLS (✓t )                                      (5)
where ⌘✓ is the learning rate for the update. The gradient matching continues for T steps along the
optimization path, progressively improving the quality of S. This process is repeated for several ini-
tializations K drawn from P✓0 . Algorithm 1, adapted from (Zhao et al., 2021), shows the complete
distillation process.


                                                       4
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Algorithm 1: Dataset condensation with                  Algorithm 2: Integrating DD with FL train-
     gradient matching (Zhao et al., 2021).                  ing. Lines for FL are shown in purple.
  Input: Randomly initialized synthetic samples             Input: Randomly initialized synthetic samples
         S, training dataset D, outer-loop steps                   {Si }N                              N
                                                                          i=1 , training datasets {Di }i=1 , FL
         K, inner-loop steps T , steps for updating                global rounds K, local update steps T ,
         synthetic samples &S in each inner-loop                   steps for updating synthetic samples &S
         step, learning rate ⌘✓ and synthetic                      in an inner-loop step, learning rate ⌘✓
         samples ⌘S .                                              and synthetic samples ⌘S .
1 for k = 0, · · · , K  1 do                              1 for k = 0, · · · , K     1 do
2          —                                              2     for each client i = 1, · · · , N in parallel do
3          Initialize ✓0 ⇠ P✓0                            3         Initialize ✓0i      ✓k
4          for t = 0, · · · , T 1 do                      4         for t = 0, · · · , T 1 do
 5              Sample minibatch pairs B D ⇠ D            5               Sample minibatch pairs B Di ⇠ Di
                  and B S ⇠ S                                               and B Si ⇠ Si
 6              Compute rLD (✓t ) on B D                  6               Compute rLDi (✓ti ) on B Di
 7              Compute rLS (✓t ) on B S                  7               Compute rLSi (✓ti ) on B Si
 8              Update S using                            8               Update Si using
                  d(rLD ,rLS )               B eq. (4)                      d(rLDi ,rLSi )             B eq. (4)
 9              B Use the whole S                         9               B Reuse the above gradient
10              ✓t+1       ✓t ⌘✓ rLS (✓t )               10
                                                                            i
                                                                          ✓t+1       ✓ti ⌘✓ rLDi (✓ti )
                                                                           PN |Di | i
                                                         11     ✓k+1           i=1 |D| ✓T
11      —
     Output: S                                               Output: {Si }N
                                                                          i=1 , ✓K


     3.3     I NTEGRATING DD WITH FL TRAINING BY R E - USING G RADIENTS

     Producing good-quality synthetic data that can reliably be used as a substitute for the training data
     requires many local update steps. Thus, DD is computationally expensive. To reduce this overhead,
     we integrate the DD process with FL training such that clients reuse the gradient updates computed
     during FL training to perform DD. We achieve this by exploiting the algorithmic similarity of Zhao
     et al. (2021) (Algorithm 1) with standard FL algorithms. Algorithm 2 shows how Q UICK D ROP
     integrates DD with FL training, with the key differences from Algorithm 1 colored in red.
     The outer loop of Algorithm 1 corresponds to global rounds in FL (line 1), while the inner loop
     corresponds to the local update steps in FL (line 4). The random initialization of model parameters
     in DD is substituted with initialization to the global model parameters received from the server in
     round k (line 3). A main difference between Algorithm 1 and 2 is that Algorithm 1 distills using
     K randomly initialized models, whereas Algorithm 2 only uses a single initialized model. This
     still works for unlearning as we do not prioritize generalization across different initializations in
     Q UICK D ROP. Our goal is instead to create a synthetic dataset with which can be utilized to unlearn
     knowledge from a model that was trained with a specific initialization. Clients generate gradients
     on mini-batches of their original training data to perform local updates (line 6). Q UICK D ROP effec-
     tively utilizes these gradients to update the synthetic data by matching the gradients computed on
     local synthetic data (lines 7-8). Finally, the model update step on synthetic data in DD is substituted
     by the local update, which the client performs for FL training (line 10). The federated server aggre-
     gates the received models before commencing the next round (line 11). Thus, Q UICK D ROP exploits
     gradients from FL training to efficiently generate distilled data for downstream unlearning. We note
     that the algorithm in Zhao et al. (2021) proposes a class-wise gradient matching which performs
     better than random batches. We also utilize it in Q UICK D ROP but omit from the pseudo code for
     presentation clarity.
     Fine-Tuning distilled data. As the FL model training approaches convergence, the magnitude of
     gradients computed on both the training data and the synthetic data approaches zero. This prevents
     the synthetic data from being updated, resulting in slightly lower quality samples than when per-
     forming DD independently of FL. Therefore, to match the performance of independent DD, we let
     clients conduct additional fine-tuning steps to further improve the quality of their synthetic data. In
     this fine-tuning phase, Q UICK D ROP clients perform Algorithm 1 on their synthetic data.

     3.4     E ND - TO - END W ORKFLOW OF Q UICK D ROP

     Finally, we summarize the end-to-end workflow of Q UICK D ROP, which is also depicted in Fig-
     ure 1. Clients initially train a global model via FL while also conducting dataset distillation (DD)


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to generate distilled datasets. For this, we use the integrated DD approach based on gradient match-
ing described in Sections 3.2 and 3.3. The quality of the distilled dataset can be improved using
fine-tuning. The distilled dataset is then employed for unlearning and recovery, also see Section 3.1.
Mixing original data samples. Clients also utilize the distilled dataset for the recovery phase. In
our experiments, we observed that while using distilled data works well for unlearning, it slightly
hurts the achieved performance in the recovery phase as the distilled samples are not a perfect
representation of the original datasets. We found that even including a few original samples into the
distilled datasets can nullify this performance drop. Thus, clients in Q UICK D ROP perform recovery
on the merged dataset comprising distilled data and a few original samples.

4     E VALUATION
We evaluate Q UICK D ROP and compare its efficiency and performance with state-of-the-art FU base-
lines. We first describe the experimental setup and then show the unlearning performance of Q UICK -
D ROP, the computational efficiency of our integrated FL and DD approach, the impact of additional
fine-tuning steps, and finally the scalability of Q UICK D ROP with 100 clients.

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We evaluate the performance of Q UICK D ROP on three standard image classification datasets:
MNIST (LeCun, 1998), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), and SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011). For
all datasets, we use a ConvNet as the deep neural network backbone (Gidaris & Komodakis, 2018).
All experiments are conducted on a machine equipped with an i9-10900K CPU and an RTX 3090
GPU. All source code is available online. Link omitted due to double-blind review.
Federated Learning. To generate heterogeneous client local datasets, we adopt the Dirichlet distri-
bution based approach from several previous works (Hsu et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2021). The degree
of non-IIDness is controlled by a parameter ↵ 2 [0, 1), with lower values corresponding to more
heterogeneity. In this section, we fix ↵ = 0.1 which is highly non-IID, and show experiments with
IID distributions in Appendix B. We conduct all experiments in this section with ten clients, and we
quantify the scalability of Q UICK D ROP with 100 clients on the SVHN dataset in Section 4.5. We
use a full client participation in each round and train for 200 global rounds (i.e., K = 200), sufficient
to reach convergence. All other FL-related hyper-parameters follow McMahan et al. (2017).
Dataset Distillation. We initialize the synthetic samples {Si }N
                                                               i=1 as randomly selected real training
samples from the original local client dataset. We found this to be more effective in our setting
than when initializing these samples from Gaussian noise. We use the same distance function d for
gradient matching as in Zhao et al. (2021). Our evaluation mainly focuses on class-level unlearning
and shows extensive evaluations comparing Q UICK D ROP to state-of-the-art baselines. Throughout
this section, we refer to the class(es) being unlearned as target class(es). However, we note that
Q UICK D ROP also supports client-level unlearning, which we experimentally show in Appendix C.
To guarantee that the distribution of the distilled dataset of each client reflects their original dataset
distribution, we scale the number of distilled samples for each class for different clients by a factor
s (i.e., distillated sample size per class = original datassize per class ). For any class with a distilled sample
size of zero after scaling, we will round it up to 1 to ensure that this class has at least one distilled
sample. We fix s = 100 for all experiments, which we found to yield a reasonable balance between
efficiency and effectiveness. All other DD-related hyper-parameters follow Zhao et al. (2021).
Baselines. We compare the performance of Q UICK D ROP to the following three baselines:

      1. R ETRAIN -O R: This baseline retrains a model from scratch with FL using the original
         dataset minus the forgetting dataset.
      2. SGA-O R: This baseline performs SGA using the original dataset (Wu et al., 2022). When
         the deletion request of a target class arrives, every involved client executes SGA on the data
         of the target class it owns to unlearn the contribution of the target class in the model.
      3. FU-MP: This baseline uses model pruning by first measuring the class discrimination of
         channels in the model (i.e., the relevance of different classes on the model channel) and
         then prunes the most relevant channel of the target class to unlearn it (Wang et al., 2022a).


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


All reported testing accuracies are the Top-1 accuracy achieved on the testing data of each dataset.
We turn off fine-tuning for all experiments (F = 0), except for the experiments reported in Sec-
tion 4.4. For all experiments with Q UICK D ROP, we perform a single round of unlearning and two
rounds for recovery, which we found to be the minimum for the model to sufficiently unlearn par-
ticular knowledge and restore the performance of the remaining classes. Doing more unlearning
rounds would introduce noise into the model and lower the accuracy of the remaining classes, mak-
ing it more difficult to recover them later. We run each experiment five times and average all results.
Additional notes on the experimental setup and parameters can be found in Appendix A.

4.2    P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION ON A S INGLE U NLEARNING R EQUEST

Unlearning a Single Class. We first quantify the                                0     2    4    6   8
                                                                      class
change in testing accuracy of target and non-target                             1     3    5    7   9

classes after the unlearning and recovery stages, using


                                                                    Testing Accuracy [%]
the CIFAR-10 dataset and 10 clients. The network col-       75

laboratively unlearns from the model the knowledge
                                                            50
corresponding to class 9 (digit “9”) by performing one
round of unlearning and two rounds of recovery. Fig-        25

ure 2 shows the testing accuracy for each class over         0
                                                                           Unlearn      Recover

time in different colors when unlearning with Q UICK -          1        2         3       4      5   6

D ROP. When Q UICK D ROP starts the unlearning stage,                                Round

we observe a rapid accuracy drop on the target class Figure 2: The testing accuracy for all
while the accuracy of non-target classes decreases as classes with CIFAR-10 when unlearning
well. This is because SGA introduces some noise that class 9 and recovering the accuracy of the
affects non-target classes, even though the model pa- other classes with Q UICK D ROP.
rameters changed by SGA are mainly for unlearning
the knowledge of the target class. The recovery stage that starts at round 3, therefore, restores the
accuracy of non-target classes by training the global model on all distilled data of the remaining
classes using stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Figure 2 shows that the accuracies of non-target
classes after two recovery rounds are almost restored to their original values.
Testing Accuracy. Next, we compare the testing accuracy of Q UICK D ROP with our baselines on
CIFAR-10 when unlearning a single class. Table 1 shows the testing accuracy on the F-Set and R-Set
for different FU approaches and after each stage (unlearning and recovery). The F-Set is the set of
samples being unlearned, and the R-Set is comprised of all other samples. Ideally, any FU approach
should achieve near-zero testing accuracy on the F-Set after unlearning. We remark that there is
no recovery stage for R ETRAIN -O R. Table 1 shows that, after the unlearning stage, all approaches
effectively eliminate the knowledge of the target class in the model as the F-Set testing accuracy
is near zero (0.85% for Q UICK D ROP). After recovery, SGA-O R and FU-MP restore the accuracy
of the R-Set close to the values achieved with R ETRAIN -O R. The accuracy of Q UICK D ROP after
recovery, 71.98%, is lower than that of the baselines. This is because the synthetic samples generated
do not represent the original dataset perfectly. However, additional fine-tuning of distilled datasets
can close this gap, at the cost of additional computation (see Section 4.4). Nonetheless, we conclude
that Q UICK D ROP effectively unlearns data samples with minimal impact on the remaining samples.
Computation Efficiency. Table 1 also shows the computational cost for unlearning and recovery in
terms of rounds, time required, and data samples involved in executing these rounds. We observe
significant differences in computation cost between different FU approaches. Since DD reduces
the number of samples for each client used during unlearning, the unlearning stage (one round) in

      Stage                         Unlearning                                                         Recovery
                 Testing Accuracy          Computation Cost                      Testing Accuracy           Computation Cost
 FU approach     F-Set    R-Set     Round    Time (s)   Data Size                     F-Set   R-Set    Round   Time (s)    Data Size
 Q UICK D ROP    0.82%   37.68%        1        5.03       100                  0.85%         70.48%    2         10.58      900
 R ETRAIN -O R   0.81%   74.95%       30      7239.58    45 000                   —             —       —           —         —
   SGA-O R       0.75%   48.69%        2       495.17     5000                  1.03%         74.83%    2         551.33    45 000
    FU-MP        0.12%   11.58%        1       61.36     50 000                 0.09%         73.96%    4         953.62    45 000

Table 1: The test accuracy and computation cost of Q UICK D ROP and FU baselines on the CIFAR-10
dataset, with non-IID data distributions (↵ = 0.1) and in a 10-client network.

                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q UICK D ROP only takes 5.03 s, and 10.58 s in the recovery stage; both stages are completed in just
15.61 s. This efficiency is because a round of unlearning and recovery with Q UICK D ROP only in-
volves 100 and 900 data samples, respectively. Although SGA-O R only needs two rounds to unlearn
a target class adequately, it takes 247.58 s to complete a round as completing this round updates the
model with all clients’ original data (5000 data samples in the unlearning stage and 45 000 samples
in the recovery stage). While R ETRAIN -O R is the simplest method with high testing accuracies
after unlearning, its computational time renders this approach infeasible in many scenarios, which
is 1447⇥ higher than Q UICK D ROP and 14⇥ higher than SGA-O R. We note that FU-MP employs
a different technique, model pruning, than the other approaches in its unlearning stage, while the
recovery stage is the same as others. Since model pruning only depends on information obtained
from inference, which can be done relatively quickly, the time to complete a single round (61.36 s)
is relatively small compared to SGA-O R (247.58 s), but its gap with Q UICK D ROP (5.03 s) is still
significant. From Table 1 we conclude that Q UICK D ROP achieves quick unlearning and recovery
using only a few data samples and with little computational overhead.
Q UICK D ROP is not only suitable for efficient unlearning but can also be applied for efficient relearn-
ing when the deleted knowledge is needed again. We use the distilled datasets to relearn particular
samples and present experiments showing the performance of unlearning in Appendix B.
Membership Inference Attack. We conduct a
                                                       Stage         Unlearning       Recovery
membership inference attack (MIA) on the un-
learned model to further assess the effective-     FU approach F-Set        R-Set  F-Set    R-Set
ness of unlearning with Q UICK D ROP, which         Q UICK D ROP 0.93% 53.39% 0.81% 71.62%
follows related work on MU Chen et al. (2021).     R ETRAIN -O R 0.37% 77.25%       —         —
                                                     SGA-O R      0.68% 65.71% 0.72% 74.21%
The MIA aims to determine whether a partic-           FU-MP       0.79% 37.68% 0.94% 72.56%
ular sample is included in the model’s knowl-
edge. We implement the MIA according to the Table 2: The membership inference attack (MIA)
settings in Golatkar et al. (2021) and measure accuracy of all baselines in different stages.
how often the attack model will classify a data
sample from deleted data as a training sample of the unlearning model. Table 2 shows these MIA
accuracies of different methods and stages. The performance of R ETRAIN -O R can be considered
optimal since the produced model has never seen the unlearned samples. We find that for all ap-
proaches, the MIA accuracy on the F-Set after the unlearning stage is below 1%. The MIA accuracy
on the R-Set for evaluated FU approaches show similar trends as the values observed in Table 1, i.e.,
Q UICK D ROP shows a slightly lower MIA accuracy on the R-Set compared to the other baselines.

4.3   T HE P ERFORMANCE OF Q UICK D ROP WITH S EQUENTIAL U NLEARNING R EQUESTS

In real-world settings, clients may continually launch multiple, sequential unlearning requests.
Therefore, we go beyond existing work on FU and evaluate the performance of Q UICK D ROP with
sequential unlearning requests. Figure 3 shows the accuracies when sequentially unlearning all ten
CIFAR-10 classes in random order. We observe that the accuracy of a target class drops to near
zero after the unlearning phase for that target class ends, illustrating the effectiveness of Q UICK -
D ROP in handling sequential unlearning requests. The accuracies of non-target classes also drop
after the unlearning stage, which is due to the noise introduced by SGA. In the subsequent recovery
stages, Q UICK D ROP rapidly recovers the accuracies of remaining classes by training on the distilled
        Testing Accuracy [%]


                                                                                     class
                               75
                                                                                        0    5

                               50                                                       1    6
                                                                                        2    7
                               25                                                       3    8
                                                                                        4    9
                               0
                                    0   10   20               30   40         50
                                                  Round

Figure 3: The testing accuracy for each class on sequential unlearning requests with CIFAR-10 and
↵ = 0.1. We unlearn a random class every five rounds and highlight the learning and recovery stages
in blue and orange, respectively. The class unlearning order is [5, 8, 0, 3, 2, 4, 7, 9, 1, 6].


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


datasets while leaving the low accuracy of the unlearned classes unaffected. Therefore, Figure 3
shows the capability of Q UICK D ROP in executing multiple unlearning requests. In particular situa-
tions, the network can process multiple unlearning requests in parallel. We discuss this optimization
in Appendix D.

4.4   DATASET D ISTILLATION AND A DDITIONAL F INE - TUNING

As discussed in Section 3.2, integrating DD into


                                                      Testing Accuracy [%]
                                                                                 25k
FL lowers the quality of the distilled dataset com-


                                                                               Gradient Steps on
                                                           Separate                  Separate DD+FL
                                                       74   DD+FL


                                                                                 Original Data
                                                                                 20k
pared to when conducting FL and DD separately.                                           reused
                                                                                 15k
To offset this, Q UICK D ROP allows clients to per-    73

form additional fine-tuning steps (F ) by execut-      72                        10k

ing Algorithm 1. Figure 4 (left) shows the test-       71
                                                                                  5k

ing accuracy of Q UICK D ROP on the R-Set after                                   0k
                                                          0    50 100 150 200          0 50 100 150 200
the recovery stage when doing more fine-tuning              Fine−tuning Steps        Fine−tuning Steps
(i.e., increasing F from 0 to 200). We also show
the testing accuracy reached when separately per- Figure 4: The testing accuracy on the R-Set af-
forming DD and FL (74.78%), which we consider ter recovery (left) and gradient steps on original
as an optimal baseline with a dashed horizontal data (right) when doing additional fine-tuning.
line. We observe an increase in accuracy as F in-
creases: from 70.48% with F = 0 to 74.55% with F = 200. More fine-tuning, however, comes at
the cost of additional computation. Figure 4 (right) shows the number of gradient steps performed
on the original dataset as F increases. This figure marks the portion of gradients we re-use for FL
and DD in orange, which indicates the savings in computation by integrating DD and FL. When per-
forming FL and DD separately, we require 25 000 gradient steps on the original dataset (indicated
by a dashed line). However, when integrating FL and DD, we only need 10 000 gradient steps on
the original dataset with F = 0, and we can re-use all these gradients for DD. With F = 200, this
number increases to 20 000.

4.5   P ERFORMANCE AND E FFICIENCY OF Q UICK D ROP IN L ARGER N ETWORKS

Finally, we analyze the unlearning performance
                                                        Stage          Unlearning         Recovery
of Q UICK D ROP and other baselines in a 100-
client network and with the SVHN dataset.              Baseline      F-Set    R-Set   F-Set    R-Set
SVHN is a large dataset containing more than        Q UICK D ROP    0.72%    58.57%   0.81%   84.96%
600 000 samples and 10 classes. In each round,      R ETRAIN -O R 0.34% 88.39%          —        —
                                                      SGA-O R       0.53% 52.48% 0.66% 86.47%
the server selects a random 10% subset of              FU-MP        0.58% 39.46% 0.73% 85.63%
clients to update the model. Table 3 shows for
each approach and stage the testing accuracy Table 3: Testing accuracy of different FU ap-
on the F-Set and R-Set when unlearning class proaches with 100 clients and the SVHN dataset.
9. Even with 100 clients, Q UICK D ROP effec-
tively unlearns class knowledge, and the accuracy after the unlearning stage on the F-set is just
0.72%. Compared to other baselines, Q UICK D ROP shows good testing accuracy after the recovery
stage on the R-Set, even with more clients and samples in the training dataset. Additional fine-tuning
steps can further reduce this gap. We also observe that Q UICK D ROP executes a complete unlearn-
ing request 475.2⇥ faster than R ETRAIN -O R, highlighting the superior advantage in computation
efficiency stemming from dataset distillation.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced Q UICK D ROP, a novel and efficient federated unlearning method that
incorporates dataset distillation to address the challenges of erasing data from a trained ML model.
Q UICK D ROP has clients produce and use a compact, distilled dataset that drastically reduces com-
putational overhead during the unlearning and recovery phases. Q UICK D ROP elegantly combines
the gradient matching DD and FL processes, allowing for gradient reuse and thereby further reduc-
ing computational overhead. Empirical evaluations on three standard datasets confirmed the effec-
tiveness and efficiency of Q UICK D ROP, demonstrating a remarkable acceleration in the unlearning
process compared to existing federated unlearning approaches.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We have undertaken several steps to ensure the integrity, reproducibility and replicability of Q UICK -
D ROP. We have provided an extensive description of the proposed Q UICK D ROP in the main text,
specifying its workflow in Figure 1, its theoretical formulation in 3 and the integration with Zhao
et al. (2021) in Algorithm 2. To facilitate the reproducibility of the experimental results, the com-
plete source code used for the evaluation of Q UICK D ROP will be made publicly available and a link
will be added in the final paper version. We have used publicly available ML models and datasets.
The details provided in Section 4, as well as the information provided in Section A, should be suf-
ficient to reproduce our results. We believe that these efforts will aid researchers in understanding,
replicating, and building upon Q UICK D ROP.

R EFERENCES
Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Bengio. Gradient based sample selection
  for online continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Lucas Bourtoule, Varun Chandrasekaran, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Hengrui Jia, Adelin
  Travers, Baiwu Zhang, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot. Machine unlearning. In 2021 IEEE
  Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 141–159. IEEE, 2021.

Jonathan Brophy and Daniel Lowd. Machine unlearning for random forests. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 1092–1104. PMLR, 2021.

Yinzhi Cao and Junfeng Yang. Towards making systems forget with machine unlearning. In 2015
  IEEE symposium on security and privacy, pp. 463–480. IEEE, 2015.

George Cazenavette, Tongzhou Wang, Antonio Torralba, Alexei A Efros, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Dataset
  distillation by matching training trajectories. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4750–4759, 2022.

Min Chen, Zhikun Zhang, Tianhao Wang, Michael Backes, Mathias Humbert, and Yang Zhang.
 When machine unlearning jeopardizes privacy. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC confer-
 ence on computer and communications security, pp. 896–911, 2021.

Min Du, Zhi Chen, Chang Liu, Rajvardhan Oak, and Dawn Song. Lifelong anomaly detection
 through unlearning. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and com-
 munications security, pp. 1283–1297, 2019.

European Union. Regulation (eu) 2016/679 of the european parliament and of the council of 27 april
  2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on
  the free movement of such data, and repealing directive 95/46/ec (general data protection regula-
  tion). Official Journal of the European Union, 2018. URL https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
  legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679. OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 1–88.

Spyros Gidaris and Nikos Komodakis. Dynamic few-shot visual learning without forgetting. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4367–4375,
  2018.

Antonio Ginart, Melody Guan, Gregory Valiant, and James Y Zou. Making ai forget you: Data
  deletion in machine learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Eternal sunshine of the spotless net:
  Selective forgetting in deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9304–9312, 2020a.

Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Forgetting outside the box: Scrubbing
  deep networks of information accessible from input-output observations. In Computer Vision–
  ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part
  XXIX 16, pp. 383–398. Springer, 2020b.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, Avinash Ravichandran, Marzia Polito, and Stefano Soatto.
  Mixed-privacy forgetting in deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 792–801, 2021.
Chuan Guo, Tom Goldstein, Awni Hannun, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Certified data removal
  from machine learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03030, 2019.
Raia Hadsell, Dushyant Rao, Andrei A Rusu, and Razvan Pascanu. Embracing change: Continual
  learning in deep neural networks. Trends in cognitive sciences, 24(12):1028–1040, 2020.
Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu, Hang Qi, and Matthew Brown. Measuring the effects of non-identical data
  distribution for federated visual classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06335, 2019.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Agata Lapedriza, Hamed Pirsiavash, Zoya Bylinskii, and Antonio Torralba. Are all training exam-
  ples equally valuable? arXiv preprint arXiv:1311.6510, 2013.
Yann LeCun. The mnist database of handwritten digits. http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/mnist/, 1998.
Gaoyang Liu, Xiaoqiang Ma, Yang Yang, Chen Wang, and Jiangchuan Liu. Federaser: Enabling
  efficient client-level data removal from federated learning models. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 29th In-
  ternational Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQOS), pp. 1–10. IEEE, 2021.
Mohammad Saeid Mahdavinejad, Mohammadreza Rezvan, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Peyman
 Adibi, Payam Barnaghi, and Amit P Sheth. Machine learning for internet of things data analysis:
 A survey. Digital Communications and Networks, 4(3):161–175, 2018.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. 2011.
Quoc Phong Nguyen, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Patrick Jaillet. Variational bayesian unlearning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:16025–16036, 2020.
Pengzhen Ren, Yun Xiao, Xiaojun Chang, Po-Yao Huang, Zhihui Li, Xiaojiang Chen, and Xin
  Wang. A comprehensive survey of neural architecture search: Challenges and solutions. ACM
  Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(4):1–34, 2021.
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00489, 2017.
Rui Song, Dai Liu, Dave Zhenyu Chen, Andreas Festag, Carsten Trinitis, Martin Schulz, and Alois
  Knoll. Federated learning via decentralized dataset distillation in resource-constrained edge envi-
  ronments. In 2023 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–10, 2023.
  doi: 10.1109/IJCNN54540.2023.10191879.
Junxiao Wang, Song Guo, Xin Xie, and Heng Qi. Federated unlearning via class-discriminative
  pruning. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, pp. 622–632, 2022a.
Kai Wang, Bo Zhao, Xiangyu Peng, Zheng Zhu, Shuo Yang, Shuo Wang, Guan Huang, Hakan
  Bilen, Xinchao Wang, and Yang You. Cafe: Learning to condense dataset by aligning features.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  12196–12205, 2022b.
Tongzhou Wang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Antonio Torralba, and Alexei A Efros. Dataset distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1811.10959, 2018.
Leijie Wu, Song Guo, Junxiao Wang, Zicong Hong, Jie Zhang, and Yaohong Ding. Federated
  unlearning: Guarantee the right of clients to forget. IEEE Network, 36(5):129–135, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Qiang Yang, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, and Yongxin Tong. Federated machine learning: Concept
  and applications. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 10(2):1–19,
  2019.
Haibo Zhang, Toru Nakamura, Takamasa Isohara, and Kouichi Sakurai. A review on machine
  unlearning. SN Computer Science, 4(4):337, 2023.
Bo Zhao and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with differentiable siamese augmentation. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12674–12685. PMLR, 2021.
Bo Zhao and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with distribution matching. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 6514–6523, 2023.
Bo Zhao, Konda Reddy Mopuri, and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with gradient matching. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=mSAKhLYLSsl.
Yanlin Zhou, George Pu, Xiyao Ma, Xiaolin Li, and Dapeng Wu. Distilled one-shot federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07999, 2020.
Zhuangdi Zhu, Junyuan Hong, and Jiayu Zhou. Data-free knowledge distillation for heterogeneous
  federated learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12878–12889. PMLR,
  2021.


                                              12
