Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NSUPERVISED IMAGE - TO - VIDEO DOMAIN ADAPTA -
TION FOR FINE - GRAINED VIDEO UNDERSTANDING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Video understanding models continue to rely on image-pretrained semantic rep-
         resentations due to a lack of labeled videos. Pixel-precise video annotations are
         time-consuming and laborious to collect, and may not be feasibly obtained in cer-
         tain situations. There is a growing amount of freely available unlabeled video data
         that has led many methods to tackle unsupervised video representation learning
         and image-to-video domain adaptation. The focus thus far has been on semantic
         representations for classification, which lack the spatial detail required for tasks
         such as segmentation. To produce representations better suited for fine-grained
         video understanding, we propose using large-scale image segmentation datasets
         and domain adversarial learning to train 2D/3D networks for video segmentation.
         We introduce a novel unsupervised clustered adversarial loss that first clusters fea-
         ture maps from a patch embedding then applies a domain discriminator to samples
         within clusters. Our loss is designed to prevent removal of overall spatial structure
         while encouraging the removal of fine-grained spatial information specific to the
         image and video domains. Through experiments using several image and video
         segmentation datasets, we show how a general or clustered adversarial loss placed
         at various locations within the network can make spatial feature representations
         invariant to these domains and improve performance when the network has access
         to only labeled images and unlabeled videos.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Using large-scale image datasets to pretrain video understanding models is a common method of
learning semantic information when there are no video labels available. This can result in subpar
performance on downstream video tasks, especially tasks that require pixel-precise localization of
objects in the frame. The performance drop observed when training on images and testing on videos
is due to the image-video domain gap, which arises due to video artifacts not present in images,
namely motion blur, low lighting and low resolution. Figure 1 shows an example of the domain
differences arising in common datasets: the boundaries of the moving bicycle in the video frame are
blurred. Other contributions to the domain gap are the different distributions of spatial locations of
objects in the frame, diversity of object appearance and aspects, and camera framing (Kalogeiton
et al., 2015). These factors combined make supervised training on images insufficient for pixel-wise
video understanding, producing a need for an alternative representation learning method that uses
unlabeled videos.
Unsupervised video domain adaptation has mainly focused on the classification task rather than
on segmentation. Recent methods minimize distance between augmented versions of video clips
(Li et al., 2023) and utilize spatial (Zara et al., 2023a) and text (Zara et al., 2023b) features from
CLIP-pretrained models as a source of pseudo labels for the target domain. (Lo et al., 2023) focus
on video segmentation but rely heavily on optical flow, which can be time-consuming to extract.
Recent works do not explicitly address the image-video domain gap.
In this paper, we propose an approach to image-to-video domain adaptation that takes advantage
of both labeled images and unlabeled videos and apply it to video segmentation. Taking inspira-
tion from Tang et al. (2012), we use unlabeled videos to minimize the domain difference between
image representations and the spatial component of video representations. To prevent the loss of
discriminative semantic information, we propose a novel clustered adversarial loss in which features


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: A single image from the COCO dataset (left) and a frame from Davis 2019 (right) shows
domain differences such as motion blur arising from video artifacts.


from images and videos are first clustered in an unsupervised manner before applying an adversarial
loss to remove domain-specific information from features within each cluster. We train our video
segmentation networks to be invariant to properties specific to video (motion blur, viewpoints, etc.)
so that we can train on labeled images and apply them to videos without a performance drop.
We present experiments in which our proposed unsupervised loss is combined with an image-
supervised segmentation loss, leading to a training method that relies only on image labels but
maintains good performance on videos. We experiment with two different segmentation backbones:
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Transformers. To take advantage of temporal informa-
tion in unlabeled videos while retaining spatial information from labeled images, we also apply our
method to VideoSwin (Liu et al., 2021b) with a spatiotemporal window size. We experiment with
two different placements for the domain discriminator – after the patch embedding layer (spatial)
or after the encoder (global) – and find that the spatial placement boosts the contribution of the
adversarial loss. We conduct experiments using the video segmentation datasets Davis 2019 and
FBMS and show that in our target setting with no access to labeled videos, our method improves
segmentation performance over models supervised with images. In an ablation where we replace
the video dataset with another image dataset, we show that the adversarial loss is indeed removing
image-video domain-specific differences from the representations.

2    R ELATED W ORK

Image to Video Adaptation Image-to-video domain adaptation has been explored for video clas-
sification (Chen et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2015), detection (Prest et al., 2012; Donahue et al., 2013) and
face recognition (Sohn et al., 2017). Kae & Song (2020) propose a two-stage training approach in
which 2D image features are transferred to a 3D CNN before continuing to train on videos. Recently,
Lin et al. (2022) introduced CycDA, which performs spatial feature learning and spatiotemporal fea-
ture learning alternately in a four-stage training approach. There is a lack of image-to-video domain
adaptation for video segmentation, where it is important for features to maintain a high spatial res-
olution throughout the encoding stage. As a result, video segmentation features are more dependent
on spatial localization than they are for the tasks above. The adaptation methods developed for those
tasks do not take detailed spatial domain differences into account.
Many works have addressed domain adaptation for semantic segmentation in order to solve the
synthetic-to-real problem or transfer representations. Shin et al. (2021) use distillation to tackle
synthetic-to-real domain adaptation for video semantic segmentation. Guan et al. (2021) enforce
similar temporal consistency between consecutive real frames and consecutive synthetic frames.
Hong et al. (2017) use unlabeled videos for image segmentation by generating pseudo-labels. Tang
et al. (2012) address image-to-video domain adaptation in object detection by retraining an image-
trained detector on target video samples. Our clustered adversarial loss is most similar to that of
Yang et al. (2021), which uses domain adversarial learning on the class tokens of a vision transformer
for image classification.

Unified Image-Video Models A growing body of work is focused on developing unified models
for image and video tasks. Huang et al. (2023) propose training the same model for many image
and video tasks interactively, but rely on pixel-wise video annotations. Qing et al. (2023) combines
spatial features from a frozen CLIP-pretrained transformer with temporal features from a 3D encoder
by finetuning temporal and integration branches; their method does not remove image domain-


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Images +
      Video Frames                                                                                                                                                                      Padding


                                  Patch Embed


                                                                      Patch Merge


                                                                                                     Patch Merge
    ...


                                                      Swin Block


                                                                                     Swin Block


                                                                                                                         Swin Block


                                                                                                                                            Decoder
                                                                                                                   ...
                                                                                                                                                                                        2D Conv
                                                                                                                                                      Images only


                                                                                                                                                                                            Norm


              Spatial level:              Cluster                                                    Global level:                                                          Feature maps             Patch tokens
                                         Sampling                                                 Concatenate tokens                                                           128
          Apply to feature maps                                                                                                                                                             96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 128

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        96
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Permute


                                                                                                                                                                    128


                                                                                                                                                                                                           128
                                      Discriminator                                                                         Discriminator                                                         axes



                                                                                                                                                                          96 x [128, 128]                128 x 128 x [96]



Figure 2: We apply the supervised segmentation loss to images only, and add an adversarial loss on
either the spatial or the global level. In the spatial treatment, a discriminator is applied to spatial
feature maps following cluster sampling (see Fig. 3) the patch embedding layer. In the global
treatment, a discriminator is applied to full image representations following the end of the encoder.
The patch embedding, shown right, consists of 96 4⇥4 convolution filters and normalization.


specific features from the spatial representations. Vi2CLR (Diba et al., 2021) uses separate 3D and
2D CNN encoders and contrastive learning over clusters of latent frame and clip features.

3     M ETHODS
Our approach relies on treating images and videos as separate domains and applying a domain adver-
sarial loss to learn robust semantic representations. Many image and video segmentation networks
use encoders that learn low-level features in the shallow layers and abstract features in deeper layers.
Based on observations by Kalogeiton et al. (2015), we hypothesize that the semantic representations
learned by an encoder trained only on images differs from those learned on videos due to video
artifacts like motion blur, camera framing and aspect diversity. We further hypothesize the artifacts
make it more difficult for a segmentation decoder to recover fine-grained details in videos. Our goal
is to bring detailed semantic features learned from images closer to those learned from videos using
an adversarial loss propagated through the encoder. In a real-world scenario the most likely setting
is access to a small amount of labeled images (and perhaps labeled videos) and a large amount of
unlabeled videos. Our method makes it straightforward to use all available data.
To make the feature representations invariant to the image and video domains, we add a domain
discriminator at different points in the encoder, shown in Figure 2. During training we reverse the
discriminator’s gradients when they meet the encoder, which encourages the encoder to learn feature
representations that fool the discriminator by containing as little information as possible about the
domain.

3.1       D OMAIN A DVERSARIAL L OSS

Formally, we are given samples from a source dataset Ds = {(xs , y s )}N
                                                                       s=1 where each x is a single
                                                                                       s

image and y s is its pixel-wise segmentation label. In the unsupervised domain adaptation setting
we have access to samples from an unlabeled target dataset Dt = {xt }M t=1 where each x is a video
                                                                                       t

frame. Given a sample xi 2 {D , D }, a discriminator estimates its domain Di through:
                                 s  t


                                                                                    arg max Pr(Di = D | h(xi ))                                                                                                        (1)
                                                                           D2{D s ,D t }

where Di is the domain of xi and h(·) is a function mapping xi to some latent feature space. In
our setting, h(xi ) is the encoder’s feature representation of xi (global level) or a feature map from
its low-level embedding (spatial level); Figure 2 shows these placements in the model architecture.
Using a binary cross entropy loss, the discriminator’s training objective Lg is to minimize:
                                   X
                           Lg =             di log(pi ) + (1 di ) log(1 pi )                        (2)
                                                                   (xi ,di )2D


                                                                                                                                 3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Low-level                                                    k-means                           Balanced
                                            Feature maps
                    embeddings                                                    clusters                          samples


                       I                         I                               IV       IV
  Patch Embed                                                                 I I I VI   V V
                                                                                        I V I                    {I, I}   {I, V}
                                  Flatten                       Cluster              VV I           Sample                          Discriminator
                                                                                     I I IV V                   {V, I}    {V, V}
                       V                         V                                 IVI       I


                                                                                 K clusters                   Sample in sets of 4


Figure 3: In the clustered adversarial loss feature maps from a batch of low-level image / video
frame embeddings are clustered, then balanced samples are drawn from each cluster. I represents
feature maps derived from images, and V represents feature maps derived from video frames. Here
the input has dimensions (H, W ); there are 96 convolution filters of size 4 ⇥ 4, and 4 image and 4
video frame samples per minibatch.



where D = Ds [ Dt , di is a binary indicator 1[xi 2 Ds ], and pi is the network’s estimate of
Pr(Di = Ds |h(xi )).
During training, a Gradient Reversal Layer (GRL) (Ganin et al., 2016) is placed between discrimi-
nator and layer prior to it. The GRL outputs the identity on the forward pass and reverses the sign
of the discriminator’s gradients during the backward pass.


3.2             C LUSTERED A DVERSARIAL L OSS

In our setting, we consider images and videos to be two separate domains, and are interested in
removing image- and video-specific information from semantic feature representations. We hy-
pothesize that this will allow the network to learn semantic features that perform well on the target
domain, videos, after training on labeled source images. The general adversarial loss Lg defined in
equation 2 has been widely used in domain generalization tasks to remove domain-specific infor-
mation from features (Lin et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2023). However, it does not spare semantic and
spatial structure relevant to the task. This becomes an issue when the source and target domains
have very different spatial or class distributions, in which case the discriminator may remove cru-
cial semantic class information from the network, leading to poor performance. Image and video
datasets may be labeled with different semantic classes, but we seek to take advantage of all labeled
data regardless of annotation consistency.
To prevent this loss of structure, we propose a novel unsupervised clustered adversarial loss that
retains any coarse semantic and spatial information that may correlate with domain while still re-
moving fine domain-specific features. To this end we perform unsupervised cluster sampling, shown
in Figure 3. Specifically, feature maps extracted from image and video frames are first clustered in
an unsupervised manner using K-means clustering, then an adversarial loss is applied to balanced
samples drawn from each cluster. The discriminator now takes a pair of purely spatial feature maps
and estimate the likelihood that they belong to the same domain. Formally, our clustered adversarial
loss Lcl is defined as:

                                            kK
                                            X         X
                                 Lcl =                             bi log(qi ) + (1              bi ) log(1      qi )                       (3)
                                            k=1 (xi ,x0i )2Bk



where K is the total number of clusters, bi is a binary indicator of whether xi and x0i belong to the
same domain Di , and qi is the network’s estimated probability that xi and x0i belong to the same
domain. Bk is a set of pairs of image and video features within a cluster, constructed to contain
a balanced number of feature pairs from (Ds , Dt ), (Ds , Ds ) and (Dt , Dt ) in order to stabilize the
discriminator’s loss. Clustering is only carried out during training and does not affect inference time.


                                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   S EGMENTATION L OSS

To maintain detailed semantic information, the network is trained for segmentation through a stan-
dard cross entropy loss:                X XX
                             Lseg =                    yi,j log pi,j,k                         (4)
                                       (xi ,yi )2D s   j   k

where j iterates over each pixel in the image, c ranges over the number of object classes and pi,j,k
is the decoder’s estimate of the probability that pixel j in image i belongs to class k. In case of
spatiotemporal input, j ranges over the temporal dimension as well.
The final network is trained end-to-end by minimizing the segmentation loss and maximizing the
adversarial loss:
                                        Lf inal = Lseg µL✓a                                     (5)
where La 2 {Lg , Lcl } and µ is a constant scaling factor chosen through grid search to ensure the
encoder backbone does not collapse. Our joint training procedure ensures that the network learns
feature representations that are useful for segmentation and do not contain domain information.

4     E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS
4.1   DATASETS

To understand how our method changes semantic segmentation representations learned from videos
we conduct experiments on subsets of Davis 2019 (Perazzi et al., 2016) and on FBMS (Ochs et al.,
2014). For our experiments we process video annotations so that they are semantically consistent
across videos in order to better measure our network’s understanding of semantics. We use COCO
Stuff (Lin et al., 2014) as a source of labeled images, which has many overlapping classes with
Davis and FBMS.
Davis is a video object segmentation dataset with foreground object mask annotations for 60 training
and 30 validation videos. We focus on 10 classes in common with COCO that appear in both training
and validation splits. Having an object appear in the training set allows us to analyze how its object
representation changes when using our method: any difference in performance results from changes
in the object representations as opposed to the model’s ability to generalize to unseen classes. A
breakdown of the number of video frames in each of the shared classes in Davis can be found in
Appendix Table 8.
FBMS contains 59 video sequences with 353 annotated training frames and 367 annotated test
frames across 19 semantic classes. As an additional source of unlabeled video data that often fea-
tures motion blur, low lighting, and low resolution, we use YouTube-BoundingBoxes (YTBB) (Real
et al., 2017). It features bounding box annotations for 23 objects in ⇡380,000 YouTube videos. To
decode videos we use 30 fps and skip unavailable videos.

4.2   I MPLEMENTATION

To analyze the domain shift between images and videos, we train segmentation networks jointly
on images and videos. We consider two types of segmentation backbones: CNNs and Transform-
ers. For our CNN we use Deeplabv3 (Chen et al., 2017) with a ResNet-101 backbone initialized
from COCO-pretrained weights. The domain discriminator consists of a 2D convolution, a fully
connected layer, dropout, ReLU and the classification layer. For our 2D Transformer we use the
Swin-T Transformer backbone with a UperNet decoder (Liu et al., 2021a) with patch size (4,4) and
window size (7,7), initialized from ADE20k-pretrained weights. The discriminator is implemented
as a sequence of alternating linear and leaky ReLU layers. When the discriminator is placed at the
end of the encoder (global treatment) the tokens are concatenated and spatial dimensions flattened.
At the patch embedding level (spatial treatment) each token’s spatial dimensions are flattened and
the token and batch dimensions are combined. Our spatiotemporal model is VideoSwin with a Swin-
T backbone, patch size (1,4,4) and window size (4,7,7) and uses a PatchGAN discriminator (Isola
et al., 2017) with four layers. VideoSwin is initialized with ADE20k weights replicated across the
temporal dimension appropriately. The number of clusters in our adversarial loss is set to 11 and
ablated in Table 6.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Results on Davis from training a 2D CNN on Davis, COCO and YTBB. Adv indicates
whether the model is trained with the adversarial loss. Labeled/Unlabeled columns indicate the
label setting for the training set. mIOU is averaged over 10 classes plus background. The general
adversarial loss boosts performance over the baseline trained on labeled images and no videos.
                         Adv       Labeled      Unlabeled mIOU
                        7          COCO              –          32.3      –
                        3          COCO            Davis        36.9    + 4.60
                        3          COCO            YTBB         37.7    + 5.40
                         7       Davis                 –        32.2       –
                         7     COCO+Davis              –        46.2       –


5     R ESULTS

5.1   2D CNN S ON DAVIS

We focus on the setting in which we have access to labeled images and unlabeled videos due to the
challenging nature of collecting video annotations. To test the general adversarial loss’ contribution
to learning detailed semantic representations, we place a discriminator at the end of a 2D CNN
encoder which acts on global spatial feature representations. We train on video frames from Davis,
images from COCO and also experiment with training on random unlabeled YouTube videos from
YTBB. Unlabeled frames are only used in the adversarial loss. Our baseline is the 2D CNN trained
only on labeled images.
Table 1 shows our results on Davis measured using mean Jaccard index or Intersection over Union
(IOU) over all semantic classes. We find that in our target setting with no access to labeled videos,
the adversarial loss boosts the performance of the baseline CNN. The adversarial loss even boosts
performance on Davis when using random unlabeled YouTube videos to train the discriminator. Our
method outperforms the supervised setting in which the model is trained only on labeled videos.
Training with the adversarial loss on images and unlabeled videos performs better than training on
just labeled videos, highlighting the usefulness of our method in settings where labeled videos are
difficult to collect and object diversity is limited.
To test whether our method can improve the performance of a VOS baseline model, we replace the
CNN encoder of UNOVOST (Luiten et al., 2020) with our adversarially trained encoder and show
this improves its performance on Davis in Table 7. Thus our method can boost performance of
existing VOS models in the challenging unlabeled video setting.

5.2   T RANSFORMERS

In the following experiments we test whether the general and clustered adversarial losses boost the
performance of a Transformer-based model trained only on labeled images. We use Swin as our 2D
Transformer and VideoSwin with a spatiotemporal window size as our 3D Transformer.

2D Transformer on Davis We train Swin on videos from Davis and images from COCO and
show results in Table 2. We find that applying the discriminator to spatial feature maps right after
the patch embedding yields better performance than to the whole representation at the end of the
encoder, showing that targeting spatial patterns is sufficient to reduce the domain gap. We test the
performance of our clustered adversarial loss and show that clustering feature maps at the patch em-
bedding level before applying the adversarial loss leads to a further boost in performance. Training
with the adversarial loss improves performance in the unlabeled video setting as well as with access
to labeled videos.

VideoSwin on Davis We explore how our method performs in a model that learns spatiotemporal
features, namely, VideoSwin with image patch tokens and spatiotemporal window extending over
the entire clip length. Table 3 shows the results of training this network using the general adversarial
loss after the patch embedding. In the unlabeled video setting, the adversarial loss improves on the


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         A            B (GT)             C               D (ours)              E          F (ours)

Figure 4: Qualitative results on Davis videos. Column A: Original frame. Column B: Ground truth.
Column C: 2D CNN trained on COCO images. Column D: 2D CNN trained on labeled COCO and
unlabeled Davis with general adversarial loss. Column E: Swin trained on COCO images. Column
F: Swin trained with clustered adversarial loss on labeled COCO and unlabeled Davis frames. Swin
trained with the clustered loss recovers fine-grained details and has a better separation of semantic
classes than the model trained only on images.


Table 2: Results on Davis from training a 2D Transformer on Davis and COCO. Cluster indicates
whether the clustered or general adversarial loss is used. The Spatial/Global column indicates the
discriminator’s location.
       Adv Cluster Spatial/Global             Labeled        Unlabeled mIOU
        7        –             –               COCO                  –          29.98      –
        3        7           Spatial           COCO                 Davis       25.27   - 4.71
        3        7           Spatial           COCO                 Davis       32.70   + 2.72
        3        3           Spatial           COCO                 Davis       38.53   + 8.55
        7        –             –              Davis                  –          25.97      –
        7        –             –           COCO + Davis              –          29.01   + 3.04
        3        7           Spatial       COCO + Davis              –          28.15   + 2.18
        3        7           Spatial       COCO + Davis              –          32.55   + 6.58
        3        3           Spatial       COCO + Davis              –          38.27   + 12.30


image-supervised model, showing that our method can be applied to spatiotemporal models that rely
on image-pretrained weights.

FBMS We test whether our method achieves a boost in performance on a different video dataset
FBMS and show results in Table 5. In the unlabeled video setting, the general adversarial loss
improves over the model supervised by images. Because the annotations for FBMS do not include
all instances of each class in every video, there is a discrepancy between the annotations for FBMS
and COCO which we believe prevents the model from learning strong semantic class representations,



Table 3: Results on Davis of VideoSwin with the general adversarial loss at the patch embedding
level.
                     Adv       Labeled     Unlabeled mIOU
                       7         COCO             –           19.35            –
                       3         COCO            Davis        30.48         + 11.13
                       7       Davis                 –        25.75           –
                       7     COCO+Davis              –        32.46         + 6.71
                       3     COCO+Davis              –        33.65         + 7.90


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 A                B               C                D            E (ours)

Figure 5: Qualitative results on FBMS videos. Column A: Original frame. Column B: Ground
truth. Column C: Swin trained on FBMS video frames. Column D Swin trained on COCO images.
Column E: Swin trained on labeled COCO and unlabeled FBMS data with the adversarial loss.


Table 4: Ablation study on whether an adversarial loss placed at the end of the encoder boosts im-
provement when training on labeled COCO images and unlabeled Pascal images. Adding unlabeled
data from another image dataset does not significantly affect test IOU measured on COCO or Davis.
                    Model        Adv Labeled Unlabeled              Test   mIOU
                      CNN          7      COCO           –         Davis      32.3
                      CNN          3      COCO         Pascal      Davis      33.7
                      CNN          7      COCO           –         COCO       44.5
                      CNN          3      COCO         Pascal      COCO       45.0
                  Transformer      7      COCO           –         Davis     10.35
                  Transformer      3      COCO         Pascal      Davis     10.21
                  Transformer      7      COCO           –         COCO      11.31
                  Transformer      3      COCO         Pascal      COCO      10.10


leading the model to perform worse when trained with both labeled videos and images than training
with our adversarial loss.
We show qualitative results of our method compared to the baselines on FBMS in Figure 5.2. When
only training on video frames, the model is unable to fully represent the object and often under-
segments it. When training on a large image dataset, the results are improved, and when training
with the adversarial loss and unlabeled video frames, the model segments foreground objects better.


6   A BLATIONS

Number of clusters We conduct an ablation on the number of clusters K used in our clustered
adversarial loss, since increasing K creates a trade-off with efficiency. In this ablation, we place
the clustered adversarial loss after the patch embedding layer of a 2D Swin Transformer and train
on labeled COCO images and unlabeled Davis frames. The results in Table 6 show that setting the
number of clusters slightly above the minibatch size (11 clusters; minibatch size 8) performs best.

Unlabeled Images We conduct an ablation to test whether the performance boost with our adver-
sarial loss is due to feature invariance in the image-video domains or invariance to dataset biases. To
test this, we train a 2D model on labeled images from COCO and unlabeled images from the entire
large-scale image segmentation dataset Pascal VOC (Everingham et al., 2010). The results in Table
4 show that using unlabeled images when training with the adversarial loss does not significantly
improve results regardless of the backbone. Additionally the same observations hold when testing
on COCO. We believe the adversarial loss’ improvements are due to features becoming invariant to
video artifacts, not dataset-specific biases.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Table 6: Ablation of number of clusters K
                                                         reported in mIOU on Davis.
                                                            K         2        5     11       22
                                                          mIOU     45.57    47.27    47.97    47.25

                                                         Table 7: Performance of UNOVOST
Table 5: Results on FBMS of training a 2D Trans-
former with our general adversarial loss at the          (Luiten et al., 2020) on Davis with our ad-
patch level.                                             versarial training method.
  Adv Labeled Unlabeled mIOU                                       Adv     mIOU
    7      COCO         –          33.98      –                     7      26.49      –
    3      COCO       FBMS         34.47    + 0.49                  3      27.84    +1.35


7       D ISCUSSION
We hypothesize that due to different filter sensitivities, each image / video frame will have feature
maps with many spatial structures, and that by including slightly more clusters than inputs, clusters
include similar spatial patterns from multiple inputs. Because the clustered loss formulation does
not explicitly rely on features specific to the image-video domain gap, it can be applied to different
adaptation tasks. It could also be applied to prevent discriminative information loss during joint
supervised training on multiple datasets. In this setting, when there is not significant overlap in
semantic labels, missing information risks confusing the network and degrading performance.
In experiments with the adversarial loss within a 2D Transformer, we found placing it after the
patch embedding layer increases performance over concatenating tokens at the end of the encoder
and applying the loss over the concatenated feature. Feature maps at the beginning of the network
retain fine-grained spatial details that likely contain more explicit domain information than features
at the end of the encoder. This makes it easier for the discriminator to target video artifacts (such as
motion blur at moving object boundaries). Placing the discriminator at the end of the encoder where
features are abstract is also beneficial, so it may be useful to place the discriminator at intermediate
blocks within the transformer, which we leave for future work.
Finally, we note that while spatiotemporal models have become critical for good performance in
video classification, fully 3D end-to-end trainable networks have had limited success on video seg-
mentation without relying on optical flow. We hypothesize that a lack of video annotations is a major
contribution to this problem, and through our experiments using VideoSwin, we take a step towards
developing a domain adaptation solution that relies only on image labels and abundant unlabeled
videos.

8       C ONCLUSION
In this paper we address a gap in the video representation learning literature where the focus has
typically been on video classification rather than segmentation. We propose an unsupervised image-
to-video domain adaptation method, in which a clustered adversarial loss allows a network to learn
fine-grained semantic representations from labeled images and unlabeled videos. Similar to previous
video models, we leverage image datasets to learn strong semantic features while using the adver-
sarial loss to address the performance drop that ensues when applying these networks to videos.
We conduct experiments for video segmentation to show that our method benefits learning detailed
semantic representations for videos. We find that the general adversarial loss improves CNN and
2D/3D Transformer’s performance and our clustered adversarial loss improves 2D Transformer per-
formance.

R EFERENCES
Jin Chen, Xinxiao Wu, Yao Hu, and Jiebo Luo. Spatial-temporal causal inference for partial image-
   to-video adaptation. AAAI, 2021.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Rethinking atrous
  convolution for semantic image segmentation. CVPR, 2017.
Ali Diba, Vivek Sharma, Reza Safdari, Dariush Lotfi, Saquib Sarfraz, Rainer Stiefelhagen, and Luc
  Van Gool. Vi2clr: Video and image for visual contrastive learning of representation. ICCV, 2021.
Jeff Donahue, Judy Hoffman, Erik Rodner, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. Semi-supervised
   domain adaptation with instance constraints. CVPR, 2013.
M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zisserman. The pascal visual object
 classes (voc) challenge. IJCV, 2010.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
  works. JMLR, 2016.
Dayan Guan, Jiaxing Huang, Aoran Xiao, and Shijian Lu. Domain adaptive video segmentation via
  temporal consistency regularization. ICCV, 2021.
Jintao Guo, Lei Qi, and Yinghuan Shi. Domaindrop: Suppressing domain-sensitive channels for
   domain generalization. ICCV, 2023.
Seunghoon Hong, Donghun Yeo, Suha Kwak, Honglak Lee, and Bohyung Han. Weakly supervised
  semantic segmentation using web-crawled videos. CVPR, 2017.
Thomas E. Huang, Yifan Liu, Luc Van Gool, and Fisher Yu. Video task decathlon: Unifying image
  and video tasks in autonomous driving. ICCV, 2023.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A. Efros. Image-to-image translation with
  conditional adversarial networks. CVPR, 2017.
Andrew Kae and Yale Song. Image to video domain adaptation using web supervision. WACV,
  2020.
Vicky Kalogeiton, Vittorio Ferrari, and Cordelia Schmid. Analysing domain shift factors between
  videos and images for object detection. TPAMI, 2015.
Kai Li, Deep Patel, Erik Kruus, and Martin Renqiang Min. Source-free video domain adaptation
  with spatial-temporal-historical consistency learning. CVPR, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro
  Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dollár. Microsoft coco: Common objects
  in context. ECCV, 2014.
Wei Lin, Anna Kukleva, Kunyang Sun, Horst Possegger, Hilde Kuehne, and Horst Bischof. Cycda:
 Unsupervised cycle domain adaptation from image to video. ECCV, 2022.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. ArXiv preprint, 2021a.
Ze Liu, Jia Ning, Yue Cao, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Han Hu. Video swin
  transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13230, 2021b.
Shao-Yuan Lo, Poojan Oza, Sumanth Chennupati, Alejandro Galindo, and Vishal M. Patel. Spatio-
  temporal pixel-level contrastive learning-based source-free domain adaptation for video semantic
  segmentation. CVPR, 2023.
Jonathon Luiten, Idil Esen Zulfikar, and Bastian Leibe. UnOVOST: Unsupervised offline video
  object segmentation and tracking. WACV, 2020.
Peter Ochs, Jitendra Malik, and Thomas Brox. Segmentation of moving objects by long term video
  analysis. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2014.
F. Perazzi, J. Pont-Tuset, B. McWilliams, L. Van Gool, M. Gross, and A. Sorkine-Hornung. A
   benchmark dataset and evaluation methodology for video object segmentation. CVPR, 2016.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alessandro Prest, Christian Leistner, Javier Civera, Cordelia Schmid, and Vittoria Ferrari. Learning
  object class detectors from weakly annotated video. CVPR, 2012.
Zhiwu Qing, Shiwei Zhang, Ziyuan Huang, Yingya Zhang, Changxin Gao, Deli Zhao, and Nong
  Sang. Disentangling spatial and temporal learning for efficient image-to-video transfer learning.
  ICCV, 2023.
Esteban Real, Jonathon Shlens, Stefano Mazzocchi, Xin Pan, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Youtube-
  boundingboxes: a large high-precision human-annotated dataset for object detection in video.
  CVPR, 2017.
Inkyu Shin, Kwanyong Park, Sanghyun Woo, and In So Kweon. Unsupervised domain adaptation
  for video semantic segmentation. ArXiv preprint, 2021.
Kihyuk Sohn, Sifei Liu, Guangyu Zhong, Xiang Yu, and Manmohan Yang, Ming-Hsuan Chandraker.
  Unsupervised domain adaptation for face recognition in unlabeled videos. ICCV, 2017.
Kevin Tang, Vignesh Ramanathan, Li Fei-fei, and Daphne Koller. Shifting weights: adapting object
  detectors from image to video. NeurIPS, 2012.
Jinyu Yang, Jingjing Liu, Ning Xu, and Junzhou Huang. TVT: Transferable vision transformer for
   unsupervised domain adaptation. ArXiv preprint, 2021.
Ting Yao, Yingwei Pan, Chong-Wah Ngo, Houqiang Li, and Tao Mei. Semi-supervised domain
  adaptation with subspace learning for visual recognition. CVPR, 2015.
Giacomo Zara, Alessandro Conti Conti, Subhankar Roy Roy, Stephane Lathuiliere, Paolo Rota, and
  Elisa Ricci. The unreasonable effectiveness of large language-vision models for source-free video
  domain adaptation. ICCV, 2023a.
Giacomo Zara, Subhankar Roy Roy, Paolo Rota, and Elisa Ricci. Autolabel: Clip-based framework
  for open-set video domain adaptation. CVPR, 2023b.


                                                11
