Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


RAVL: R EACH -AWARE VALUE L EARNING FOR THE
E DGE - OF -R EACH P ROBLEM IN O FFLINE M ODEL -
BASED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Offline reinforcement learning makes use of pre-collected datasets and has
         emerged as a powerful paradigm for training agents without the need for expensive
         or unsafe online data collection. This offline approach, however, introduces the
         additional challenge of evaluating values for state-actions not seen in the dataset –
         termed the out-of-sample problem. Model-based approaches deal with this by al-
         lowing the agent to collect additional data through rollouts in a learned dynamics
         model. The prevailing theoretical understanding is that this effectively resolves
         the out-of-sample issue, and that any remaining difficulties are due to errors in
         the learned dynamics model. Based on this understanding, one would expect im-
         provements to the dynamics model to lead to improvements to the learned policy.
         Surprisingly, however, we find that existing algorithms completely fail when the
         true dynamics are provided in place of the learned dynamics model. This observa-
         tion exposes a common misconception in offline reinforcement learning, namely
         that dynamics model errors do not explain the behavior of model-based methods.
         Our subsequent investigation reveals a second major and previously overlooked
         issue in offline model-based reinforcement learning (which we term the edge-of-
         reach problem), whereby values of states that are only reachable in the final step
         of the limited horizon rollouts are pathologically overestimated, similar to the out-
         of-sample problem faced by model-free methods. This new insight fills some of
         the gaps in existing theory and allows us to reinterpret the efficacy of prior model-
         based methods. Guided by this understanding, we propose Reach-Aware Value
         Learning (RAVL), a value-based algorithm that is able to capture value uncer-
         tainty at edge-of-reach states. Our method achieves strong performance on the
         standard D4RL benchmark, and we hope that the insights developed in this paper
         aid the future design of more accurately motivated offline algorithms.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Offline reinforcement learning (Offline RL, Ernst et al. (2005); Levine et al. (2020)) allows agents to
learn from pre-existing datasets. This makes it a practical choice for scenarios where online data col-
lection could be costly or dangerous, such as robotics (Ball et al., 2021; Chebotar et al., 2021; Kumar
et al., 2021) or healthcare (Shiranthika et al., 2022; Tang & Wiens, 2021). Furthermore, offline RL
provides a route for utilizing large existing datasets to scale RL to more complex problems (Kumar
et al., 2023), mirroring recent advances in supervised learning (Brown et al., 2020).
The central challenge in offline RL is dealing with value estimation for counterfactual actions not
present in the dataset (termed the out-of-sample problem (Kostrikov et al., 2022)). A naı̈ve approach
results in inaccurate out-of-distribution values being propagated through to observed state-actions,
which can lead to pathological training dynamics (Kumar et al., 2019). There have been many
proposals to resolve this, with approaches largely falling into one of two categories: model-free (An
et al., 2021; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kostrikov et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2019;
2020) or model-based (Kidambi et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2020).
Model-free methods typically address the out-of-sample problem by applying a form of conser-
vatism or constraint to avoid out-of-sample state-actions in the Bellman update. In contrast, model-


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Our paper investigates the overlooked edge-of-reach problem in offline model-based reinforcement
learning, whereby states (in red) only reachable at the final step of a model rollout are liable to pathological
value overestimation. We show the boundaries of reachable states at each timestep of k-step rollouts from Ds .

based methods (Kidambi et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2020), which are the focus of
this paper, aim to solve the out-of-sample problem by using a learned dynamics model (Janner
et al., 2019; Sutton, 1991) to allow the agent to collect additional observations for previously out-of-
sample state-actions. The current understanding is that these additional rollouts allow the agent to
collect corrective feedback for any misestimated values, thereby solving the out-of-sample problem
analogously to how it is avoided in online RL. With this understanding, model-based methods typi-
cally attribute any remaining difficulties to errors in the learned dynamics model, and algorithms are
subsequently motivated by avoiding model exploitation using some notion of dynamics uncertainty.
This understanding of model-based approaches naturally leads to the belief that improving the dy-
namics model should lead to stronger performance. However, in this paper, we begin by demon-
strating the surprising observation that existing offline model-based methods completely fail when
trained with the true error-free dynamics model (see Table 1). This exposes a gap in the current
predominant understanding of model-based offline RL methods. From our subsequent investigation,
we find that the combination of a fixed dataset with limited-horizon rollouts results in there being a
set of states which, under any policy, are only reachable in the final rollout step. For these edge-of-
reach states, even with the ability to collect additional data, the agent is never able to observe the
outcome of any actions from them. The result is pathological value overestimation closely related
to that seen with the out-of-sample problem in model-free methods. We term this the edge-of-reach
problem. Thus, contrary to common understanding, the out-of-sample problem key in model-free
methods can be seen to effectively persist in model-based methods.
We illustrate this problem with careful and thorough analysis on a simple environment. We demon-
strate first, that pathological value overestimation can occur despite allowing additional data col-
lection, and second, that correcting only the value estimates of edge-of-reach states is sufficient to
resolve this. This leads us to propose Reach-Aware Value Learning (RAVL), a scalable solution
based on value ensembles that are able to capture the value uncertainty at edge-of-reach states. Our
method connects the two previously disjoint subfields of model-free and model-based offline RL
algorithms, combining the strengths of both. We show that RAVL provides a satisfying solution on
the simple environment, and moreover scales to the standard D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) benchmark.
The insights presented in this paper allow us to fill some of the gaps in our existing understanding,
and subsequently enable us to reinterpret the success of prior offline model-based RL algorithms
based on this more complete understanding of the underlying mechanisms. Furthermore, our find-
ings serve to unify understanding of model-based and model-free algorithms, and as such may pave
the way for porting further strengths of existing model-free algorithms into model-based approaches.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:

       • We expose a gap in the current understanding of offline model-based RL algorithms using
         experiments with the oracle dynamics model in Section 4.1. This leads us to identify the
         existence of edge-of-reach states.
       • We describe the edge-of-reach problem in Section 4.2 and carefully demonstrate the phe-
         nomenon in a simple environment in Section 5, including experiments to verify that failure
         stems from value overestimation of edge-of-reach states.
       • In light of this new understanding, we propose Reach-Aware Value Learning (RAVL), a
         natural solution to the edge-of-reach problem in Section 6. We show that our algorithm
         provides an effective solution on the simple environment and also scales to achieve strong
         performance on the standard offline RL benchmark, D4RL (Fu et al., 2020).


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     BACKGROUND
2.1    R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING AND VALUE F UNCTIONS

We consider the standard RL framework (Sutton & Barto, 2018), in which the environment is for-
mulated as a Markov Decision Process, M = (S, A, T, R, µ0 , γ), where S and A denote the state
and action spaces, T (s′ |s, a) and R(s, a) denote the transition and reward dynamics, µ0 the initial
state distribution, and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. The goal in reinforcement learning is to learn
a policy π(a|s) that maximizes the expected discounted return:
                          "∞                                                                         #
                           X
         ∗                       t
        π = arg max E           γ R(st , at ) | s0 ∼ µ0 (·), at ∼ π(· | st ), st+1 ∼ T (· | st , at ) . (1)
                   π
                             t=0

The broad class of algorithms we consider are actor-critic (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999) methods which
jointly learn a policy π and state-action value function (Q-function). The Q-function Q(s, a) aims
to predict the expected discounted return conditional on starting at state s, taking action a, and
henceforth following the current policy. We then iterate between improving the policy relative to
the current Q-function (policy improvement) and fitting the Q-function to the current policy (policy
evaluation) to learn the optimal policy. The policy evaluation step relies on approximate dynamic
programming with Bellman updates, updating the Q-function using some dataset D as follows:
               Qj+1 ← arg min E(s,a,r,s′ )∼D,a′ ∼πj (·|s′ ) [(Q(s, a) − [r + γQj (s′ , a′ )])2 ]               (2)
                         Q                                    | {z } |         {z          }
                                                                   input         Bellman target



2.2    O FFLINE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING AND THE O UT- OF -S AMPLE P ROBLEM

In online RL, the agent is able to collect new on-policy data throughout training. By contrast, in the
offline setting, the algorithm has access only to a fixed offline dataset consisting of transition tuples
Doffline = {(si , ai , ri , s′i )}i=1,...,N collected by one or more behavioral policies π β . The central
problem in offline learning is, therefore, the counterfactual action or out-of-sample problem:1 where
state-actions pairs (s′ , a′ ) used to compute the targets in the Bellman update (see Equation (2)) may
not appear in the dataset Doffline . The consequence is that these out-of-sample state-actions are never
optimized due to never appearing as inputs in the Bellman update, meaning they are prone to being
erroneously misestimated. Further, when coupled with the max operator in policy improvement,
this misestimation means naı̈ve application of online algorithms often results in catastrophic training
dynamics and pathological overestimation of Q-values (Kumar et al., 2019).

2.3    O FFLINE M ODEL -BASED M ETHODS

Model-based methods (Sutton, 1991) aim to solve the out-of-sample issue by allowing the agent to
collect additional synthetic data in a learned dynamics model M   c = (S, A, Tb, R,b µ0 , γ). Tb(s′ |s, a)
and R(s,
     b a) denote the approximate transition and reward functions, and are commonly realized as a
deep ensemble (Chua et al., 2018; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). Methods typically use the MBPO
procedure (Janner et al., 2019) (see Algorithm 1), with synthetic data sampled as k-step trajectories
(termed rollouts) under the current policy, starting from states in the offline dataset Doffline .

3     R ELATED W ORK
Overestimation bias in Q-learning. Q-learning is a popular basis for many off-policy RL algo-
rithms, however, it has been shown to suffer from an overestimation bias stemming from the max-
imum operation maxa′ ∈A Q(s′ , a′ ) in the Bellman update (van Hasselt et al., 2016). This problem
is exacerbated when combined with function approximation and bootstrapping, commonly known
as the deadly triad (van Hasselt et al., 2018) and can become even more problematic in the offline
    1
      This is often referred to as the problem of evaluating values for ‘out-of-distribution’ state-actions (due
to a distribution shift between the policy used to sample the action and the behavior policy used to collect
Doffline ). We choose to use the term ‘out-of-sample’ to highlight connections later on, but assuming that function
approximators generalize within-distribution, these are essentially interchangeable.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


setting due to the out-of-sample problem (Kumar et al., 2019). An effective approach to mitigat-
ing this issue is clipped double-Q learning (Fujimoto et al., 2018) (extending the original double-Q
learning (van Hasselt et al., 2016)) which proposes to learn two independent Q-functions and take
the minimum over them. Furthermore, this approach can be extended with a larger ensemble of
Q-functions to further control overestimation bias (An et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021). As discussed
to in Section 2.2, overestimation bias and the subsequent pathological training dynamics is the main
barrier to transferring online RL algorithms to the offline setting, due to the lack of corrective feed-
back on out-of-sample state-actions. As such, there have been many attempts to address it.
Offline model-free methods. Offline model-free algorithms can broadly be divided by how they
deal with out-of-sample state-action pairs into action sampling-based methods and value pessimism-
based methods. Action sampling-based methods ensure that any state-actions used in the Bellman
update are close to the behavior policy π β , such that they are in-distribution with respect to Doffline .
This may be done by updating in a SARSA (Sutton & Barto, 2018) fashion (Kostrikov et al., 2022),
by modeling π β directly (Fujimoto et al., 2019), or by explicitly constraining the policy using some
measure of distance to πβ (Kumar et al., 2019). A related idea is to add a behavioral cloning loss
term (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021). On the other hand, value pessimism-based methods aim to regularize
the Q-function directly such that it produces low-value estimates for out-of-sample state-actions (An
et al., 2021; Kostrikov et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2020). Of these, the most similar to our RAVL
algorithm is EDAC (An et al., 2021) which encourages values at out-of-distribution state-actions to
be low by minimizing over a Q-ensemble.
Offline model-based methods. As alluded to in Section 1, the prevailing view in the offline model-
based literature is that the ability to collect additional data in the model effectively resolves the
out-of-sample issue, as the agent is now able to observe the outcome of previously out-of-sample
state-actions. Thus, the primary concern stated for model-based methods is to account for errors
in the learned dynamics model in order to avoid model exploitation. A broad class of methods ex-
plicitly penalizes reward by dynamics uncertainty (Kidambi et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022; Sun et al.,
2023; Yu et al., 2020), typically using variance over a dynamics ensemble. On the other hand, Rigter
et al. (2022) defines a two-player game between the policy and model, updating the model in order
to minimize the learned value function. This forces the policy to act conservatively in areas not
covered by the dataset, where model errors may be high. Matsushima et al. (2021) borrow ideas
from model-free approaches and use policy constraints, with the motivation that the model is likely
to be more accurate close to the behavior policy. Critically, all previously described methods draw
their motivation from dealing with dynamics model errors. Finally, most related to our method,
COMBO (Yu et al., 2021), penalizes value estimates for state-actions outside model rollouts. How-
ever, similarly to Yu et al. (2020), COMBO is theoretically motivated by the assumption that one
can perform infinite horizon model rollouts, which we later show overlooks serious implications.


4     T HE E DGE - OF -R EACH P ROBLEM

In the following section, we describe the underlying motivation and focus of our paper: the edge-of-
reach problem. We begin by presenting a surprising result using the ground truth dynamics, from
which it follows. Next, we provide intuition for our hypothesis and theoretical proof of its effect on
offline model-based training. Finally, we connect the problem to the standard out-of-sample issue in
Appendix A, resulting in a unified view of model-free and model-based offline RL.

4.1    A S URPRISING R ESULT: FAILURE WITH THE T RUE DYNAMICS M ODEL

On the surface, the ability to collect additional data in model-based offline methods resolves the out-
of-sample issue in offline RL (see Section 2.2). The key remaining difference compared to online RL
therefore appears to be that: in online RL, data is collected with the true dynamics, while in offline
model-based RL, data is collected in an approximate dynamics model. As a result, most existing
offline model-based algorithms aim to mitigate the effect of dynamics model errors, for example by
penalizing using estimates of dynamics uncertainty (Sun et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2020) or terminating
after transitioning past a certain level of uncertainty (Kidambi et al., 2020).
Such an understanding would naturally lead us to expect that the ideal case would be to have a
perfect model with zero dynamics error. Surprisingly, we show this is not the case. In Table 1, we


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 1: We show, surprisingly, that if the true error-free dynamics are used in place of the learned dynamics
model, existing offline model-based algorithms fail (highlighted) on the D4RL MuJoCo v2 datasets. Our
baseline is MOPO (tuned results taken from Sun et al. (2023)). Oracle refers to replacing the learned dynamics
model in MOPO with the true dynamics function, making it equivalent to MBPO (the base optimizer for
most other offline model-based RL methods) with a perfect uncertainty-free model. We summarize this in
Algorithm 1. Normalized mean and standard deviation are shown over 6 random seeds.
                          Hopper                      Walker2d                     HalfCheetah
                 MOPO              Oracle         MOPO       Oracle             MOPO        Oracle
  random           31.7           9.5±1.1            7.4   -0.4±0.2               38.5    35.2±3.4
  medium           62.8         17.2±11.1           84.1    7.2±1.6               73.0    72.9±8.6
  mixed           103.5         71.5±32.2           85.6    7.9±1.9               72.1    72.2±4.1
  medexp           81.6           6.1±6.8          112.9    7.7±2.1               90.8   84.9±17.6

demonstrate this on the D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) datasets. When the learned dynamics model used
in MOPO (Yu et al., 2020) is replaced with the true dynamics (labeled Oracle), most environments
fail to train at all. Furthermore, we note that other dynamics penalty-based offline model-based RL
algorithms (Kidambi et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2023) share the same base MBPO (Janner et al., 2019)
optimizer, hence this result indicates the failure of all existing methods. We provide a formal
comparison between the methods used here and elsewhere in the paper in Appendix F.2.

4.2   T HE E DGE -O F -R EACH H YPOTHESIS

Our observation in Section 4.1 exposes a widespread misconception as to the true cause of issues in
offline model-based RL. In the following section, we informally describe our resulting hypothesis.
In offline model-based RL, synthetic data is collected by generating k-step rollouts. Crucially, k
(typically ≤ 5) is less than the true horizon of the environment (H = 1000 in MuJoCo (Todorov
et al., 2012)), and all rollouts begin from states sampled from the fixed offline dataset Doffline . Since
Doffline is typically limited, k-steps away from the dataset is unlikely to sufficiently cover the full
state space S. Consider states on the boundary of the space that rollouts are able to cover, i.e. states
which, under any policy, are only reachable in the final step of a rollout. For these states, even with
the ability to collect additional data, the agent is never able to observe the outcome of actions from
them. We term these edge-of-reach states (see red in Figure 1).
More concretely, denoting the rollout-augmented dataset Drollouts = {(si , ai , ri , s′i , a′i )}i=1,...,M ,
edge-of-reach states are those that appear as s′i but never, under any policy, appear as si . Crucially,
this means they are used to compute the Bellman targets in Q-learning, but never appear as inputs
to the Q-function and are hence themselves never updated. This makes them liable to erroneous
misestimation, which bootstrapping then propagates to previous state-actions, leading to poor value
estimates more widely. More significantly still, this misestimation coupled with the overestimation
bias in Q-learning can lead to pathological overestimation, with Q-values being driven upwards to
arbitrarily high values over training. We demonstrate this in Section 5 and Appendix B.2, and term
this the edge-of-reach problem. In short:

  Edge-of-Reach Hypothesis: Limited horizon rollouts from a fixed offline dataset lead to the
  existence of edge-of-reach states which, due to lack of corrective feedback, can cause patho-
  logical value overestimation.

This is closely related to the out-of-sample problem in the model-free case, but focusing on the state,
rather than the action part of the state-action pair. Thus, contrary to common understanding, the out-
of-sample problem, which is key in model-free methods, can be seen to effectively persist in model-
based methods. We provide a more thorough comparison of the out-of-sample and edge-of-reach
problems in Appendix A, separating the problems into conditions required on states and actions
independently. This serves to provide a unified view of model-free and model-based approaches.

4.3   F ORMALIZATION

We now formalize the intuitions presented in Section 4.2 and present theoretical grounding for the
edge-of-reach problem. Furthermore, we prove how errors can propagate to all transitions.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 1 (Edge-of-reach states). Consider a deterministic transition model T : S × A → S, a
policy π : S → A, a rollout length k, and a distribution over starting states v0 (s), which in our
case is the state distribution of Doffline . Given a starting state s0 ∼ v0 , k-step rollouts are generated
according to at ∼ π(·|st ) and st+1 ∼ T (·|st , at ) for t = 0 . . . k − 1, giving (s0 , a0 , s1 , . . . , sk ). Let
us use pt,π (s) to denote the marginal distributions over st .
We define a state s ∈ S edge-of-reach with respect to T , v0 , and k if: for t = k, ∃ π s.t. pt,π (s) > 0,
but, for t = 1, . . . , k − 1 and ∀ π, pt,π (s) = 0.
With stochastic transition models (e.g. Gaussian models), we may have the case that no state will
truly have zero density, and we relax this definition slightly to pt,π (s) < ϵ for some small ϵ. The
next proposition quantifies how errors in edge-of-reach states are propagated to preceding states.
Proposition 1. [Error propagation from edge-of-reach states] Consider a rollout of length k,
(s0 , a0 , s1 , . . . , sk ). Suppose that the state sk is edge-of-reach and the approximate value func-
tion Qj−1 (sk , π(sk )) has error ϵ. Then, standard value iteration will compound error γ k−t ϵ to the
estimates of Qj (st , at ) for t = 1, . . . , k − 1. Proof provided in Appendix E.
This is an analogous statement to that of Kumar et al. (2019); however, we highlight its significance
in the context of model-based methods. While we show this for a single rollout, in practice, this
behavior will manifest across sampled minibatches. We argue that this issue is the predominant
issue in offline model-based algorithms, since existing works (Janner et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2022)
have shown that modern dynamics models are typically accurate even to high rollout lengths.

5     A NALYSIS WITH A S IMPLE E NVIRONMENT
In the previous section, we provided a plausible theoretical explanation and intuition for the pathol-
ogy found in Section 4.1. In this section, we empirically confirm this hypothesis with careful analy-
sis on a simple environment. First, we show that naı̈ve application of actor-critic algorithms results
in exploding Q-values and failure to learn despite using the true dynamics. Next, we verify that
edge-of-reach states are the source of this problem by correcting value estimates only at these states.

5.1    S ETUP

We consider a simple 2D continuous grid world with a reward given according to an agent’s distance
from a fixed goal (shown in Figure 2(a)). Concretely, we denote states as (x, y) pairs, and consider
                                                                                (δx ,δy )
bounded 2D actions (δx , δy ) which displace the agent, i.e. (x, y) −−−−→ (x + δx , y + δy ) with


Figure 2: Experiments on the simple environment, illustrating the edge-of-reach problem and potential solu-
tions. (a) Reward function, (b) final (failed) policy with naı̈ve application of SAC, (c) final (successful) policy
with patching in oracle Q-values for edge-of-reach states, (d) final (successful) policy with RAVL, (e) returns
evaluated over training, (f) mean Q-values evaluated over training.

                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


|δx |, |δy | ≤ 1. Reward is exponentially decreasing away from the goal g = (4, 8), i.e. R(s, a) =
exp(− 12 ∥s − g∥22 ). The initial state distribution is centered around the origin, µ0 = U ([−2, 2]2 ).
We train the agent using SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) as in Sun et al. (2023); Yu et al. (2020) with a
setup identical to our later D4RL benchmark experiments (see Appendix C for details). Finally, for
the data collection component, the agent is allowed to sample k = 10 step rollouts starting from the
initial state distribution µ0 . We evaluate episode returns over H = 30 steps.
This environment serves to distill the offline RL problem into just the components relevant to the
edge-of-reach issue, namely a fixed start state distribution and limited rollout horizon k < H. Since
the actions are bounded, the set of edge-of-reach states can be defined exactly as those between the
red and orange boxes in Figure 2. There is no notion of an approximate dynamics model, as we are
demonstrating that issues arise even in the case of the agent having access to the true dynamics.

5.2   O BSERVING PATHOLOGICAL VALUE OVERESTIMATION

We may expect SAC to be able to learn a sensible policy, however, the default SAC agent (see blue in
Figure 2) fails to train stably, with pathological Q-value growth over training and poor performance
(Figure 2(c) and (d)). Examining the rollout trajectories sampled over training (see Figure 4) we
observe the following behavior: (Before 25 epochs) Initially, the agent follows the reward function,
and performance increases. (Between 25 and 160 epochs) Value misestimation takes over, and the
policy begins to aim toward unobserved state-actions (since their values can be misestimated and
hence overestimated), and performance subsequently decreases. (After 160 epochs) The effect above
compounds with each epoch, leading to the agent eventually reaching edge-of-reach states. From
this point onwards, the agent samples edge-of-reach states at which it never receives any corrective
feedback, and the consequent pathological value overestimation results in a complete collapse in
performance. As such, we see the edge-of-reach problem manifesting itself as pathological edge-
of-reach seeking behavior. Visualizing the final policy over S, the trained agent aims towards an
arbitrary edge-of-reach state with the highest (heavily overestimated) Q-value, completely ignoring
the reward function. We show an analogous result holds in larger environments in Appendix B.2.

5.3   V ERIFYING THE H YPOTHESIS U SING VALUE PATCHING

Our hypothesis is that the source of this problem is value misestimation at edge-of-reach states.
We verify this with our SAC-OraclePatch experiments, in which we replace value estimates in the
Bellman targets with their true values. In yellow in Figure 2 we demonstrate that applying patching
solely for edge-of-reach states is sufficient to solve the problem. This is particularly compelling as
in practice only a very small proportion of states had correct values patched in (0.4% of states over
training). Of course, patching in true values is not possible in practice, thus in the next section we
develop a practical approximation to this. We show in Section 7.1 that our proposed method, RAVL
(see green in Figure 2), has a very similar effect to that of the ideal SAC-OraclePatch intervention
and completely resolves the edge-of-reach problem.

6     O UR M ETHOD : R EACH -AWARE VALUE L EARNING (RAVL)
As verified in Section 5.3, the edge-of-reach problem stems from value overestimation at edge-of-
reach states. To resolve this issue, we therefore need to identify and correct values for this set of
states. Edge-of-reach states can be viewed as those that may be within-distribution with respect to
the set of nextstates s′ in Drollouts , but which are always out-of-distribution with respect to the states
s sampled (see Appendix A for a more detailed discussion). As such, we can use uncertainty esti-
mation and value pessimism ideas from model-free literature (see Section 3) to identify and apply
pessimism at these states (see Figure 3). Our resulting proposal is Reach-Aware Value Learning
(RAVL), an algorithm that unifies model-based training with Ensemble Diversified Actor-Critic
(EDAC, An et al. (2021)), the current state-of-the-art model-free value pessimism approach. Con-
cretely, RAVL involves training an ensemble of Ncritic Q-functions, each parameterized by ϕj , and
modifying Equation (2) to:
       Qk+1 ← arg min E(s,a,r,s′ )∼D,a′ ∼πk (·|s′ ) [(Q(s, a) −[r + γ    min Qkϕj (s′ , a′ )])2 ]      (3)
                 Q                                    | {z }          j=1,...,Ncritic
                                                        input   |              {z           }
                                                                            Bellman target


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As is standard in offline model-based RL, we optimize this objective using MBPO (Janner et al.,
2019) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018). We apply the ensemble diversity promoting regularizer as
proposed in An et al. (2021). Full details and pseudocode are given in Appendix C. Note that, in
contrast to prior model-based methods, we do not include any dynamics uncertainty penalization.
This is discussed in Section 7.3.
The perspective taken in this paper allows us to directly transfer ideas from the model-free literature
for dealing with the out-of-sample problem and apply them to addressing the edge-of-reach issue
in the model-based setting. The resulting algorithm combines the strengths of both model-based
and model-free approaches: In model-free value pessimism approaches, pessimism is required for
all out-of-sample state-actions. By using the model, we are able to reduce the set of state-actions
requiring pessimism to primarily those from edge-of-reach states. The resulting algorithm can hence
be considered to be significantly less pessimistic.

7     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section, we first evaluate RAVL on the simple environment from Section 5 and demonstrate
that it provides an effective solution to the edge-of-reach problem. Next, we show that RAVL scales
to strong performance on the standard D4RL benchmark. Finally, we compare RAVL to prior
dynamics uncertainty penalized methods and elucidate why they may work despite not explicitly
addressing the edge-of-reach problem. We provide full hyperparameters and a discussion of run-
time in Appendix D.

7.1   E VALUATION ON THE S IMPLE E NVIRONMENT

We first test RAVL on the simple environment from Section 5 (see green in Figure 2). We observe
that it achieves the same result as the theoretically optimal but practically impossible method of
patching in the true values at edge-of-reach states, SAC-OraclePatch. The Q-values are stabilized
over learning and match those of SAC-OraclePatch. In Figure 3, we demonstrate that RAVL is able
to capture the higher value uncertainty at edge-of-reach states. The Q-value variance over RAVL’s
ensemble (RAVL’s effective penalty) is significantly higher at edge-of-reach states, thus verifying
that RAVL is able to detect and penalize edge-of-reach states exactly as hoped.
                                                                     Figure 3: A histogram of RAVL’s
                                                                     effective penalty (variance over the
                                                                     Q-value ensemble) plotted for the
                                                                     state-actions evaluated during train-
                                                                     ing, separated into whether the state
                                                                     is or is not edge-of-reach. Exactly as
                                                                     desired, RAVL is able to detect and
                                                                     apply a higher penalty at edge-of-
                                                                     reach states. (The simple environ-
                                                                     ment allows this analysis, since we
                                                                     can exactly define the set of edge-of-
                                                                     reach states.)


7.2   E VALUATION ON THE D4RL B ENCHMARK

Next, we show that RAVL scales to the standard offline RL benchmark, D4RL (Fu et al., 2020).
We consider the MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) v2 datasets in Table 2 and show that we can match
the performance of the current state-of-the-art in model-based method, MOBILE (Sun et al., 2023),
without the need for any explicit dynamics penalization. As well as being theoretically interesting
(see discussion Section 7.3), this is additionally beneficial in terms of running cost as MOBILE
requires computation of multiple transition samples to calculate its penalty. Compared to EDAC (An
et al., 2021), the model-free equivalent of our algorithm, RAVL achieves much higher performance
on the Halfcheetah mixed and medium environments. This represents a new state-of-the-art on
those datasets and shows the clear benefit of using additional synthetic model-based samples. Our
approach is far stronger than COMBO (Yu et al., 2021), a competing baseline that introduced a less
effective form of value conservatism into model-based methods.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: A comprehensive evaluation of RAVL over the standard D4RL MuJoCo benchmark. We show the
mean and standard deviation of the final performance averaged over 6 seeds. Our simple approach matches the
state-of-the-art without any explicit dynamics penalization.
                               Model-Free                              Model-Based
     Environment            BC CQL EDAC MOPO COMBO RAMBO MOBILE RAVL (Ours)
             medium        43.2 46.9   65.9  73.0  54.2 77.9  74.6  78.7±2.0
 Halfcheetah mixed         37.6 45.3   61.3  72.1  55.1 68.7  71.7  74.9±2.0
             medexp        44.0 95.0 106.3   90.8  90.0 95.4 108.2 102.1±8.0
             medium        54.1 61.9 101.6   62.8  97.2 87.0 106.6 88.1±15.4
 Hopper      mixed         16.6 86.3 101.0  103.5  89.5 99.5 103.9 103.1±1.0
             medexp        53.9 96.9 110.7   81.6 111.1 88.2 112.6 110.1±1.8
             medium        70.9 79.5   92.5  84.1  81.9 84.9  87.7  86.3±1.6
 Walker2d    mixed         20.3 76.8   87.1  85.6  56.0 89.2  89.9  83.0±2.5
             medexp        90.1 109.1 114.7 112.9 103.3 56.7 115.2 115.5±2.4

7.3    R EINTERPRETATION OF P RIOR M ETHODS

Finally, we compare RAVL to prior offline model-based algorithms, which overlooked the edge-of-
reach problem (see Section 4) and instead primarily sought to reduce learned dynamics exploitation.
We compare RAVL and MBPO (the base algorithm for most offline model-based approaches) which
both do not include any explicit dynamics penalty to prevent model exploitation. For these
algorithms, we find that the rewards collected in the model closely match, or else are lower, than
in the true environment (see Tables 3 and 7). We particularly note that these levels of observed
model reward could not lead to the levels of catastrophic value overestimation as seen for MBPO
in Appendix B.2. This finding provides further evidence that the edge-of-reach problem may be a
more accurate explanation for the issues seen in offline model-based methods.
Table 3: Per-step rewards with MBPO and RAVL in model rollouts are similar to those with the true dynamics,
indicating (as in Janner et al. (2019); Lu et al. (2022)) that the model is largely accurate for short rollouts. This
suggests that model exploitation is not the main issue. We provide numbers for a representative selection of
D4RL environments with the configurations from Table 2. Mean and standard deviation are shown over 1000
rollouts.
                    Hopper mixed                     Walker2d medexp                  Halfcheetah medium
                   Model         True                 Model        True                 Model          True
    MBPO       2.37±1.05    2.44±1.02             3.96±1.41   3.96±1.41             4.89±1.27     5.01±1.09
    RAVL       2.44±1.07    2.45±1.03             4.15±1.37   4.15±1.37             4.91±1.24     5.01±1.11

This leads us to ask: What allows prior dynamics error-motivated methods to work despite ignor-
ing the critical edge-of-reach problem? To answer this, we investigate whether existing dynamics
penalties may help to accidentally mitigate the edge-of-reach problem. We confirm this in Figure 6,
showing that there is a positive correlation between the penalties in dynamics uncertainty methods
and RAVL’s effective penalty of value ensemble variance. This may be expected, as dynamics un-
certainty will naturally be higher further away from Doffline , which is also where edge-of-reach states
are more likely to lie. We additionally note that, since the edge-of-reach problem is orthogonal to
dynamics misestimation, RAVL could be combined with appropriate model uncertainty penaliza-
tion (Lu et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2020) for environments with less accurate models.


8     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we develop a more complete understanding of the issues faced in offline model-based
reinforcement learning. By identifying the edge-of-reach problem, we connect the previously dis-
joint areas of model-free and model-based offline algorithms. Our practical algorithm, RAVL, is
simple and combines the strengths of both, achieving strong performance on the standard D4RL
benchmark without the need for any explicit dynamics penalization. We hope the analysis in our pa-
per inspires the future development of more principled and well-motivated offline algorithms. In this
spirit, a particularly exciting future direction could be to extend the analysis in this paper to higher
dimensional pixel-based settings, where model-free and model-based methods share little overlap.
In particular, standard offline visual model-based algorithms such as Offline DreamerV2 (Lu et al.,
2023) still rely on dynamics penalization and could be drastically simplified with our approach.


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Gaon An, Seungyong Moon, Jang-Hyun Kim, and Hyun Oh Song. Uncertainty-based offline re-
  inforcement learning with diversified q-ensemble. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
  P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 34, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
  3d3d286a8d153a4a58156d0e02d8570c-Paper.pdf. 1, 4, 7, 8, 15, 16
Philip J Ball, Cong Lu, Jack Parker-Holder, and Stephen Roberts. Augmented world models facil-
  itate zero-shot dynamics generalization from a single offline environment. In Marina Meila and
  Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, vol-
  ume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 619–629. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/ball21a.html. 1
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. 1
Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Yao Lu, Ted Xiao, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jake Varley, Alex Irpan,
  Benjamin Eysenbach, Ryan Julian, Chelsea Finn, et al. Actionable models: Unsupervised offline
  reinforcement learning of robotic skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07749, 2021. 1
Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith W. Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-
  learning: Learning fast without a model. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AY8zfZm0tDd. 4
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learn-
  ing in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2018/file/3de568f8597b94bda53149c7d7f5958c-Paper.pdf. 3, 15
Damien Ernst, Pierre Geurts, and Louis Wehenkel. Tree-based batch mode reinforcement learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 6(18):503–556, 2005. 1
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning, 2020. 2, 5, 8, 15
Scott Fujimoto and Shixiang Shane Gu. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning. In
  Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. 1, 4
Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
  actor-critic methods. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2018. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v80/fujimoto18a.html. 4
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 2052–2062. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v97/fujimoto19a.html. 1, 4
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Jennifer Dy and An-
  dreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 10–15 Jul
  2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/haarnoja18b.html. 7, 8, 15
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-
 based policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019. 2, 3, 5,
 6, 8, 9, 15


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rahul Kidambi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Thorsten Joachims. MOReL: Model-
  based offline reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  f7efa4f864ae9b88d43527f4b14f750f-Paper.pdf. 1, 2, 4, 5, 15
Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 1999. 3
Ilya Kostrikov, Rob Fergus, Jonathan Tompson, and Ofir Nachum. Offline reinforcement learning
   with fisher divergence critic regularization. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
   on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2021. URL https:
   //proceedings.mlr.press/v139/kostrikov21a.html. 4
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-
   learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://
   openreview.net/forum?id=68n2s9ZJWF8. 1, 4
Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, Matthew Soh, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy
  q-learning via bootstrapping error reduction. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
  F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 32, 2019. 1, 3, 4, 6, 13, 16
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning
  for offline reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  0d2b2061826a5df3221116a5085a6052-Paper.pdf. 1, 4
Aviral Kumar, Anikait Singh, Stephen Tian, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. A workflow for
  offline model-free robotic reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10813, 2021. 1
Aviral Kumar, Anikait Singh, Frederik Ebert, Mitsuhiko Nakamoto, Yanlai Yang, Chelsea Finn, and
  Sergey Levine. Pre-training for robots: Offline rl enables learning new tasks from a handful of
  trials, 2023. 1
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’17, 2017. 3
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tu-
  torial, review, and perspectives on open problems, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2005.01643. 1
Cong Lu, Philip Ball, Jack Parker-Holder, Michael Osborne, and Stephen J. Roberts. Revisiting de-
  sign choices in offline model based reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=zz9hXVhf40.
  1, 4, 6, 9, 15
Cong Lu, Philip J. Ball, Tim G. J. Rudner, Jack Parker-Holder, Michael A Osborne, and Yee Whye
  Teh. Challenges and opportunities in offline reinforcement learning from visual observa-
  tions. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=1QqIfGZOWu. 9
Tatsuya Matsushima, Hiroki Furuta, Yutaka Matsuo, Ofir Nachum, and Shixiang Gu. Deployment-
  efficient reinforcement learning via model-based offline optimization. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  3hGNqpI4WS. 4
Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, and Nick Hawes. RAMBO-RL: Robust adversarial model-based offline
 reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=nrksGSRT7kX. 4
Chamani Shiranthika, Kuo-Wei Chen, Chung-Yih Wang, Chan-Yun Yang, BH Sudantha, and Wei-
  Fu Li. Supervised optimal chemotherapy regimen based on offline reinforcement learning. IEEE
  Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 26(9):4763–4772, 2022. 1


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yihao Sun, Jiaji Zhang, Chengxing Jia, Haoxin Lin, Junyin Ye, and Yang Yu. Model-Bellman incon-
  sistency for model-based offline reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 40th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 33177–33194. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v202/sun23q.html. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 15
Richard S. Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. SIGART
  Bull., 2(4):160–163, jul 1991. ISSN 0163-5719. doi: 10.1145/122344.122377. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/122344.122377. 2, 3
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  second edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.
  html. 3, 4
Shengpu Tang and Jenna Wiens. Model selection for offline reinforcement learning: Practical con-
  siderations for healthcare settings. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pp. 2–35.
  PMLR, 2021. 1
Denis Tarasov, Alexander Nikulin, Dmitry Akimov, Vladislav Kurenkov, and Sergey Kolesnikov.
  CORL: Research-oriented deep offline reinforcement learning library. In 3rd Offline RL Work-
  shop: Offline RL as a ”Launchpad”, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  SyAS49bBcv. 16
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033.
  IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109. 5, 8
Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 30, 2016. URL https:
  //ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/10295. 3, 4
Hado van Hasselt, Yotam Doron, Florian Strub, Matteo Hessel, Nicolas Sonnerat, and Joseph Mo-
  dayil. Deep reinforcement learning and the deadly triad, 2018. 3
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. MOPO: Model-based offline policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
  2020/file/a322852ce0df73e204b7e67cbbef0d0a-Paper.pdf. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9,
  14, 15
Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Rafael Rafailov, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sergey Levine, and
  Chelsea Finn.   Combo: Conservative offline model-based policy optimization. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 28954–28967,
  2021.         URL    https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
  f29a179746902e331572c483c45e5086-Paper.pdf. 4, 8


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL
A     A U NIFIED P ERSPECTIVE ON THE O UT- OF -S AMPLE AND
      E DGE - OF -R EACH P ROBLEMS
We supplement the discussion in Section 4.2 with a more thorough comparison of the out-of-sample
and edge-of-reach problems, including how they relate to model-free and model-based approaches.

A.1    D EFINITIONS

Consider a dataset of transition tuples D = {(si , ai , ri , s′i , di )}i=1,...,N collected according to some
dataset policy π D (·|s). Compared to Section 2, we include the addition of a done indicator di ,
where di = 1 indicates episode termination (and di = 0 otherwise). Transition tuples thus consist of
state, action, reward, nextstate, done. Consider the marginal distribution over state-actions ρD      s,a (·, ·),
over states ρD                                               D                        D            D
              s (·), and conditional action distribution ρa|s (·|s). Note that ρa|s (·|s) = π (·|s). We
abbreviate x is in distribution with respect to ρ as x ∈dist ρ.

A.2    Q-L EARNING C ONDITIONS

As described in Section 2.1, given some policy π, we can attempt to learn the corresponding Q-
function with the following iterative process:
          Qk+1 ← arg min E(s,a,r,s′ )∼D,a′ ∼π(·|s′ ) [(Q(s, a) − [r + γ(1 − d)Qk (s′ , a′ )])2 ]             (4)
                    Q                                  | {z } |            {z              }
                                                             input             Bellman target

Q-learning relies on bootstrapping, hence to be successful we need to be able to learn accurate
estimates of the Bellman targets for all (s, a) inputs. Bootstrapped estimates of Q(s′ , a′ ) are used in
the targets whenever d ̸= 1. Therefore, for all (s′ , a′ ), we require:

          Combined state-action condition: (s′ , a′ ) ∈dist ρD
                                                             s,a or d = 1.

In the main paper, we use this combined state-action perspective for simplicity, however, we can
equivalently divide this state-action condition into independent requirements on the state and action
as follows:

          State condition: s′ ∈dist ρD
                                     s or d = 1,
          Action condition: a ∈ ρa|s (s′ ) (given the above condition is met and d ̸= 1).
                              ′ dist D


Informally, the state condition may be violated if D consists of partial or truncated trajectories, and
the action condition may be violated if there is a significant distribution shift between π D and π.

A.3    C OMPARISON B ETWEEN M ODEL -F REE AND M ODEL -BASED M ETHODS

Table 4: A summary of the comparison between model-free and model-based offline RL in relation to the
conditions on Q-learning.

               Action condition violation      State condition violation                 Main source of issues
Model-free  Possible, common in practice Possible, but uncommon in practice → Action condition violation
Model-based Not possible                 Possible, common in practice       → State condition violation

In offline model-free RL, D = Doffline , with π D = π β . For the settings we consider, Doffline consists
of full trajectories and therefore will not violate the state condition. However, this may happen
in a more general setting with Doffline containing truncated trajectories. By contrast, the mismatch
between π (used to sample a′ in Q-learning) and π β (used to sample a in the dataset Doffline ) often
does lead to significant violation of the action condition. This exacerbates the overestimation
bias in Q-learning (see Section 3), and can result in pathological training dynamics and Q-value
explosion over training (Kumar et al., 2019).


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


On the other hand, in offline model-based RL, the dataset D = Drollouts is collected on-policy ac-
cording to the current (or recent) policy such that π D ≈ π. This minimal mismatch between π D
and π means the action condition is not violated and can be considered to be resolved due to the
collection of additional data. However, the procedure of generating the data D = Drollouts can be
seen to significantly exacerbate the state condition problem, as the use of short truncated-horizon
trajectories means the resulting dataset Drollouts is likely to violate the state condition. Due to lack
of exploration, certain states may temporarily violate the state condition. Our paper then considers
the pathological case of edge-of-reach states, which will always violate the state condition.

B     A DDITIONAL F IGURES
B.1    V ISUALIZATIONS OF ROLLOUTS T HROUGH T RAINING

In Figure 4, we provide a visualization of the rollouts sampled over training in the simple envi-
ronment for each of the algorithms analyzed in Figure 2 (see Section 5). This accompanies the
discussion of the behavior of SAC during training in Section 5.2.


Figure 4: A visualization of the rollouts sampled over training on the simple environment in Section 5. We note
the pathological behavior of the baseline SAC, and the success of the ideal intervention SAC-OraclePatch, and
our practically realizable method RAVL.



B.2    O BSERVING PATHOLOGICAL VALUE OVERESTIMATION ON THE D4RL B ENCHMARK

In Figure 5, we show observations of pathological overestimation of Q-values on a representative
D4RL dataset when optimizing using MBPO (which corresponds to Ncritic = 2 and η = 0 in our
method). This confirms that despite the ability to gather additional on-policy data, the out-of-sample
issue effectively persists in model-based methods. RAVL is able to resolve this issue and achieve
state-of-the-art performance.

B.3    C OMPARISON B ETWEEN DYNAMICS P ENALTY AND RAVL

We provide a further comparison to Section 7.3 between our method and prior offline model-based
methods by comparing the dynamics uncertainty-based penalty used in MOPO with the variance
of the value ensemble of RAVL in Figure 6. We find there is a positive correlation between the
dynamics uncertainty-based penalty used in MOPO (Yu et al., 2020), and the variance of the value
ensemble of RAVL. This helps us in reinterpreting dynamics uncertainty-based methods and ex-
plaining why they may work despite not considering the crucial edge-of-reach problem.


                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: We observe an exponential increase in Q-values and resulting low performance on one of the D4RL
datasets using the baseline MBPO. We present results on Walker2d-medexp but note that similar trends are seen
across other D4RL datasets. RAVL is able to resolve these issues and achieve state-of-the-art performance.
This is a similar trend to that demonstrated in our simple environment in Figure 2(f). The figure shows (a)
D4RL normalized score and (b) mean Q-values evaluated over training. Approx Q∗ indicates the magnitude of
Q-values which would correspond to a normalized D4RL score of 100 with γ = 0.99. We show the mean and
standard deviation averaged over 6 seeds.


Figure 6: We find that the dynamics uncertainty-based penalty used in MOPO (Yu et al., 2020) is positively
correlated with the variance of the value ensemble of RAVL, suggesting prior methods may unintentionally
address the edge-of-reach problem. Pearson correlation coefficients are 0.49, 0.43, and 0.27 for Hopper-mixed,
Walker2d-medexp, and Halfcheetah-medium respectively.


C    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In this section, we give full implementation details for RAVL. As is typical in offline model-based
reinforcement learning (Kidambi et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2020), we
use short MBPO (Janner et al., 2019) style rollouts. The agent is trained using the EDAC (An et al.,
2021) losses, a conservative ensemble-based algorithm based on SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018). Our
transition model follows the standard setup in model-based offline algorithms, being realized as a
deep ensemble (Chua et al., 2018) and trained via maximum likelihood estimation. We summa-
rize this by providing pseudocode for offline model-based methods. The pseudocode representing
prior dynamics uncertainty-based methods is given in Algorithm 1 for comparison, while RAVL is
represented in Algorithm 2.

D    H YPERPARAMETERS
For the D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) MuJoCo datasets presented in Section 7.2, we sweep over the fol-
lowing hyperparameters and list the optimal choices in Table 5.

       • (EDAC) Number of Q-ensemble elements Ncritic , in the range {10, 50}
       • (EDAC) Ensemble diversity weight η, in the range {1, 10, 100}
       • (MBPO) Model rollout length k, in the range {1, 5}


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for base model-based algorithm (MBPO)
1: Require: M  c = (Tb, R)b learned environment model (trained on Doffline )
              (Existing methods include dynamics uncertainty penalty in M      c)
2: Input: Rollout length k ≥ 1, real data ratio r ∈ [0, 1], Doffline offline dataset
3: Initialize: Drollouts = ∅ model replay buffer, πθ policy, Qϕ value ensemble
4: for epochs = 1, . . . do
5:    (Collect data) Starting from states in Doffline , collect k-step rollouts in Tb with πθ . Store data in Drollouts
6:    (Train agent) Train πθ and Qϕ on Drollouts ∪ Doffline mixed with ratio r
7: end for

Algorithm 2 Pseudocode for RAVL
1: Require: M c = (Tb, R) b learned environment model (trained on Doffline )
2: Input: Rollout length k ≥ 1, real data ratio r ∈ [0, 1], Doffline offline dataset
3: Initialize: Drollouts = ∅ model replay buffer, πθ policy, Qϕ value ensemble
4: for epochs = 1, . . . do
5:    (Collect data) Starting from states in Doffline , collect k-step rollouts in Tb with πθ . Store data in Drollouts
6:    (Train agent) Train πθ and Qϕ on Drollouts ∪ Doffline mixed with ratio r using EDAC for Q-ensemble
7: end for


       • (MBPO) Real-to-synthetic data ratio r, in the range {0.05, 0.5}

The remaining model-based and agent hyperparameters are given in Table 6. We note that, similarly
to An et al. (2021), the Hopper environment performs better with Ncritic = 50 while Walker2d and
Halfcheetah perform better with Ncritic = 10; thus in practice, we only need to tune the remaining
three hyperparameters. Our implementation is based on the Clean Offline Reinforcement Learning
(CORL, Tarasov et al. (2022)) repository, released at https://github.com/tinkoff-ai/
CORL under an Apache-2.0 license. Our algorithm takes approximately 1 day to run on the standard
D4RL datasets using an A100 GPU for the full number of epochs.

           Table 5: Variable hyperparameters for RAVL used in D4RL MuJoCo locomotion tasks.
               Environment                             Ncritic               η               k                r
                                 medium                 10                    1              5              0.05
     HalfCheetah                 mixed                  10                  100              5              0.05
                                 medexp                 10                    1              5               0.5
                                 medium                 50                  100              1               0.5
     Hopper                      mixed                  50                   10              1               0.5
                                 medexp                 50                  100              1               0.5
                                 medium                 10                   10              1               0.5
     Walker2d                    mixed                  10                    1              5              0.05
                                 medexp                 10                    1              1               0.5

            Table 6: Fixed hyperparameters for RAVL used in D4RL MuJoCo locomotion tasks.
                    Parameter                                                           Value
                    epochs                                                              3,000
                    gamma                                                                0.99
                    learning rate                                                     3 × 10−4
                    batch size                                                           256
                    buffer retain epochs                                                   5
                    number of rollouts                                                 50,000


E    P ROOF OF E RROR P ROPAGATION R ESULT
In this section, we provide a proof of Proposition 1. Our proof follows analogous logic to the error
propagation result of Kumar et al. (2019).


                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 1. [Error propagation from edge-of-reach states] Consider a rollout of length k,
(s0 , a0 , s1 , . . . , sk ). Suppose that the state sk is edge-of-reach and the approximate value func-
tion Qj−1 (sk , π(sk )) has error ϵ. Then, standard value iteration will compound error γ k−t ϵ to the
estimates of Qj (st , at ) for t = 1, . . . , k − 1. Proof provided in Appendix E.

Proof. Let us denote Q∗ as the optimal value function, ζj (s, a) = |Qj (s, a) − Q∗ (s, a)| the error at
iteration j of Q-Learning, and δj (s, a) = |Qj (s, a) − T Qj−1 (s, a)| the current Bellman error. Then
first considering the t = k − 1 case,
             ζj (st , at ) = |Qj (st , at ) − Q∗ (st , at )|                                                (5)
                           = |Qj (st , at ) − T Qj−1 (st , at ) + T Qj−1 (st , at ) − Q∗ (st , at )|        (6)
                           ≤ |Qj (st , at ) − T Qj−1 (st , at )| + |T Qj−1 (st , at ) − Q∗ (st , at )|      (7)
                           = δj (st , at ) + γζj−1 (st+1 , at+1 )                                           (8)
                           = δj (st , at ) + γϵ                                                             (9)
Thus the errors at edge-of-reach states are discounted and then compounded with new errors at
Qj (sk−1 , ak−1 ). For t < k − 1, the result follows from repeated application of Equation (8) along
the rollout.



F     A DDITIONAL TABLES
F.1   F ULL H ORIZON M ODEL ROLLOUTS

Complementary to Table 3, we show that returns for full horizon model rollouts (k = 1000) are
lower than the true returns in Table 7. This provides further evidence that model exploitation may
not be an issue even for long horizons. However, we note that learned dynamics models are not
expected to be accurate to this horizon, so returns may be arbitrarily inaccurate.
Table 7: Returns of MBPO and RAVL evaluated in the learned dynamics and reward model used for training
are always lower than the true returns, suggesting that model exploitation is not the main issue. We provide
numbers for a representative selection of D4RL environments with the configurations from Table 2. Normalized
mean and standard deviation are shown over 6 random seeds.
                    Hopper mixed                    Walker2d medexp                 Halfcheetah medium
                   Model         True               Model         True                  Model        True
    MBPO       47.5±15.3    71.5±32.2            -0.2±-0.4     7.7±2.1            -501.6±45.6    72.9±8.6
    RAVL        89.3±7.3    103.0±0.7            18.9±7.1    115.5±2.4              40.2±42.6    78.7±2.0


F.2   S UMMARY OF S ETUPS U SED IN C OMPARISONS

Throughout the paper, we compare several different setups in order to identify the true underlying
issues in model-based offline RL. We provide a summary of them in Table 8. More comprehensive
descriptions of each are given in the main text and in relevant table and figure captions.

Table 8: We summarize the various setups used for comparisons throughout the paper. ‘*’ denotes application
to the simple environment (see Section 5). All methods use k-step rollouts from the offline dataset (or from a
fixed starting state distribution in the case of the simple environment).

                                       Dynamics Model                 Agent           Figures and Tables
                                          Type Penalty             Ncritic  η
 MOPO                                 Ensemble      ✓                   2   0         Table 1, Figure 6
 Oracle                                   True     n/a                  2   0         Table 1
 MBPO (Offline)                       Ensemble       ✗                  2   0         Tables 3, 7, Figure 5
 RAVL (Ours)                          Ensemble       ✗              >2 >0             Tables 2, 3, 7, Figure 5
 SAC (Truncated Horizon)*                 True     n/a                  2   0         Figures 2, 4
 RAVL (Ours)*                             True     n/a              >2 >0             Figures 2, 3, 4


                                                        17
