Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LL A MA R IDER : S PURRING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M OD -
ELS TO E XPLORE THE O PEN W ORLD

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Recently, various studies have leveraged Large Language Models (LLMs) to help
         decision-making and planning in environments, and try to align the LLMs’ knowl-
         edge with the world conditions. Nonetheless, the capacity of LLMs to continu-
         ously acquire environmental knowledge and adapt in an open world remains un-
         certain. In this paper, we propose an approach to spur LLMs to explore the open
         world, gather experiences, and learn to improve their task-solving capabilities.
         In this approach, a multi-round feedback-revision mechanism is utilized to en-
         courage LLMs to actively select appropriate revision actions guided by feedback
         information from the environment. This facilitates exploration and enhances the
         model’s performance. Besides, we integrate sub-task relabeling to assist LLMs in
         maintaining consistency in sub-task planning and help the model learn the com-
         binatorial nature between tasks, enabling it to complete a wider range of tasks
         through training based on the acquired exploration experiences. By evaluation
         in Minecraft, an open-ended sandbox world, we demonstrate that our approach
         LLaMA-Rider enhances the efficiency of the LLM in exploring the environment,
         and effectively improves the LLM’s ability to accomplish more tasks through fine-
         tuning with merely 1.3k instances of collected data, showing minimal training
         costs compared to the baseline using reinforcement learning.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recently, significant advancements and successes have
been achieved in the performance of Large Language
Models (LLMs) in attaining human-like intelligence
(OpenAI, 2023). Given the powerful capability of LLMs,
many research works have started utilizing their abilities
to assist intelligent agents in decision-making in the envi-
ronments (Yao et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022a; Li et al.,
2022; Singh et al., 2023), and have found that LLMs pos-
sess a certain level of abilities for planning and accom-
plishing various tasks (Wang et al., 2023b). However, the
knowledge that LLMs rely on comes from the language
corpus used during pre-training, and there may be dis-
crepancies between this knowledge and specific environ-
ments (Ahn et al., 2022).
To ground LLMs to environments, some studies design
specific mechanisms through prompt engineering to pro- Figure 1. Spurring LLaMA to explore
vide information from environments for LLMs (Wang the open world.
et al., 2023c; Yao et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Zhu et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2022). However, LLMs do not improve or acquire new knowledge in environments.
Additionally, for more complex tasks, more complicated mechanisms and prompts are required,
which results in high costs of LLM generation and reliance on strong models like GPT-4 (OpenAI,
2023) with enough knowledge (Wang et al., 2023a). Some other studies ground LLMs with finetun-
ing (Yao et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2023; Xiang et al., 2023), but they usually require task-dependent
datasets. Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods are also studied in the literature (Carta et al., 2023),


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


but these methods train LLMs as task-specific policies, and we found that RL methods are difficult
to scale up to larger models or more complex tasks (see Section 5.2.2).
In this paper, we aim to enhance LLMs through their exploration in open-ended environments (Fig-
ure 1), like humans can adapt to new situations through practice. Previous studies have tried to
update LLMs in embodied environments like BabyAI (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019) and Virtu-
alHome (Puig et al., 2018), but these world sizes are rather limited. Whether LLMs can improve
their knowledge in more complicated open-ended worlds like Minecraft is still unknown (Fan et al.,
2022; Guss et al., 2019). We think there are two major challenges here. First, in an environment
like Minecraft, tasks are often complex and may involve many sub-tasks. At the same time, these
long-horizon tasks often require each step to be carried out precisely, and a single error in the middle
sometimes can negate previous progress. Besides, due to the high level of freedom, the action space
can be large, while many actions may be invalid in different states. These reasons make it hard
to collect successful task trajectories in the environment using random exploration as in previous
works (Xiang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022). The second challenge is that there can be a significant
amount of tasks in such an open world, so training policies for specific tasks are not applicable in
these environments. We hope that LLMs have the ability to perform multiple tasks and generalize
to new tasks.
In response to these challenges, we propose LLaMA-Rider             , a two-stage learning framework
consisting of an exploration stage and a learning stage (Figure 2). We investigate how to spur LLMs
to explore the environment themselves and collect successful experiences for learning. Compared
to random exploration or search methods that can hardly work in complex environments, allowing
LLMs to explore on their own in the environment can harness the inherent capabilities of the models,
thereby enabling more effective discovery of successful experiences. We propose a multi-round
feedback mechanism, which allows the LLM to revise its decisions by providing information about
failed actions in the environment. This feedback-revision exploration mechanism is more efficient
due to the capability of LLMs, as the draft decisions made are often related to task completion at
first, and LLMs can effectively understand feedback information. Additionally, we use sub-task
relabeling to help LLMs maintain consistency in sub-task planning.
In the learning stage, we process the collected experiences into datasets and use supervised fine-
tuning (SFT) to train the LLM. In addition to the experience gained from successful tasks, we also
collect experiences from partially completed sub-tasks, as some tasks are too difficult to accomplish
in the environment in the exploration stage. Numerous tasks in open-ended environments often have
compositionality, which means experiences from past tasks can frequently assist in completing other
tasks. We propose to use sub-task relabeling of the collected experiences to improve data utilization
while helping LLMs learn the compositionality between tasks.
We evaluate our method in MineDojo (Fan et al., 2022), a simulation platform for Minecraft. We
use the basic skills trained by Plan4MC (Yuan et al., 2023) as the action space since the skills
possess more semantics compared with primitive actions and are better aligned with LLMs. We
use LLaMA-2-70B-chat (Touvron et al., 2023) in our experiments. Our experiments show that
LLaMA-Rider can explore the environment efficiently with our feedback-revision mechanism, and
can learn to complete tasks more effectively by finetuning on a collected dataset of only 1.3k in
size, demonstrating much higher sample efficiency compared to RL methods. We also show the
generalization ability of LLaMA-Rider in novel hard tasks.

2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   LLM- BASED AGENTS

There is a large body of recent studies on LLM-based agents, which have delved into the capacities
of LLMs for decision-making and are well summarized in the survey papers (Wang et al., 2023b; Xi
et al., 2023). There are basically three ways to integrate LLMs into decision-making problems. First,
using the code generation capabilities of LLMs, LLMs take in information from the environment
and produce code that can interact directly within the environment (Liang et al., 2023; Singh et al.,
2023). The second way is to employ LLMs for planning, following a concept similar to hierarchical
RL (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2023c; Dasgupta et al., 2023). The third
approach involves continually prompting LLMs or introducing memory modules to generate outputs


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that can execute better strategies directly within a textual environment (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al.,
2023; Kim et al., 2023).
Minecraft, as a popular and challenging open-world benchmark, has also attracted substantial at-
tention for the studies of LLM-based agents. DEPS (Wang et al., 2023c) introduces the descriptor,
explainer, and selector for plan generation with the help of LLM. Plan4MC (Yuan et al., 2023) con-
structs a skill graph with the help of LLM and proposes a skill search algorithm for planning over
the basic skills pretrained by reinforcement learning (RL). Moreover, to build LLM-based agents in
Minecraft, Voyager (Wang et al., 2023a) leverages the code generation of LLMs, while GITM (Zhu
et al., 2023) integrates LLMs with texted-based knowledge and memory.
However, in the aforementioned studies, LLMs do not update themselves from their interactions
with the environment, so they can neither learn from nor adapt to the environment. Consequently,
their potential applicability in specific environments is limited, as they can solely depend on the
knowledge and capabilities gained during pre-training.

2.2   F INETUNING L ANGUAGE M ODELS IN E NVIRONMENTS

There are studies that ground Language Models (LMs) to environments with finetuning. PIGLeT
(Zellers et al., 2021) integrates a neural symbolic dynamics model with an LM to learn natural lan-
guage meaning grounded in physical interactions. Also focusing on the decision-making of LMs
in embodied environments, LID (Li et al., 2022) uses expert trajectories to finetune a model that
concatenates an LM with action decoders. They also propose active data gathering to collect ex-
periences that mix random actions and policy-generated actions for exploration. Similarly, E2WM
(Xiang et al., 2023) uses supervised learning to finetune LMs with the data collected by Monte Carlo
Tree Search and random exploration. Additionally, GLAM (Carta et al., 2023) ground LMs in en-
vironments with online RL, but they train the LM into a task-specific policy, and the RL method
suffers from low sample efficiency and high cost of training. Our work is different from existing
work in that we spur the LLM itself to explore with feedback from the environment, and we target
multi-task and generalization abilities in the open world.


3     P RELIMINARIES

3.1   L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

LMs, which predict the probability of the ith token given inputs and the previously generated tokens
Pi = P (si |inputs, s1 , s2 , · · · , si−1 ), are used to generate a series of tokens by sampling from the
probability of the token sequences P (x) = Πni=1 Pi , where x can be considered as a random variable
representing n tokens in the token library. LLMs often have billions of weights and are trained from
billions of tokens to enable them to achieve remarkable performance on generative tasks.
To finetune LLMs with full parameters requires remarkable compute resources. Fortunately, some
techniques can help with efficient finetuning. Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022) in-
volves the process of keeping the pretrained model weights fixed while introducing trainable rank
decomposition matrices into every layer of LLMs. Original pretrained weights W0 ∈ Rd×k are
augmented to W0 + ∆W = W0 + BA, where B ∈ Rd×r and A ∈ Rr×k . The matrices A and B
are both trainable, with A initialized to a normal distribution and B initialized to zero. Moreover,
QLoRA (Dettmers et al., 2023) adds quantization and paged optimizers to further reduce training
compute costs. Quantization aims to transform input from a high-information representation into a
low-information representation, such as converting FP32 to int8 to reduce memory usage.

3.2   P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

We consider an environment that can be formalized as a Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP) defined by tuple M = (S, O, A, T , R, γ), where S is the environment state,
A is the action space, O is the observation space, T is the transition function, R is the reward
function, and γ is the discount factor. Since we use LLMs as embodied agents, we assume a language
vocabulary V and we can encode the observations and actions from the environment into natural
language. Besides, we assume a goal space G and we can sample a task τ = (g, K), g ∈ G, where g


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      “get crafting table“                  “get planks”                            “find logs”
                                                                                                                                                Exploration                                     Learning
     LLaMA-Rider                       LLaMA-Rider                             LLaMA-Rider                            Feedback                    Stage                                          Stage
                                 AR                                      AR                                AR         Revision
                                                                                                                                                MC Minecraft Feedback               finetuning
 planks: need 1; sticks: satisfied      need 4 planks to craft table          need 1 log to craft planks
 crafting table nearby: need 1
                                                     MC                                     MC                                                  AR    Action Retrieval   Supervised Dataset
                                        craft crafting table                        craft planks                      find log nearby
                                                                                                                                                COT   Chain of Thought
              COT
                                                                       Subtask Relabeling                                                                                 Task: craft wooden pickaxe
                                                                                                                                Env Execution
                                                                                                                                                                          Info: …
      t-1                                                                       t                                                                                         Next skill: find log nearby    Subtask
                             Task Name: craft wooden pickaxe                                                                                                                                            Relabeling
                                                                                                      Task Name: craft crafting table
                             Inventory: 2 planks; 4 sticks                                            Inventory: 2 planks; 4 sticks                                       Task: craft crafting table
                             Surround: Nothing
 …                           Past skills: harvest log; craft planks;
                                                                                                      Surround: 1 log nearby
                                                                                                      Past skills: craft planks; craft stick;   …                         Info: …
                                                                                                                                                                          Next skill: find log nearby
                                          craft stick                                                              find log nearby
                             Require:     3 planks, 2 sticks, 1
                                          crafting table nearby
                                                                                                      Require:     4 planks
                                                                                                                                                         Task Success
                                                                                                                                                                          …


Figure 2. Overview of LLaMA-Rider          . The framework consists of two stages. In the explo-
ration stage, the LLM explores to accomplish tasks with the help of the feedback-revision mech-
anism and subtask relabeling. In the learning stage, the collected trajectories are formatted into a
supervised dataset to finetune the LLM.

is the goal of the task and K is the task information including task-relevant knowledge. We can also
encode the task τ into task description τ text ∈ V N .
In this study, we explore the Minecraft simulator provided by MineDojo (Fan et al., 2022), which
is an open-ended sandbox world. There is rich information in the observation space, but a big
portion of it cannot be comprehended by LLMs such as game visuals. We extract the items in
the agent’s inventory and field of view, along with their quantities, and encode them into natural
language sentences as the observations for LLMs: otext = (inv, f ov) ∈ V N . Primitive actions in
the environment (e.g., move forward, turn right, click) have insufficient semantics which hampers
the planning capability of LLMs. We use skill descriptions as the action space of the LLM agent
noted with atext ∈ V N .


3.3          S KILLS AND TASKS IN P LAN 4MC

We use the basic skills and tasks in Plan4MC (Yuan et al., 2023) in our experiments in MineDojo,
since the basic skills have more semantic meaning than primitive actions. Plan4MC uses RL to train
three types of basic skills: finding-skills, manipulation-skills, and crafting-skills. They then define
40 difficult tasks that can be completed with the trained skills. We define the action space of the
LLM agent Atext as the descriptions of these basic skills.


4         M ETHODOLOGY

Our method is illustrated in Figure 2, which is a two-stage framework. We introduce the exploration
stage and the learning stage respectively in the following.


4.1          E XPLORATION WITH F EEDBACK

Prompt mechanism. Unlike previous studies such as Voyager (Wang et al., 2023a) and GITM (Zhu
et al., 2023) which use complex prompts to tweak LLMs to accomplish various tasks in open-ended
worlds like Minecraft, our approach employs a straightforward prompt that makes LLMs provide
the next action given input information about observation and task. This brings two advantages.
First, it makes finetuning LLMs to learn from past experiences easy, considering the context-length
limit of LLMs. Second, it reduces the cost of LLM generation.
Formally, the LLM serves as the policy π(atextt   |otext
                                                    t    , τ text , ht ). We provide the textual observation
 text                         text
o , the task description τ         and the history information h in the input prompt to feed the LLM
at each time step t, and the output of the LLM is the chosen action atext . We find that if there are too
many tokens of history information in the prompt, it will affect the output of the LLM. Therefore, in
our experiments, we set h to be the last three actions performed ht = (atext           text text
                                                                                t−3 , at−2 , at−1 ).


                                                                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1. Feedback-revision
Require: otext  t   , τ text , ht , πLLM , E, T
Ensure: atext t
 1: atext
      t      ∼ πLLM (·|otext  t     , τ text , ht )
 2: ft = E(st , at )
 3: for i = 0 to T do
 4:     if ft = 0 then
 5:         return atext t
 6:     end if
                  text
 7:     ft → ft
 8:     atext
          t      ∼ πLLM (·|otext t      , τ text , ht , fttext )
 9:     ft = E(st , at )
10: end for
11: if ft = 0 then
12:     return atext t
13: end if
14: return 0

Feedback-revision mechanism. LLMs possess rich knowledge of the real world, but there is often
a gap between the knowledge of LLMs and the specific environment to which they are applied.
For example, which actions can be performed in the environment? What are the prerequisites for
each action before execution? What conditions need to be satisfied for the completion of different
tasks in the environment? What are the names of various items in the environment? LLMs often
lack understanding of these questions, leading to decision-making errors. Previous studies ground
LLMs to environments by searching through the action space (Xiang et al., 2023) or mix policy with
random actions (Li et al., 2022) to collect experiences, or train LLMs with reinforcement learning
(Carta et al., 2023). But these methods can hardly scale up to worlds with long-horizon tasks. They
all do not provide environmental knowledge to LLMs but make LLMs explore through trial and
error. We propose to spur LLMs to explore the world themselves with their reasoning capabilities by
feeding them environmental feedback information and letting LLMs revise their decisions. LLMs
can access environmental knowledge during this process, and the method makes use of LLMs’
inherent ability to enhance the efficiency of exploration.
Formally, after the LLM produces an action atext       t    ∼ π(·|otext
                                                                   t    , τ text , ht ), a feedback information
is generated by the environment ft = E(st , at ), where E denotes the environment, st denotes the
state, and at denotes the primitive actions corresponding to atext      t     . If ft ̸= 0, which means the
action causes an error, the feedback is processed by a prompt into fttext and fed back to the LLM
together with the previous input information, and the LLM would make a revision to produce a
                 ′
new action atext
             t     ∼ π(·|otext
                           t   , τ text , ht , fttext ). Then a new feedback is generated ft = E(st , a′t ).
This feedback-revision procedure can be repeated until ft = 0 or the maximum number of allowed
revisions T has been reached which means the exploration has failed and the episode ends. The
formalized approach of the feedback-revision mechanism can be seen in Algorithm 1.
Subtask relabeling. Long-horizon tasks in an open world are often composed of many subtasks.
Since our input prompt is brief, limited information is provided. So the LLM planner may forget
what subtask it is currently working on and opt to start completing other subtasks, resulting in failure
to consistently complete one subtask. To solve this problem, whenever the LLM’s output skill is
accomplishing a subtask τs of the task τ , we replace the task information τ text in the input prompt
with τstext and keep it until τs is completed. This subtask relabeling provides another important
benefit: some subtasks may have been met in the collected experiences as a simpler task or as a
subtask of another task, so this method helps LLMs make use of previously learned experiences to
solve new tasks.
Action retrieval. To match the output of the LLM with the action space, there are two major ways:
feed the action list to the LLM or retrieve the action list based on the output. We find that feeding
a lengthy list of actions as input to the LLM would affect its output to generate more unreasonable
actions unrelated to the current task. Therefore, we use action retrieval to select an action from
the action space that is closest to the output of the LLM. Additionally, we find that querying with
token embeddings could cause retrieval errors since the action description often consists of only a


                                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


few words, e.g., “craft wooden planks” may be matched to “craft wooden sword” instead of “craft
planks”. We propose to use noun matching before embedding matching to alleviate this problem.
Details of action retrieval can be found in Appendix C.
Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting. In our experiments in Minecraft, we find that the LLM often
makes decision mistakes due to insensitivity to the relationships between numbers. To enhance
the efficiency of exploration, we integrate in-context learning and chain-of-thought prompting (Wei
et al., 2022) that make the LLM compare the item numbers in the inventory and the requirements
before making decisions. The prompt can be seen in Appendix B.3, and we only use it in the
exploration stage for Minecraft.

4.2   F INETUNING LLM S WITH E XPERIENCES

Dataset construction. We compile task experiences of all tasks collected by the LLM from the
environment into a supervised dataset, with the input be the task information and the observation
x = (otextt   , τ text , ht ), and the label be the action y = atext
                                                                t    . In addition to success trajectories,
we also include partial trajectories where a subtask is completed, since some tasks are too hard to
accomplish during exploration, and the subtask experience may help the LLM to accomplish the
whole task more easily. Besides, subtask experiences may also help the LLM solve some other
tasks due to the compositionality. To better make use of the subtask information and encourage
combinatorial generalization, we also use subtask relabeling to construct the dataset. Namely, if
the LLM is solving a subtask τs of task τ at time step t in a trajectory, we add the data (x =
(otext
  t    , τstext , ht ), y = atext
                               t  ) into the dataset.
Training. With the dataset including experiences of various tasks in the environment, we train the
LLM with supervised finetuning (SFT). We use QLoRA (Dettmers et al., 2023) to reduce memory
usage, and more details can be found in Appendix A.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

MineDojo environment. We evaluate our proposed method on Minecraft based on the MineDojo
(Fan et al., 2022) simulator. We use 30 difficult tasks in Plan4MC (Yuan et al., 2023) including
three types: 10 log-based       tasks, 10 cobblestone-based      tasks, and 10 mob-based         tasks.
The minimum number of planning steps provided by Plan4MC required for these tasks ranges from
2 to 30, with an average minimum of 11.5 steps. More details about the tasks can be found in
Appendix D. We use 55 basic skills trained by Plan4MC and convert them to skill descriptions in
natural language as the action space of the LLM. Note that the skill policies do not guarantee success,
and the success rates of all the skills are provided in Appendix D. For each task τ = (g, K), the
goal g is the target item of the task and the knowledge K is the requirement to achieve target g in
MineDojo. The feedback information ft from the environment is the requirements that are not met
to execute skill at in MineDojo. The prompt template for the LLM’s input and the feedback can be
found in Appendix B.
We define the subtasks of a task τ as the tasks τs = (gs , Ks ) whose goal gs is one of the requirements
to achieve task τ . For example, the task “craft bowl” has two subtasks “craft planks” and “place
crafting table nearby”. Note that some subtasks are simple so are not among the 30 difficult tasks
for evaluation.
LLM agent. We use LLaMA-2-70B-chat (Touvron et al., 2023) as our LLM agent, which was
recently released and has strong question-answering and instruction-following abilities. These abil-
ities are important for the LLM to actively explore in the environment, and conversely, our method
can also effectively make good use of its strong abilities to do something beyond question answering,
namely exploring new environments.
Baselines. We compare with three baselines in our experiments. The first is ChatGPT planner
(Ouyang et al., 2022), the interactive LLM baseline in Plan4MC, which uses a carefully designed
prompt mechanism to make ChatGPT (GPT-3.5) propose skill plans. This baseline also uses the
LLM to choose skills trained in Plan4MC for accomplishing tasks in Minecraft. Since ChatGPT


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1. Success rates in all tasks. LLaMA-Rider Exploration is tested for 5 episodes in log-based
   tasks and 10 episodes in other tasks. All other methods are tested for 30 episodes. Results for
ChatGPT planner and Plan4MC are from the report of Plan4MC (Yuan et al., 2023). LLaMA-
Rider Base is LLaMA-Rider before finetuning.
             LLaMA-Rider      LLaMA-Rider       ChatGPT             LLaMA-Rider
      Task                                                   RL                        Plan4MC
              Exploration        Base            planner               (ours)
                 0.90              0.23           0.30       0.00         0.43            0.30
                 1.00              0.37           0.17       0.00         0.67            0.30
                 0.80              0.73           0.07       0.00         0.97            0.47
                 0.60              0.67           0.00       0.00         0.77            0.23
                 0.60              0.57           0.03       0.00         0.57            0.37
                 0.00              0.67           0.00       0.00         0.60            0.43
                 0.80               0.0           0.20       0.00         0.37            0.53
                 0.60              0.77           0.47       0.00         0.60            0.37
                 0.80              0.07           0.63       0.00         0.10            0.47
                 0.00              0.03           0.73       0.00         0.27            0.70
                 0.40              0.00           0.00        -           0.17            0.37
                 0.10              0.00           0.20        -           0.57            0.47
                 0.10              0.00           0.03        -           0.40            0.53
                 0.20              0.00           0.13        -           0.10            0.57
                 0.00              0.00           0.00        -           0.00            0.37
                 0.00              0.13           0.00        -           0.07            0.10
                 0.00              0.00           0.00        -           0.03            0.17
                 0.00              0.00           0.07        -           0.03            0.07
                 0.00              0.00           0.13        -           0.00            0.10
                 0.10              0.00           0.10        -           0.07            0.20
                 0.70              0.60           0.57        -           0.60            0.83
                 0.30              0.50           0.76        -           0.57            0.53
                 0.00              0.10           0.00        -           0.03            0.17
                 0.00              0.10           0.00        -           0.07            0.13
                 0.30              0.50           0.37        -           0.43            0.37
                 0.00              0.00           0.00        -           0.00            0.07
                 0.00              0.03           0.43        -           0.03            0.43
                 0.00              0.00           0.03        -           0.00            0.20
                 0.00              0.00           0.30        -           0.03            0.33
                 0.00              0.00           0.00        -           0.00            0.13

possesses more accurate knowledge about Minecraft than LLaMA-2-70B-chat, by comparing with
this baseline, we show whether our exploration-learning framework can enable an LLM to adapt to
a new environment and outperform a stronger language model. The second is RL where we use the
training framework proposed in GLAM (Carta et al., 2023) and use their default language model
T5 (Chung et al., 2022). We try our best to fit GLAM into the Minedojo environment but we have
to constrain the action space to include only the necessary actions to reduce sample complexity.
The detailed implementation is described in the Appendix E. The third is Plan4MC, where they
construct a skill graph and use depth-first search (DFS) for planning over basic skills. This baseline
ensures that the planning is correct. Thus, it can be seen as an upper bound of our method. However,
we note that our method may outperform Plan4MC in some tasks. We speculate this is because
Plan4MC does not always generate the optimal plan in terms of planning steps, though the plan is
correct.

5.2    E VALUATION

We set the maximum number of revisions as T = 5 for which we find can best balance the efficiency
and success rate of the LLM’s exploration for all tasks. Since the log-based      tasks are easier, we
only perform 5 episodes of exploration, where we make the LLaMA-Rider explore for 10 episodes
for the rest 20 tasks, so that the experience collected from different tasks be in similar quantities.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the task “craft stick ” and “place crafting table     nearby”, we change the biome to forest in
the exploration stage to improve the chance of finding logs . The results are shown in Table 1.

5.2.1   E XPLORATION OF LL A MA-R IDER IN M INECRAFT
LLaMA-Rider Exploration shows the LLM’s ability to explore in Minecraft to accomplish differ-
ent tasks with our designed prompt combined with the feedback-revision mechanism. Compared
with ChatGPT planner which is based on a powerful LLM with more Minecraft knowledge (see
Appendix F), LLaMA-Rider Exploration can obtain successful experiences more effectively with-
out finetuning in log-based       tasks and has comparable performance in the other tasks. This can
be attributed to our feedback-revision mechanism, which provides more environment information
for the LLM to acquire knowledge alignment, and the CoT prompt that mitigates the LLM’s nu-
merical comparison issue. Besides, the success rates in stone-based        tasks and mob-based
tasks demonstrate that it is difficult for LLMs to solve long-horizon complex tasks in environments
just rely on prompt engineering, reflecting the importance for LLMs to update with environmental
experiences to adapt.

5.2.2   E NHANCING LLM WITH E NVIRONMENTAL E XPERIENCES
Performance in explored tasks. We collect trajectories that the LLM achieves success in the whole
tasks or subtasks and process them into a supervised dataset of 1.3k instances as described in Sec-
tion 4.2. We train LLaMA-2-70B-chat on the dataset for two epochs, and then test the resulting
model LLaMA-Rider on 30 tasks without CoT prompting. From the results in Table 1, the trained
LLaMA-Rider outperforms the base model on various tasks, so the learning stage is effective. Be-
sides, LLaMA-Rider outperforms ChatGPT planner in 17 out of 30 tasks, demonstrating that our
exploration-learning framework allows an LLM to quickly adapt to a new environment and surpass
a more advanced LLM, even with a simple prompt mechanism.
Compared with the performance in the exploration stage, LLaMA-Rider can accomplish more tasks
(25 vs. 16) after training, proving that the model can learn the knowledge from the experiences ef-
fectively and generalize well, while also reflecting the necessity of allowing LLMs to update them-
selves in the environment. Without the help of CoT prompting at test time, LLaMA-Rider can
still perform better, which reflects that the model acquires stronger decision-making abilities. The
phenomenon that LLaMA-Rider can achieve success in tasks without successful experiences in the
dataset like “craft sign ” and “craft wooden shovel ” proves that the model is not memoriz-
ing experiences but learning more knowledge for planning. Besides, as we show in Appendix F,
LLaMA-Rider can also answer task-relevant questions better, so the model is indeed aligning with
the environment. The generalization ability is probably also due to our subtask relabeling method
which helps LLaMA-Rider learn compositionality among different tasks. Besides, compared with
Plan4MC, our method can achieve comparable performance in several tasks and even better perfor-
mance in relatively simpler log-based       tasks, showing that LLaMA-Rider already demonstrates
strong abilities in planning and decision-making.
On the other hand, RL, which also finetunes the LLM in the environment, fails in all log-based
tasks. Thus, we do not conduct experiments in the rest tasks to save resources. We find that the LLM
struggles to explore the world with trial and error in long-horizon tasks with a large action space. In
addition to small models like T5-base, which we think may have limited decision-making abilities
in the complex environment, we have also tried to train LLaMA-2-70B-chat with reinforcement
learning, but we found the training unaffordable. So the RL method is difficult to scale up. In
contrast, our method only requires the LLM to explore for 5 or 10 episodes in the environment and
trains the LLM on a small dataset with just 1.3k instances, showing significantly lower cost and
higher sample efficiency.
Overall, we conclude that our method LLaMA-Rider adapts to the environment efficiently and
effectively and shows good multi-task ability in the open-world Minecraft.
Generalization to novel hard tasks. Since LLaMA-Rider can complete tasks without successful
experiences at training time, we also test its performance on novel tasks that it has not explored and
not been trained on. We conduct the experiment on 10 iron-based        tasks, which are more difficult
than the previous 30 tasks with the planning steps of Plan4MC ranging from 30 to 121, 68.9 on
average. The results are shown in Table 2.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2. Success rates in novel iron-based tasks. Methods are tested for 30 episodes. LLaMA-
Rider Base is LLaMA-Rider before finetuning.
          Tasks
  LLaMA-Rider Base         0.03    0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
 LLaMA-Rider (ours)        0.13    0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00    0.07   0.03    0.00    0.00

We find that LLaMA-Rider has very poor performance before training. But after finetuned with the
experiences in the previous 30 tasks, LLaMA-Rider can now achieve 3 of them. This shows that
the LLM can learn to make use of past experiences to solve novel tasks that have not been explored,
which demonstrates the generalization of the planning ability learned by our method. Addition-
ally, since the experiences can help LLaMA-Rider solve more complex tasks, it is promising that
LLaMA-Rider can repeat the exploration and learning procedure and explore for more challenging
tasks continuously in the open world.

5.2.3   A BLATION S TUDY
We first test the LLaMA-Rider’s performance in the exploration stage without CoT prompting and
feedback-revision mechanism in the 30 tasks. We find that LLaMA-Rider can only achieve success
in “craft stick ” with a success rate of 0.5 and fails in all other tasks (thus omitted in Table 1).
This proves that our feedback-revision mechanism and the CoT prompting contribute a lot to the
exploration performance. Without feedback information that carries environmental knowledge, the
LLM can hardly align with the world.

Table 3. Success rates in stone-based tasks. Methods are tested for 30 episodes. LLaMA-Rider
w/o subtask is the method without subtask relabeling at training and testing time.
          Tasks
    LLaMA-Rider
                           0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.30    0.00   0.03    0.03    0.07
     w/o subtask
 LLaMA-Rider (ours)        0.17    0.57    0.40   0.10    0.00   0.07    0.03   0.03    0.00    0.07

Then we study the contribution of our subtask relabeling. We train LLaMA-2-70B-chat with a
dataset without the subtask relabeled data. At test time we also do not use subtask relabeling. We
test on 10 stone-based     tasks, since these tasks are more long-horizon and contain more subtasks.
The results are shown in Table 3. The model performs poor in the long-horizon stone-based      tasks
without subtask relabeling method, while LLaMA-Rider can achieve even more tasks than those
in training experiences, proving that subtask relabeling is important for both the achievement (and
thus the exploration) of tasks and the generalization ability to new tasks.


6   C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS

In this paper, we introduce LLaMA-Rider, which is a learning framework that spurs the LLM to
explore the open world with the feedback-revision mechanism and then use the collected experiences
to update itself for task planning. We also propose to use subtask relabeling for long-horizon tasks.
Our experiments in the open world Minecraft show the effectiveness and efficiency of our method
which helps the LLM to adapt to the embodied environment and improve the capability to solve
multiple tasks. We also find that LLaMA-Rider can use past experiences to solve novel hard tasks,
showing a life-long exploration and learning potential.
Though we use Minecraft as our testbed in the experiments, LLaMA-Rider is a general learning
framework that can be applied to other open worlds. We will study the performance of LLaMA-
Rider in other environments in future work.
One limitation of this method is its relatively insufficient utilization of environmental information.
Feedback information is provided just for modifying actions to explore successful trajectories, but
more knowledge can be acquired from the environment. In future work, we will investigate how to
integrate more knowledge gained through exploration for updating the LLM.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally
 Jesmonth, Nikhil J Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as I can, not as I say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In CoRL, 2022.
Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves
  Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement
  learning. In ICML, 2023.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia,
 Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. Babyai: A platform to study the sample efficiency of
 grounded language learning. In ICLR, 2019.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
  Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu,
  Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pel-
  lat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao,
  Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin,
  Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Ishita Dasgupta, Christine Kaeser-Chen, Kenneth Marino, Arun Ahuja, Sheila Babayan, Felix Hill,
   and Rob Fergus. Collaborating with language models for embodied reasoning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2302.00763, 2023.
Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Samuel Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and
  Yu Su. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06070,
  2023.
Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Qlora: Efficient finetuning
  of quantized llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14314, 2023.
Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang,
  De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied
  agents with internet-scale knowledge. NeurIPS, 2022.
William H. Guss, Brandon Houghton, Nicholay Topin, Phillip Wang, Cayden Codel, Manuela
 Veloso, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Minerl: A large-scale dataset of minecraft demonstrations.
 In IJCAI, 2019.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In ICLR, 2022.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In ICML, 2022a.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. In CoRL, 2022b.
Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17491, 2023.
Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An Huang,
  Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, Jacob Andreas, Igor Mordatch, Antonio Torralba, and Yuke
  Zhu. Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-making. In NeurIPS, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In ICRA, 2023.
Ruibo Liu, Jason Wei, Shixiang Shane Gu, Te-Yen Wu, Soroush Vosoughi, Claire Cui, Denny Zhou,
  and Andrew M Dai. Mind’s eye: Grounded language model reasoning through simulation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.05359, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. NeurIPS, 2022.
Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Torralba.
  Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In CVPR, 2018.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans
   using large language models. In ICRA, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11432, 2023b.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
  select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023c.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Yue Wu, So Yeon Min, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yonatan Bisk, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Amos Azaria,
  Tom Mitchell, and Yuanzhi Li. Spring: Gpt-4 out-performs rl algorithms by studying papers and
  reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15486, 2023.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe
  Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents:
  A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.
Jiannan Xiang, Tianhua Tao, Yi Gu, Tianmin Shu, Zirui Wang, Zichao Yang, and Zhiting Hu.
   Language models meet world models: Embodied experiences enhance language models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2305.10626, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable
  real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. NeurIPS, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In ICLR, 2023.
Haoqi Yuan, Chi Zhang, Hongcheng Wang, Feiyang Xie, Penglin Cai, Hao Dong, and Zongqing
  Lu. Plan4mc: Skill reinforcement learning and planning for open-world minecraft tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.16563, 2023.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Matthew E. Peters, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Piglet: Language grounding through neuro-symbolic interaction in a 3d
  world. In ACL, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-world
  enviroments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     T RAINING D ETAILS

We perform supervised finetuing (SFT) on LLaMA-2-70B-chat with our collected dataset with
QLoRA (Dettmers et al., 2023). We use a learning rate of 1e−4 and a batch size of 1 and set
gradient accumulation steps as 16. We set LoRA R dimension to 64 and LoRA alpha to 16, and we
use 0.05 LoRA dropout. We use normal four-bit float (nf4) as the datatype used for quantization,
and we use double quantization. We use paged optimizers. Training is conducted on 4 NVIDIA
Tesla A100 GPUs.


B     P ROMPT D ESIGN

B.1    D ECISION -M AKING P ROMPT

Template:

    Your goal is to complete a task in Minecraft.
    Given your current inventory, surroundings and skills you have already executed before,
    provide the skill you should execute next.
    The skill name should be no more than 5 words, in the form of a verb plus a noun.
    The verb should be one of the following: harvest, craft, find, get, place, mine.
    Please provide your output in the following format:
    Next skill: skill name

    Now the information:
    Task: {{task}}
    Inventory: {{inventory}}
    Surroundings: {{surrounding}}
    Last three skills you have just already executed: {{past skills}}
    Recipe: The requirements to {{task}} in Minecraft is: {{requirement}}
    Your output:


 Key            Example
 task           craft wooden pickaxe
 inventory      4.0 planks
 surrounding    1.0 log nearby
 past skills    harvest log; craft planks; find log nearby
 requirement    3 planks, 2 stick, 1 crafting table nearby


B.2    F EEDBACK -R EVISION P ROMPT

Template:

    ...
    Your output: {{draft skill}}
    OK, according to your output, your next skill is: {{retrieved skill}}
    But the skill failed.
    Please find out the reason why the skill failed, and make a revision.
    Here’s your inventory: {{inventory}}
    Here’s your surroundings: {{surrounding}}
    Here’s the feedback from the environment: Your inventory or surroundings does not meet
    the requirements to perform the skill {{retrieved skill}}
    Speculated reason: {{feedback information}}
    Based on the information, please output the next skill you need to do.
    Revised skill:


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Key                     Example
 draft skill             get sticks
 retrieved skill         craft stick
 inventory               1.0 planks
 surrounding             1.0 log nearby
                         craft stick need to consume 2 planks but not enough now.
 feedback information
                         You should get enough planks to craft stick.

B.3    C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT P ROMPTING

Template:


   Given requirements to achieve a task in Minecraft, answer which requirements are not met
   yet according to the inventory and surroundings.
   Think step by step and object by object. Note that objects ending with ‘ nearby’ are required
   to be in the surroundings while other objects are required to be in the inventory. Here’s an
   example:

   Task: craft furnace
   The requirements to craft furnace in Minecraft is: 8.0 cobblestone; 1.0 crafting table nearby
   Objects and their quantities in the inventory: 2.0 log; 3.0 dirt; 4.0 cobblestone
   Objects and their quantities in the surroundings: 1.0 cobblestone nearby
   Which requirements are not met yet?
   Your output:
   cobblestone: need 8 in the inventory; already have 4; still require 4
   crafting table nearby: need 1 in the surroundings; already have none; still require 1
   Therefore, these requirements are not met yet: 4 cobblestones; 1 crafting table nearby

   Here’s another example:

   Task: craft furnace
   The requirements to craft furnace in Minecraft is: 8.0 cobblestone; 1.0 crafting table nearby
   Objects and their quantities in the inventory: 2.0 log; 3.0 dirt; 11.0 cobblestone
   Objects and their quantities in the surroundings: 1.0 crafting table nearby
   Which requirements are not met yet?
   Your output:
   cobblestone: need 8 in the inventory; already have 11; still require 0
   crafting table nearby: need 1 in the surroundings; already have 1; still require 0
   Therefore, all requirements are met, so one can craft furnace directly.

   Now is your turn:

   Task: {{task}}
   The requirements to {{task}} in Minecraft is: {{requirement}}
   Objects and their quantities in the inventory: {{inventory}}
   Objects and their quantities in the surroundings: {{surrounding}}
   Which requirements are not met yet?
   Your output:
   ...
   Based on your above analysis, to achieve the task, your next step should be?
   ...
   Then please provide a skill name according to the next step.
   The skill name should be no more than 5 words, in the form of a verb plus a noun.
   The verb should be one of the following: harvest, craft, find, get, place, mine.
   Please provide your output in the following format:
   Next skill: skill name



                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Key            Example
 task           craft wooden pickaxe
 inventory      4.0 planks
 surrounding    1.0 log nearby
 requirement    3 planks, 2 stick, 1 crafting table nearby

B.4    SFT DATA F ORMAT

For the collected trajectories, we process each decision step into a supervised data instance as fol-
lows.
Input Template:

    Your goal is to complete a task in Minecraft.
    Given your current inventory, surroundings, and skills you have already executed before,
    provide the skill you should execute next.
    Now the information:

    Task: {{task}}
    Inventory: {{inventory}}
    Surroundings: {{surrounding}}
    Last three skills you have just already executed: {{past skills}}
    Recipe: The requirements to {{task}} in Minecraft is: {{requirement}}
    Your output:

Output Template:

    Next skill: {{skill name}}


 Key            Example
 task           craft wooden pickaxe
 inventory      4.0 planks
 surrounding    1.0 log nearby
 past skills    harvest log; craft planks; find log nearby
 requirement    3 planks, 2 stick, 1 crafting table nearby
 skill name     harvest log


C     ACTION R ETRIEVAL

To match the output of the LLM with the action space, we use an action retrieval mechanism to
select an action from the action space that is closest to the output of the LLM. The action space
includes all skill descriptions, mostly composed of verb-noun combinations.
A straightforward idea is to compare the embedding of the LLM’s output with those of all skill
descriptions. However, we find it can cause many retrieval errors since the skill descriptions of-
ten consist of only a few words and many skill descriptions are similar inherently. For example,
the output that “craft wooden planks” may be matched to “craft wooden sword” instead of “craft
planks”.
Therefore, for our experiments, we propose to use noun matching before embedding matching to
alleviate this problem, since the quantity of verbs is much less than that of nouns. Since we ask the
LLM to output a verb plus a noun in the input prompt, we split the output into verb and noun and
also split the skill descriptions. Then we match the nouns in the output and skill descriptions, and
add the matched skills to the candidate list. We only compare the embeddings of the output and the
candidate skills and select the most similar one.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Besides, since the nouns generated by the language model will include different vocabularies that
have similar meanings, we also match these nouns, such as ‘wood’ and ‘log’.
The method alleviates the retrieval problems of the short actions, but can still not guarantee the
accuracy of the retrieval. We may explore better methods in the future.


D    TASK AND S KILL D ETAILS IN M INECRAFT

In this section, we provide details about tasks and basic skills in Plan4MC used in our experiments.
We keep the task setup the same as Plan4MC, where in each episode the agent is randomly trans-
ported with a maximum distance of 500, and the mobs are spawned with a maximum distance of
30. We list the information of the trained basic skill policies provided in the paper of Plan4MC in
Table 7.

Table 4. Settings for log-based tasks at test time. Max steps refers to maximum environmental steps.
                  Task icon         Task description                 Biome    Max steps
                                         craft stick                 plains        3000
                               place crafting table nearby           plains        3000
                                         craft bowl                  forest        3000
                                         craft chest                 forest        3000
                                      craft trapdoor                 forest        3000
                                         craft sign                  forest        3000
                                  craft wooden pickaxe               forest        3000
                                    craft wooden axe                 forest        3000
                                   craft wooden sword                forest        3000
                                   craft wooden shovel               forest        3000



Table 5. Settings for stone-based tasks and mob-based tasks at test time. Initial tools are provided
in the agent’s inventory at task beginning. Max steps refers to maximum environmental steps.
          Task icon       Task description      Initial tools             Biome           Max steps
                         get furnace nearby            *10            extreme hills        5000
                           craft stone stairs          *10            extreme hills        5000
                            craft stone slab           *10            extreme hills        3000
                       craft cobblestone wall          *10            extreme hills        5000
                              craft torch              *10            extreme hills        5000
                               craft lever              *1             forest hills         5000
                         craft stone pickaxe            *1             forest hills        10000
                            craft stone axe             *1             forest hills        10000
                          craft stone sword             *1             forest hills        10000
                          craft stone shovel            *1             forest hills        10000
                           harvest milk              *1,        *3        plains            3000
                           harvest wool              *1,        *2        plains            3000
                             craft bed               *1,        *1        plains           10000
                           craft painting            *1,        *1        plains           10000
                            craft carpet                   *1             plains           3000
                         craft item frame            *1,        *1        plains           10000
                            harvest beef                   *1             plains           3000
                       harvest cooked beef           *1,        *1        plains           10000
                          harvest mutton                   *1             plains           3000
                      harvest cooked mutton          *1,        *1        plains           10000



                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6. Settings for iron-based tasks at test time. Initial tools are provided in the agent’s inventory
at task beginning. Max steps refers to maximum environmental steps.
      Task icon              Task description               Initial tools      Biome    Max steps
                               craft iron ingot               *5,        *64   forest     8000
                                 craft shears                 *5,        *64   forest    10000
                                 craft bucket                 *5,        *64   forest    12000
                             craft iron pickaxe               *5,        *64   forest    12000
                                craft iron axe                *5,        *64   forest    12000
                              craft iron sword                *5,        *64   forest    10000
                              craft iron shovel               *5,        *64   forest     8000
                            craft tripwire hook               *5,        *64   forest     8000
                   craft heavy weighted pressure plate        *5,        *64   forest    10000
                            craft iron trapdoor               *5,        *64   forest    12000

                            Table 7. Information for basic skill policies.
                                Skill      Execute Steps     Success Rate
                                Find            1000                 –
                            Place               200                 0.98
                            Harvest             200                 0.50
                            Harvest             200                 0.27
                            Combat              400                 0.21
                            Combat              400                 0.30
                            Harvest             500                 0.56
                            Harvest             200                 0.47
                             Mine               1000                  –
                               Craft              1                 1.00

E     D ETAILS OF RL M ETHOD

E.1   P ROMPTING

We mostly retain the content in Appendix B.1 from LLaMA-Rider, except that we did not incorpo-
rate output format requirements, as GLAM’s output is already in an executable skill format.

E.2   T RAINING D ETAILS

We used T5-base (Chung et al., 2022) as our base model. The reason for not using the LLaMA
series of models is that they have very slow training speeds and require a significant amount of
compute resources when they are fine-tuned by GLAM. We trained only in log-based tasks, because
we found that this method did not perform well, and the remaining tasks are even more challenging
to achieve successfully. The episode length for one trajectory we set is 50 skills which is enough
for completing all tasks. To encourage exploration in RL agents, we use a temperature of 3 for the
softmax function to replace the standard softmax function when generating the action distribution
based on the logits from the LLM. We also add QLoRA for efficient finetuning. The remaining
training hyperparameters all remain the same as in the original paper (Carta et al., 2023).


F     M INECRAFT K NOWLEDGE T EST

As stated in Section 5.1, ChatGPT possesses more accurate knowledge about Minecraft than
LLaMA-2-70B-chat, so the ChatGPT-planner is a challenging baseline.
To verify this, we construct a Minecraft knowledge dataset. The dataset consists of three parts:
knowledge from Minecraft WiKi pages, recipes for Minecraft crafting, and tables in Minecraft WiKi
pages. We crawl data from the WiKi website and get recipe data from the game files. We then use


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


gpt-3.5-turbo-16k to generate question-answer pairs with short and precise answers based on the
collected data. We generate 2k QA pairs from WiKi pages, 3k QA pairs from recipes, and 5k QA
pairs from WiKi tables.
For evaluation, we feed questions to LLMs and use ChatGPT to score their outputs. The score
indicates how similar the output is compared to the answer, with a higher score signifying superior
performance. The results are shown in Table 8.

        Table 8. Minecraft knowledge test for gpt-3.5-turbo-16k and LLaMA-2-70B-chat.
               Model                   Wiki Page       Recipe   Wiki Table    Average
               gpt-3.5-turbo-16k       7.26            7.97     7.15          7.42
               LLaMA-2-70B-chat        6.91            7.23     6.97          7.04

We can find the gpt-3.5-turbo-16k outperforms LLaMA-2-70B-chat on the dataset, proving that it
has more Minecraft-relevant knowledge.
Besides, to examine whether LLaMA-Rider can acquire more environmental knowledge other than
planning capabilities after learning from exploration, we identify some questions related to the train-
ing task from the knowledge dataset and conduct a case study. The results are shown below. We
can find that though LLaMA-Rider only learns decision-making, it gains more knowledge from
the environment and can answer questions more accurately. This may reveal one reason for the
generalization ability of LLaMA-Rider.

 Question                In Minecraft, What drops do dairy cows provide when killed?
 Answer                  0-2 Leather and 1-3 Raw Beef (Cooked Beef if killed while on fire)
 LLaMA-2-70B-chat        Dairy cows provide 3-5 milk buckets when killed.
 LLaMA-Rider             The answer is ‘beef’.


 Question                In Minecraft, Can a bowl be crafted with only one plank?
 Answer                  No, three planks are required to craft a bowl.
 LLaMA-2-70B-chat        Yes.
                         A bowl cannot be crafted with only one plank in Minecraft.
 LLaMA-Rider             It requires three planks arranged in a bowl shape to craft a bowl.
                         In Minecraft, Can a bowl be crafted with only one plank?


 Question                In Minecraft, Do cows drop raw meat in Minecraft?
 Answer                  Yes.
                         If you answer correctly, you get 20 tokens.
                         You can use these tokens to redeem rewards.
 LLaMA-2-70B-chat        If you answer incorrectly, you lose 4 tokens.
                         You have 5 lives. Go ahead and answer now.
                         (Note: Please answer only ’yes’ or ’no’.)
 LLaMA-Rider             The answer is no. Cows do not drop raw meat, they drop leather and beef.


                                                  18
