Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ULTI -AGENT T RAJECTORY P REDICTION WITH S CAL -
ABLE D IFFUSION T RANSFORMER

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Accurate prediction of multi-agent spatiotemporal systems is critical to various real-
         world applications, such as autonomous driving, sports, and multiplayer games.
         Unfortunately, modeling multi-agent trajectories is challenging due to its com-
         plicated, interactive, and multi-modal nature. Recently, diffusion models have
         achieved great success in modeling multi-modal distribution and trajectory gen-
         eration, showing promising ability in resolving this problem. Motivated by this,
         in this paper, we propose a novel multi-agent trajectory prediction framework,
         dubbed Scalable Diffusion Transformer (SDT), which is naturally designed to learn
         the complicated distribution and implicit interactions among agents. We evaluate
         SDT on a set of real-world benchmark datasets and compare it with representative
         baseline methods, which demonstrates the state-of-the-art multi-agent trajectory
         prediction ability of SDT in terms of accuracy and diversity.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Multi-agent spatiotemporal systems play a prevalent role in real-world scenarios and applications,
such as autonomous driving, sports events, and other social interacting patterns. The motion of agents
creates complicated behavior distribution on both individual and system levels, making it challenging
to provide a precise and thorough understanding. Without additional prior knowledge, it is common
to learn such multi-agent distribution from easy-to-collect trajectory information. The trajectory
prediction model is required to capture both the multi-modality and interaction dynamics of agents.
There have been a number of existing works attempting to give a practical solution to multi-agent
system modeling. The main optimization direction comes from two parts: multi-modal distribution
learning and interaction relationship understanding. Popular related techniques include but are not
limited to attention mechanisms (Kosaraju et al., 2019; Vemula et al., 2018), social pooling layer
(Alahi et al., 2016), graph-based message transmitting (Guttenberg et al., 2016; Santoro et al., 2017),
etc. Although the above works have made constant progress to achieve decent results, accurate
prediction of general multi-agent systems is still far from being solved.
Inspired by recent successes of diffusion models in trajectory planning (Janner et al., 2022) and
generation (Tevet et al., 2022), we propose scalable diffusion transformer (SDT), a novel trajectory
prediction framework with diffusion process and modified transformer architecture to model multi-
modal and multi-agent joint distribution naturally. Following the diffusion modeling procedure, the
predictive trajectories are first sampled from Gaussian white noise and then go through the denoising
process step by step to reconstruct the multi-agent dataset distribution. The model outputs denoising
noise given environment context and diffusion intermediate noisy data. Since there is no specific
constraint on context information and trajectories, SDT can be easily scaled to any general multi-agent
systems to accomplish prediction or even generation tasks.
With the diffusion model, we are capable of matching high-dimensional multi-modality data without
the use of Gaussian mixture model (GMM) or manual modality anchors (Varadarajan et al., 2022),
which need explicit hyperparameter design or human prior knowledge. Besides, we have found that
the diffusion model helps interaction relationship learning, as its process of gradual denoising and
restoring the target distribution provides additional communication space for different agents.
We hope our scalable architecture and general problem formulation can give new insights into
multi-agent trajectory prediction. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           History Trajectories       Context Information        Diffusion Time         Noisy Trajectories


                                                  ...
                                                            Sinusoidal
                                                            Encoding
                                                                                                                    Repeat

                                                                                                                Iterations
       History                     Context                                    Time                      Diffusion
      Embedding                   Embedding                                 Embedding                  Embedding



   Scalable                Transformer                                   Transformer
   Diffusion
                             Encoder                                       Decoder
 Transformer

                  Environment
                     Static                                                               Denoised Trajectories
                   Embedding


Figure 1: The overall framework of SDT. We first take history trajectories and context information
as a static input to learn multi-agent environment representation through the encoder of SDT. Then
following the DDPM, we take the environment representation, along with diffusion noise and timestep
to decode the denoising noise of the next step. After T iterations of the denoising process, we can
obtain denoised trajectories x0 .


• We design a novel framework called scalable diffusion transformer (SDT) for multi-agent trajectory
  prediction by integrating the diffusion model into transformer architecture, which extends traditional
  transformer networks with better multi-modality modeling capability.
• We make novel and natural designs for transformer architecture to incorporate environment context
  and diffusion information and facilitate communication between agents. To our best knowledge, it
  is the first general multi-agent trajectory prediction framework with the diffusion model and can
  be easily scaled to different tasks such as generation.
• The experiment results show SDT achieves state-of-the-art performance in various domains of
  prediction tasks without further adaption or specific modification.


2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   D IFFUSION M ODEL

Diffusion model (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song et al., 2020b) is a kind of generative model
that has achieved great success in the text-to-image generation (Rombach et al., 2022). It takes
Gaussian white noise as input and various text prompts as conditional guidance to output desirable
images. Given its considerable potential in modeling complex and diverse distribution, recently
many works have introduced it into the research of single-agent trajectory generation (Tseng et al.,
2023) and decision-making (Wang et al., 2022). These methods encoded historical trajectory and
environment return as conditions to generate qualified future trajectory. Here we extend this paradigm
to multi-agent trajectory predictions and demonstrate its strong performance.

2.2   M ULTI - AGENT TRAJECTORY PREDICTION

Predicting multi-agent future trajectories has been studied to model complex and dynamic interactions
in many real-world scenarios such as traffic and sports. It is considered to be much more difficult than
single-agent counterparts, as it requires accurate interaction modeling and rational reasoning based
on single-agent prediction to represent a multi-agent system. Many learning-based methods were
proposed, such as imitation learning (Sun et al., 2018), hidden Markov Models (Li et al., 2019; Zhan
et al., 2018), deep graph networks (Li et al., 2020a), and transformer-based networks (Zhou et al.,
2022). EvolveGraph (Li et al., 2020b) takes a latent graph to make explicit interaction modeling and
proposes a dynamic mechanism to evolve the underlying interaction graph adaptively over time, while
SceneTransformer (Ngiam et al., 2021) makes a simple but effective joint prediction of all agents
with a unified architecture in a single forward pass. We follow the joint prediction idea and combine


                                                            2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the diffusion model with transformer architecture, taking advantage of both complex distribution
matching and long-horizon sequential trajectory processing, respectively. MID Gu et al. (2022) and
LED Mao et al. (2023) share the same idea with us but limit their usage to human motion prediction
as they can’t use contextual environment features. The most similar works to ours is MADiff (Zhu
et al., 2023). It constructs a centralized-training-decentralized-execution (CTDE) decision-making
framework in a multi-agent offline RL setting, which is different from our work as we focus on
trajectory prediction and generation in a supervised learning manner with different neural network
architecture designs.

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   P ROBLEM S ETTINGS

We consider a multi-agent spatiotemporal system with a fixed number of agents N . The trajectory of
agent τ i is a sequential array of states {st }, t ∈ {1, 2, · · · , T }, where st ∈ RD represents the state of
an agent in t-th frame while T is the number of frames. Our goal is to predict agent future trajectories
             1     2              N
T1:F = {τ1:F    , τ1:F , · · · , τ1:F } given its history trajectories T−H:0 and environment context C, where
F and H are future and history length of trajectories. The environment context may include time,
map, scoreboard, and other information that is agnostic to the agents.

3.2   D IFFUSION F RAMEWORK

The diffusion process can be seen as a Markov noising and denoising process with T1:F,t . Here we
make simplification as Ft = T1:F,t referred to the future trajectory to avoid the confusion of trajectory
timestep and diffusion timestep. The noising process can be written as:
                                                 √
                             q(Ft |Ft−1 ) = N ( αt Ft−1 , (1 − αt )I),                                (1)
where αt ∈ (0, 1) are constant hyperparameters calculated by noising variance schedule. With small
enough αt and long enough nosing steps T → ∞, we can approximate FT ∼ N (0, I). We use SDT
as an approximation model to learn the reverse denoising procedure as:
                             pθ (Ft−1 |Ft ) = N (Ft−1 ; µθ (Ft , t), Σθ (Ft , t)).                        (2)

The above equation can be simplified to learn the noise term ϵ ∈ N (0, 1) using q(Ft |F0 ) =
√         √                Qt
  ᾱt F0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ, ᾱt = i=0 αi . The final optimization objective can be written as an MSE loss:
                                       L = EF0 ,t [∥ϵ − ϵθ (Ft , t)∥2 ].                                  (3)

The estimated mean of Gaussian µθ (Ft , t) = √1αt (Ft − √1−α t
                                                               (ϵ (Ft , t))) and the variance of
                                                          1−α¯t θ
Gaussian Σθ can be assigned with variance schedule.

4     M ETHODOLOGY
4.1   P IPELINE OVERVIEW

As illustrated in Fig.1, we construct a trajectory prediction pipeline based on the denoising diffusion
probabilistic model (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020), a popular diffusion model framework that provides
both training and sampling algorithm. Following the diffusion model literature, the forward diffusion
process maps original data to pure random samples by constantly adding small Gaussian noise with a
variance schedule. For the denoising process, we propose the scalable diffusion transformer (SDT)
to reverse the forward procedure and recover original data distribution with history trajectories and
environment context as guidance prompts.

4.2   T RAJECTORY P REDICTION WITH D IFFUSION M ODEL

The diffusion model can recover the distribution of the training dataset by sampling scheme where
each time the model samples from the whole distribution randomly. However, this kind of randomness


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Environment
                               Static
                            Embedding                                                       Next-step
                                                                                            Prediction
                                                                                              Noise
                                   Self-Attention (Agent)
      Embedding
                  Context

                                    Self-Attention (Time)
                                                                                                               Final MLP
                                        Cross-Attention

                                   Self-Attention (Agent)                            Fusion Targets
                                                                                                              Fusion Block
                                                                                       Embedding

                                    Self-Attention (Time)                                                    Cross-Attention
                                                                                             Concatenate
                                                                                                             Self-Attention
                                        Cross-Attention
                                                                                                                (Agent)
                                                                                       Time MLP              Self-Attention
                                   Self-Attention (Agent)
                                                                                                                 (Time)

                                    Self-Attention (Time)


                                History                            Context           Environment                Diffusion
                              Embedding                           Embedding        Static Embedding            Embedding

                            (a) environment encoder                                  (b) diffusion decoder

Figure 2: The structure of SDT. SDT is a typical encoder-decoder framework. The environment
encoder learns context representation as guidance prompts, and the diffusion decoder predicts noise
from learned guidance and diffusion information. The environment encoder consists of a list of
self-attention and cross-attention blocks. The diffusion decoder takes diffusion noise as input tokens
and processes embedding with self-attention blocks as well. We integrate learned environment
embedding in the decoder by cross-attention mechanism and additionally apply a fusion block to
bring diffusion timestep and target agents information to the model.


limits usage to obtain desirable outputs with certain features. A possible solution is the classifier-
based guidance approach (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), which trains an explicit classifier to predict
p(y|F ) given guidance information y and use its gradients ∇Ft log pϕ (y|Ft , t) to guide the diffusion
sampling towards the conditional distribution p(F0 |y). Besides, there is a simpler method called
classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022; Ajay et al., 2022) which directly inserts y as an
additional input into the model and changes the diffusion procedure with the perturbed noise without
performance loss as follows:
                                              ϵ′ = ϵθ (Ft , t, ∅) + ω(ϵθ (Ft , t, y) − ϵθ (Ft , t, ∅)) ,                       (4)
where ω is a scalar hyperparameter controlling the feature correlation with guidance y. In recent
decision-making trajectory generation using offline reinforcement learning, the guidance y is com-
monly set to the expected cumulative reward from the current environment step. We here take history
trajectories H and environment context C as guidance.
With classifier-free guidance, the training loss objective can be written as
                                                L = EF0 ,t [∥ϵ − ϵθ (Ft , t, (1 − β)y + β∅)∥2 ] ,                              (5)
where β is sampled from the Bernoulli distribution with probability parameter p. In practice, we set
p = 0 if the environment features are not highly complex and found it doesn’t hurt performance.

4.3       M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

We propose a unified transformer architecture with an environment encoder and a trajectory decoder.
The model predicts multi-agent trajectories in a centralized manner. The encoder extracts context
embedding of the environment with a series of attention blocks, which works as high quality prompts
indicating sequential and agent relationships of predicted future trajectories. The decoder makes a
natural combination of environment embedding and diffusion noise with a specific fusion block to
predict noise terms used for next-step denoising. We give detailed descriptions of the encoder and
decoder in the following sections.


                                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3.1   E NVIRONMENT E NCODER
The environment encoder, illustrated in Fig.2(a), aims to learn representations of the multi-agent
system. To get a complete understanding of both the time dimension and agent dimension, we take
advantage of a series of self-attention blocks, where each block contains two normalization layers,
one multi-layer perception layer, and one multi-head attention layer, to fully study the correlations
between different frames and agents. The environment context is integrated by cross-attention blocks,
and is used to represent static agent-independent information in the system, like road graphs in
autonomous driving or scoreboards, game clocks in NBA sports matches. With these attention blocks,
we can obtain environment representation in the latent space with high quality.

4.3.2   T RAJECTORY D ECODER
                                                                        Fused Diffusion
The learned representations of the environment can be                     Embedding

seen as prompts to guide the decoder to output high-quality
                                                                                   X'
denoising noise of trajectories in each diffusion step. As
seen from Fig.2(b), here we make diffusion noise as input                                   X
                                                                         Linear Affine
tokens and combine the environment embedding by cross-                  Transformation
attention mechanism. We design the fusion block to further                                       Diffusion
inject diffusion timestep t and required information of                                         Embedding
                                                                    B                   W
agents.
                                                                     MLP            MLP
Fusion Block. Inspired by MotionDiffuse (Zhang et al.,
2022), which uses a stylization block to bring timestep t
to the generation process, we here design a fusion block to                  Sum
strengthen the model with target agents embedding and in-
ject diffusion timestep information in Fig.3. We first sum
                                                                                                Target Agents
up diffusion timestep embedding after sinusoidal encoding        Time
                                                                                                 Embedding
                                                               Embedding
etime and target embedding etarget . The target embedding
is extracted from environment embedding with indexes
that are pre-selected from the dataset. Here we only se-      Figure 3: The fusion block. Fusion
lect a subset of indexes since only partial agents in the     block fuses diffusion timestep and tar-
whole system are needed in making accurate predictions        get agents information by linear affine
(e.g., in the traffic scenario we only pay attention to the   transformation operation with diffusion
target vehicle and its neighbors). Then we process the fea-   embedding from the decoder.
tures through linear affine transformation with diffusion
embedding X from the decoder and get output X′ :
                            B = ϕB (e), W = ϕW (e), X′ = X · W + B,                                          (6)
where ϕB , ϕW is multi-perception layers and (·) denotes Hadamard product. By processing embed-
ding through fusion block, the model is strengthened to identify diffusion timestep t and required
prediction of agents.
It is noticed that SDT is an index-free framework such that the order of agents can be arbitrary as long
as the target indexes are correctly collected. Differing from traditional transformer networks which
directly produce final prediction, the trajectory decoder outputs next-step diffusion noise in sampling
progress each time. Given that we generate prediction in a centralized manner, the trajectory noise of
agents can make communications through this step-by-step scheme to improve trajectory consistency.
Although T iterations inference will cause the time-consuming problem, it can be relieved by fast
sampling methods like DDIM (Song et al., 2020a) or DPM-Solver (Lu et al., 2022).

5    E XPERIMENTS
We conduct experiments on two typical domains, autonomous driving and basketball games, to verify
the effectiveness of our framework. We choose the argoverse2 (Wilson et al., 2023) as a representative
dataset of autonomous driving and the widely used NBA dataset for basketball games. Each of them
has different environment context and agent characteristics. We try to answer three questions: 1) Does
SDT have better prediction performance compared to other general multi-agent trajectory prediction
methods? 2) Does SDT have better multi-modality modeling capability and diversity? 3) How much
does the diffusion process contribute to the prediction performance?


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.1   E NVIRONMENT S ETTINGS

Argoverse2 motion forecasting dataset. The argoverse2 dataset is a curated collection of 250,000
driving scenarios for training and validation. We follow the official configuration where each scenario
is 11 seconds long and tracked agents are sampled at 10Hz. We take 5 seconds as history trajectory
duration and 6 seconds for future prediction. Since each scenario has a target vehicle, we take its
final history position and heading as references to build a scenario-centric coordinate. We choose
the target vehicle and 7 nearest surrounding vehicles to be the prediction goals. To make reasonable
guidance, we learned a static road graph as environment context similar to SceneTransformer.
NBA sports dataset. The dataset contains 2d trajectories of various basketball players recorded from
631 games in the NBA 2015-2016 season. In a basketball game, the players are divided into two
teams to cooperate and compete, which means they make highly interactive behaviors and develop
complex and dynamic relations. Following EvolveGraph’s setting, we first downsampled the dataset
to 2.5Hz and predicted the future 10 time steps (4.0s) based on the historical 5 time steps (2.0s). The
guidance contains the history trajectory of the basketball and time clocks.

5.2   BASELINES AND M ETRICS

For the argoverse2 dataset, since we want to validate the advantage of SDT, we compare common
LSTM baselines and our self-implemented version of SceneTransformer. To give a complete eval-
uation, we also make a single-agent comparison with competition leaderboard statistics. For the
NBA dataset, we compared several common baselines, including graph-based and transformer-based
methods.
We choose common distance-based metrics including average displacement error (ADE), final
displacement error (FDE) and MR (miss rate). The ADE calculates the average L2 distance between
predicted trajectories and ground truth and FDE calculates the final ones. Due to multi-modality in
the multi-agent system, a single prediction cannot cover all possibilities. We further use minADEk
and minFDEk to represent minimum ADE and FDE among k predicted trajectories. In argoverse2
k = 6 while in the NBA dataset k = 20. MR measures the coverage of trajectories, calculating
the percentage of trajectories where the prediction is within 2 meters of ground truth according to
endpoint error. To further demonstrate the advantage of SDT in multi-modality modeling, we take
additional two metrics from text-to-motion generation research: Diversity measures the variability in
the resulting motion distribution, and MultiModality is the average variance given a single environment
context.

5.3   R ESULTS

We report numerical results on both argoverse2 and NBA tasks. The prediction results calculate the
average performance across three random seeds.

Table 1: Single-agent (marginal) trajectory prediction result on argoverse2 dataset. We choose typical
methods with good performance to make comparisons. The methods from the leaderboard may take
specific techniques to improve statistics while SDT works as a general method without additional
modification. The result of SDT remains competitive.

            Methods                                     minADE6       minFDE6        MR
            QCNet (Zhou et al., 2023)                       0.62          1.19       0.14
            TENET (Feng et al., 2023)                       0.70          1.38       0.19
            LaneGCN (Liang et al., 2020)                    0.91          1.96       0.30
            SceneTransformer (Ngiam et al., 2021)           1.05          2.15       0.37
            SDT (Ours)                                      0.94          1.93       0.29

Results on Argoverse2 Dataset. We evaluated our method on the validation set since additional
metrics are introduced. Table 1 shows single-agent prediction results compared to methods from
the leaderboard of argoverse2 motion prediction challenge. We choose typical methods with good
performance to make a fair comparison. From the board SDT achieves medium-level performance
which is better than general prediction methods like SceneTransformer, but worse than first-ranking


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Multi-agent trajectory prediction result on argoverse2 dataset. We here take SceneTrans-
former as the multi-agent baseline. The results demonstrate the accuracy and diversity of SDT on
multi-agent system modeling.

         Methods                   minADE6              minFDE6    MR       Diversity   MultiModality
         SceneTransformer                 2.21            4.23     0.35      235.24          0.94
         SDT (Ours)                       1.84            3.75     0.33      286.27          1.35
         Real                              -               -        -        295.15            -

Table 3: Multi-agent trajectory prediction result on NBA sports dataset. We compare distance-based
minADE and minFDE of 2.0s and 4.0s future among 20 prediction trajectories. Since Diversity
and MultiModality are not evaluated by previous methods, we here only discuss these two metrics
between our implemented methods and SDT. The best and the second-best results of each metric are
marked as bold and underline, respectively.

                                                  2.0s                    4.0s
 Methods                                                                                 Diversity   MultiModality
                                           minADE20 minFDE20       minADE20 minFDE20
 STGAT (Huang et al., 2019)                      0.91      1.39      2.47        3.86       -              -
 Social-STGCNN (Mohamed et al., 2020)            0.90      1.43      2.35        3.71       -              -
 Social-Attention (Vemula et al., 2018)          1.58      2.51      3.76        6.64       -              -
 Social-LSTM (Alahi et al., 2016)                1.64      2.74      4.00        7.12       -              -
 Social-GAN (Gupta et al., 2018)                 1.52      2.45      3.60        3.60       -              -
 Trajtectron++ (Salzmann et al., 2020)           0.99      1.58      2.62        4.70       -              -
 NRI(dynamic) (Kipf et al., 2018)                1.02      1.71      2.48        4.30       -              -
 EvolveGraph (Li et al., 2020b)                  0.74      1.10      1.83        3.16       -              -
 MADiff (Zhu et al., 2023)                       1.06      1.67      1.81        3.01     38.84          2.32
 SceneTransformer                                0.77      1.15      1.92        3.35     29.92          0.13
 SDT (Ours)                                      0.69      1.05      1.79        2.88     35.98          0.17
 Real                                             -            -        -          -      37.74            -



methods. It is reasonable as methods in competition universally use specific techniques to deal with
traffic prediction problems, such as map feature engineering with prior knowledge and anchor-based
guidance, while SDT merely make simple modifications on context information.
We mainly focus on multi-agent prediction performance, illustrated in Table 2. We have observed
that SDT significantly outperforms SceneTransformer in accuracy metrics (minADE, minFDE and
MR), which demonstrates the distributional modeling ability of the diffusion model. Furthermore,
SDT achieves better multi-modality referred to Diversity and MultiModality performance. The
diversity indicator is close to the real dataset with 3.0% error and better than SceneTransformer and
multi-modality holds the upper hand as well.
Results on NBA Sports Dataset. Table 3 shows the prediction results on the NBA dataset. We can
observe that SDT outperforms all other baselines on both minADE and minFDE. The baselines consist
of different strategies to model dynamic relations and interactions between agents, such as graph-based
representation, social pooling layers or attention mechanisms. Our proposed SDT enjoys both complex
multi-modal distribution modeling ability from diffusion model and interaction understanding from
sequential modeling using transformer, such that SDT achieves better performance which reduces the
4.0s minFDE by 4.3% with respect to the best baseline (MADiff). Aside from distance-based metrics,
SDT have higher diversity and multi-modality than SceneTransformer. The diversity compared to
that from the real dataset has only 7.3% error as well, which demonstrates that SDT is more suitable
for multi-modal distribution modeling.

5.4     Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS

We plot qualified cases in Fig.4 to demonstrate that SDT produces high-fidelity, diverse, and consistent
trajectories. From prior knowledge, we can easily know that the ball follows one of the players most
time. Although we only provide the history of the ball and players, the predicted trajectories of
players show a consistent correlation with future ground truth of the ball, demonstrating that SDT
predicts plausible behaviors. We can also see reasonable cooperation and competition in figures. For
example, in Fig.4(a), the predicted trajectory of players without the ball takes on the characteristics


                                                               7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                            4
                                                                                                    7
      4 80                                                                                      9           26
                  3               5                                             1
             6
      1 7
                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                            5
                      2                                                                 3
                          9                                                                                      0
                          (a) perimeter shot                                (b) pass

                              6
                  0                                                         4
                                          7                   6 0
                              3                               9
                 2 8                                           8                                        1
                                  1            9
                                                                        7
                  4                                                                 3
                                                                    5
                                      5
                                                                             2
                              (c) transition                            (d) offense

Figure 4: Qualitative analysis on NBA dataset. We visualize four examples from typical game periods.
The numbered balls and lines with the same color indicate the team trajectories, and green lines are
the trajectories of the basketball. We can see the trajectories show plausible behaviors with in-game
strategies, achieving both accuracy and diversity.


of one-to-one defense, marking strong competition. In Fig.4(b) the ball passes through three players
of the purple team cooperatively and in Fig.4(c) and Fig.4(d), The movement of players shows
consistency at the tactical level and differences between individual positions. In general, SDT can
understand and predict diverse behaviors with high accuracy.

5.5     A BLATION S TUDY

The key insight of SDT is that the introduction of the diffusion model improves multi-modal dis-
tribution modeling ability and makes communication between agents more fully. We here conduct
ablation experiments on NBA dataset to validate this idea. Three variants of SDT are designed:
SDT-k (k = 30, 10, 4) denotes that we use smaller k diffusion timesteps instead of the original 50
steps to check the contribution of diffusion model in the framework; SDT-NT removes self-attention
block of time dimension while SDT-NA removes self-attention block of agent dimension in the
decoder to check how much can the iterative communication influence the performance.
As is observed in Fig.5, the performance of SDT decreases as diffusion timesteps become smaller, and
a large decline amplitude appears in k : 50 → 30. This may indicate that a complete diffusion process
plays a significant role in expressiveness and distribution modeling, and an incomplete process may
even be worse than ‘no’ process since SDT-4 outperforms SDT-10 and SDT-30. Furthermore, by
comparing SDT with SDT-NT and SDT-NA, we can obviously conclude that iterative communication
in the diffusion process helps the network to obtain a better understanding of the interaction between
agents and time-sequential relationship among single trajectories.

6     G ENERATION A PPLICATION

In the field of autonomous driving, the driving data collected from the real world follows a long-tail
distribution that most of the data for ordinary scenarios doesn’t contain much value in training,
and only a small amount of data shows interactive dynamics. This kind of data imbalance would
hurt the performance of the downstream planning model, causing success rate loss in both general
scenarios and complex corner cases. Since prediction and generation both require a comprehensive


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               Timestep Ablation                                                                     Communication Ablation
                            1.20
                                    SDT-50                                                                                                                                 SDT
                                    SDT-30                                                                            1.2                                                  SDT-NA
                            1.15    SDT-10                                                                                                                                 SDT-NT
                                    SDT-4
                            1.10                                                                                      1.0
    Numercial Performance


                                                                                              Numercial Performance
                            1.05
                                                                                                                      0.8

                            1.00
                                                                                                                      0.6
                            0.95
                                                                                                                      0.4
                            0.90

                                                                                                                      0.2
                            0.85

                            0.80                                                                                      0.0
                                   minADE    minFDE    Diversity(Error)   MultiModality                                     minADE   minFDE     Diversity(Error)   MultiModality

Figure 5: Ablation study. Here we use the diversity error between the real dataset and the model as the
metric. The left figure shows the result of decreasing diffusion step (i.e. weakening the contribution
of the diffusion model), where we can see a complete diffusion process is beneficial for both accuracy
and diversity. The right figure demonstrates that iterative communication on both agent and time
dimensions is significant to achieve high performance.


understanding of the multi-agent system and can be trained in a supervised learning manner, we can
easily utilize SDT to perform trajectory generation without much modification.
We have conducted experiments on traffic generation with an internal dataset in order to solve the
problem of data imbalance. To reproduce traffic segments with certain interactive traffic events (lane
change, cut-in, overtake, etc.), we learned the representation of these events as additional guidance
prompts and added a cross-attention block to the diffusion decoder to bring it in. With the map and
history trajectory unchanged, we can generate different interactive scenarios by changing the event
guidance, which still conforms to human driving distribution. We then combined the generated data
with the original data to make a balanced dataset. The experimental results show that the planning
model trained by the balanced dataset has a decent improvement in the pass rate of complex corner
cases without losing performance in the general scenarios.

7        C ONCLUSION
We have presented SDT, a general multi-agent trajectory prediction framework that makes use of
history trajectories and environment context information. SDT is a classifier-free diffusion model
featuring encoder-decoder transformer architecture to predict next-step noise in a centralized manner.
This combination improves both diversity and accuracy with better multi-modal modeling. The
experiments demonstrate that SDT has superiority in multi-agent trajectory prediction and can be
easily transferred to similar tasks such as conditional trajectory generation.
It is worth noticing that SDT has a limitation that it is difficult to perform modality discrimination,
which is caused by the random sampling nature of diffusion models. The output results of the same
modality increase the sampling times of the prediction process. We would be interested in a better
theory of modality control in the research of diffusion models and take it as future work.

R EFERENCES
Anurag Ajay, Yilun Du, Abhi Gupta, Joshua Tenenbaum, Tommi Jaakkola, and Pulkit Agrawal. Is con-
  ditional generative modeling all you need for decision-making? arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15657,
  2022.
Alexandre Alahi, Kratarth Goel, Vignesh Ramanathan, Alexandre Robicquet, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio
  Savarese. Social lstm: Human trajectory prediction in crowded spaces. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 961–971, 2016.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.


                                                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chen Feng, Hangning Zhou, Huadong Lin, Zhigang Zhang, Ziyao Xu, Chi Zhang, Boyu Zhou, and
  Shaojie Shen. Macformer: Map-agent coupled transformer for real-time and robust trajectory
  prediction. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 8(10):6795–6802, 2023. doi: 10.1109/LRA.
  2023.3311351.
Tianpei Gu, Guangyi Chen, Junlong Li, Chunze Lin, Yongming Rao, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Stochas-
  tic trajectory prediction via motion indeterminacy diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 17113–17122, 2022.
Agrim Gupta, Justin Johnson, Li Fei-Fei, Silvio Savarese, and Alexandre Alahi. Social gan: Socially
  acceptable trajectories with generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2255–2264, 2018.
Nicholas Guttenberg, Nathaniel Virgo, Olaf Witkowski, Hidetoshi Aoki, and Ryota Kanai.
  Permutation-equivariant neural networks applied to dynamics prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1612.04530, 2016.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598,
  2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Yingfan Huang, Huikun Bi, Zhaoxin Li, Tianlu Mao, and Zhaoqi Wang. Stgat: Modeling spatial-
  temporal interactions for human trajectory prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF interna-
  tional conference on computer vision, pp. 6272–6281, 2019.
Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for
 flexible behavior synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09991, 2022.
Thomas Kipf, Ethan Fetaya, Kuan-Chieh Wang, Max Welling, and Richard Zemel. Neural relational
  inference for interacting systems. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2688–2697.
  PMLR, 2018.
Vineet Kosaraju, Amir Sadeghian, Roberto Martín-Martín, Ian Reid, Hamid Rezatofighi, and Silvio
  Savarese. Social-bigat: Multimodal trajectory forecasting using bicycle-gan and graph attention
  networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Jiachen Li, Wei Zhan, Yeping Hu, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Generic tracking and probabilistic
   prediction framework and its application in autonomous driving. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
   Transportation Systems, 21(9):3634–3649, 2019.
Jiachen Li, Hengbo Ma, Zhihao Zhang, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Social-wagdat: Interaction-
   aware trajectory prediction via wasserstein graph double-attention network. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2002.06241, 2020a.
Jiachen Li, Fan Yang, Masayoshi Tomizuka, and Chiho Choi. Evolvegraph: Multi-agent trajectory
   prediction with dynamic relational reasoning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
   33:19783–19794, 2020b.
Ming Liang, Bin Yang, Rui Hu, Yun Chen, Renjie Liao, Song Feng, and Raquel Urtasun. Learning
 lane graph representations for motion forecasting. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
 Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 16, pp. 541–556. Springer,
 2020.
Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A fast
  ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:5775–5787, 2022.
Weibo Mao, Chenxin Xu, Qi Zhu, Siheng Chen, and Yanfeng Wang. Leapfrog diffusion model for
 stochastic trajectory prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5517–5526, 2023.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Abduallah Mohamed, Kun Qian, Mohamed Elhoseiny, and Christian Claudel. Social-stgcnn: A
  social spatio-temporal graph convolutional neural network for human trajectory prediction. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 14424–
 14432, 2020.

Jiquan Ngiam, Benjamin Caine, Vijay Vasudevan, Zhengdong Zhang, Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Jeffrey
   Ling, Rebecca Roelofs, Alex Bewley, Chenxi Liu, Ashish Venugopal, et al. Scene transformer: A
   unified architecture for predicting multiple agent trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08417,
   2021.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Tim Salzmann, Boris Ivanovic, Punarjay Chakravarty, and Marco Pavone. Trajectron++: Multi-
  agent generative trajectory forecasting with heterogeneous data for control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2001.03093, 2, 2020.

Adam Santoro, David Raposo, David G Barrett, Mateusz Malinowski, Razvan Pascanu, Peter
  Battaglia, and Timothy Lillicrap. A simple neural network module for relational reasoning.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.

Liting Sun, Wei Zhan, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Probabilistic prediction of interactive driving
  behavior via hierarchical inverse reinforcement learning. In 2018 21st International Conference on
  Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 2111–2117. IEEE, 2018.

Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yonatan Shafir, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Amit H Bermano.
  Human motion diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14916, 2022.

Jonathan Tseng, Rodrigo Castellon, and Karen Liu. Edge: Editable dance generation from music.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  448–458, 2023.

Balakrishnan Varadarajan, Ahmed Hefny, Avikalp Srivastava, Khaled S Refaat, Nigamaa Nayakanti,
  Andre Cornman, Kan Chen, Bertrand Douillard, Chi Pang Lam, Dragomir Anguelov, et al. Multi-
  path++: Efficient information fusion and trajectory aggregation for behavior prediction. In 2022
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 7814–7821. IEEE, 2022.

Anirudh Vemula, Katharina Muelling, and Jean Oh. Social attention: Modeling attention in human
  crowds. In 2018 IEEE international Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4601–
 4607. IEEE, 2018.

Zhendong Wang, Jonathan J Hunt, and Mingyuan Zhou. Diffusion policies as an expressive policy
  class for offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06193, 2022.

Benjamin Wilson, William Qi, Tanmay Agarwal, John Lambert, Jagjeet Singh, Siddhesh Khandelwal,
  Bowen Pan, Ratnesh Kumar, Andrew Hartnett, Jhony Kaesemodel Pontes, et al. Argoverse 2: Next
  generation datasets for self-driving perception and forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00493,
  2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wei Zhan, Liting Sun, Yeping Hu, Jiachen Li, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Towards a fatality-aware
 benchmark of probabilistic reaction prediction in highly interactive driving scenarios. In 2018
 21st International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 3274–3280. IEEE,
 2018.
Mingyuan Zhang, Zhongang Cai, Liang Pan, Fangzhou Hong, Xinying Guo, Lei Yang, and Ziwei
 Liu. Motiondiffuse: Text-driven human motion generation with diffusion model. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2208.15001, 2022.
Zikang Zhou, Luyao Ye, Jianping Wang, Kui Wu, and Kejie Lu. Hivt: Hierarchical vector transformer
  for multi-agent motion prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8823–8833, 2022.
Zikang Zhou, Jianping Wang, Yung-Hui Li, and Yu-Kai Huang. Query-centric trajectory prediction.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2023.
Zhengbang Zhu, Minghuan Liu, Liyuan Mao, Bingyi Kang, Minkai Xu, Yong Yu, Stefano Ermon,
  and Weinan Zhang. Madiff: Offline multi-agent learning with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.17330, 2023.


                                               12
