Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T RAVELING W ORDS : A G EOMETRIC I NTERPRETATION
OF T RANSFORMERS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Transformers have significantly advanced the field of natural language process-
         ing, but comprehending their internal mechanisms remains a challenge. In this
         paper, we introduce a novel geometric perspective that elucidates the inner mech-
         anisms of transformer operations. Our primary contribution is illustrating how
         layer normalization confines the latent features of the transformer to a hyper-
         sphere, subsequently enabling attention to mold the semantic representation of
         words on this surface. This geometric viewpoint seamlessly connects established
         properties such as iterative refinement and contextual embeddings. We validate
         our insights by probing a pre-trained 124M parameter GPT-2 model. Our find-
         ings reveal clear query-key attention patterns in early layers and build upon prior
         observations regarding the subject-specific nature of attention heads at deeper lay-
         ers. Harnessing these geometric insights, we present an intuitive understanding of
         transformers, depicting iterative refinement as a process that models the trajectory
         of word particles along the surface of a hyper-sphere.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017) has sparked a significant shift in Artifi-
cial Intelligence (AI). It is the central compo-
nent behind some of the most advanced conver-
sational AI systems (Brown et al., 2020; Thop-
pilan et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022), and has
been established as state-of-the-art for Natu-
ral Language Processing (NLP), Computer Vi-
sion (CV) and Robotics applications, and many
other tasks (OpenAI, 2023; Google, 2023; Chen
et al., 2023; Zong et al., 2022; Driess et al.,
2023).
Recent work on the interpretability of the trans-
former architecture has focused on analyz-
ing weights in relation to the word embed-
ding space used in its input and output lay-
ers Dar et al. (2022); Elhage et al. (2021); Figure 1: Overview of the proposed geometric
Geva et al. (2022); Brody et al. (2023); Wind- interpretation of Transformers. The input token
sor (2022); Millidge & Black (2022). Elhage “Traveling ” is embedded as a word particle onto a
et al. (2021) introduces “Transformer Circuits”, hyper-sphere, and residual updates determine the
a theoretical framework that decomposes the path that the particle will follow along the surface,
transformer computation into two main compo- culminating on the region closest to the next to-
nents: a residual stream that carries information ken: “Words”.
from input to output layers and attention/feed-
forward updates that modify the information
flowing in the residual stream. A key development from their work is grouping attention matrices
into the virtual interaction matrices WQK and WOV , exploring their role in updating the informa-
tion carried throughout the transformer’s residual stream. Geva et al. (2022) demonstrate that the
updates from the feed-forward module can be decomposed into a linear combination of sub-updates


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


given by the weight matrix of the feed-forward module’s second layer. This matrix directly interacts
with the residual stream and allows the authors to measure the impact of each sub-update on the
model’s final prediction using the matrix WE as a probe. Dar et al. (2022) incorporate these ideas to
show that it is not only possible to interpret the outcomes of each transformer operation in relation
to its latent space but also the weights themselves, enabling them to do zero-shot model stitching by
“translating” between latent spaces of different language models. Finally, Millidge & Black (2022)
note that analysis on the singular vectors of the WOV matrix provides better practical results when
compared to analysis of its row and column weights.
A complimentary perspective to the line of work on Transformer Circuits comes from the geometric
interpretation of layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) by Brody et al. (2023). The authors prove that
                                                                                             →
                                                                                             −
layer normalization is equivalent to√projecting features onto the hyperplane defined by the 1 vector
and then scaling the projection by d. They show that these properties are crucial for the attention
mechanism to either attend to all keys equally or to avoid the problem of having “unselectable”
keys (relevant keys within the convex hull of a set of non-relevant keys). The study by Windsor
(2022) offers additional evidence for the representational power of layer normalization, visualizing
the highly non-linear behavior resulting from this operation and demonstrating that, when employed
as an activation function in a neural network, layer normalization can solve complex classification
tasks.
In this work, we build upon these two perspectives to propose a novel geometric interpretation of
transformers. In subsection 2.1, we introduce an alternative equation for layer normalization based
on its geometric properties. In subsection 2.2 and subsection 2.3, we discuss the implications of
this equation on the attention module, its impact on the transformer’s output probabilities and how it
relates to the concept of iterative refinement. Finally, we provide results on our probing experiments
in section 3, demonstrating the benefits of our approach on interpretability. An illustrated summary
of the proposed geometric interpretation is given in Figure 1.

2     T RANSFORMERS AS A C OMPOSITION OF G EOMETRIC P RIMITIVES
In this section, we analyze each of the transformer’s components from a geometric perspective,
leveraging the interpretation of one component to analyze the next. We begin with the layer nor-
malization function, for which we demonstrate that it constrains d-dimensional input features to lie
within the surface of a (d − 1) dimensional hyper-sphere. Then we consider the role of the WQK
matrix in terms of geometric transformations on said hyper-sphere, and the WV O matrix as a key-
value mapping from the hyper-sphere back to Rd , highlighting its similarities with the key-value
interpretation of the feed-forward module proposed by Geva et al. (2021). Finally, we discuss the
role of the embedding matrix WE on the transformer’s output probabilities.

2.1   L AYER N ORMALIZATION

In its original formulation (Ba et al., 2016), layer normalization is introduced using the mean µ and
standard deviation σ computed along the dimensions of an input vector x ∈ Rd :
                                                          x−µ
                                        LayerNorm(x) =                                             (1)
                                                             σ
However, recent work by Brody et al. (2023) presents an alternate perspective on layer normaliza-
tion, interpreting it as the composition of two distinct geometric transformations. The difference
                                        →
                                        −
x − µ is shown to be orthogonal to the 1 vector, suggesting that the features of the input vector are
                                                            →
                                                            −
projected onto a hyperplane H defined by the normal vector 1 , and the denominator σ is formulated
in terms of the norm of the projected vector as follows:
                                              1
                                         σ = √ ||x − µ||                                           (2)
                                               d

Building on this insight, we demonstrate (Appendix A) that the mean µ is the projection of x onto
               →
               −                               →
                                               −
the vector √1d 1 , as opposed to directly onto 1 . This finding simplifies the computation of the
projection of x onto the hyperplane H:


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           1 →−
                                  projH (x) = x − proj(x, √ 1 )
                                                            d                                      (3)
                                            =x−µ

Incorporating Equation 2 and 3 into Equation 1, we obtain a geometric formula for layer normaliza-
tion:
                                                 √     projH (x)
                              LayerNorm(x) = d                                                 (4)
                                                     ||projH (x)||2

Intuitively, layer normalization projects a vector x ∈ Rd to the hyperplane H perpendicular to
    →
    −
√1 1 ∈ Rd , and normalizes the projection such that it lies on the surface of a d − 1 dimensional
  d                      √
hyper-sphere of radius d (for a visual understanding of this transformation with d = 3, refer to
Figure 2). Furthermore, layer normalization typically incorporates a scaling factor γ and a bias term
β. The scaling factor γ acts along each coordinate axis, transforming the hyper-sphere into a hyper-
ellipsoid, while the bias term β translates the ellipsoid’s center away from the origin (Figure 3).


Figure 2: Layer normalization visualized on 3D data. Left: Original feature space (from randomly
sampled data), with each data point color-coded according to its position in space. Right: Feature
                                                                                                     →
                                                                                                     −
space after layer normalization, note that all data points lie within the plane perpendicular to the 1
vector.

In modern implementations of the transformer, layer normalization is applied before both the atten-
tion and feed-forward module updates within each block, and once more before the final prediction
step Xiong et al. (2020). We note that such an arrangement ensures that data within each trans-
former layer is constrained to the surface of a potentially distinct hyper-sphere. Yet, due to the
residual nature of transformers, all intermediate layer representations inhabit the same vector space.
As a result, features from different layers project onto a shared hyper-sphere, which we denote as
HS . Interestingly, layer normalization’s placement prior to the classification softmax has another
consequence. It drives the model to optimize dot-product similarity between certain points within
HS and word vectors in the embedding matrix WE ∈ R|V |×d , where |V | is the vocabulary size.
This optimization indirectly defines the meaning of points in HS as a function of their similarity
with words represented in WE .

2.2   M ULTI -H EAD S ELF -ATTENTION

To understand how the geometric intuition behind HS allows for the interpretability of latent repre-
sentations within a transformer, we analyze the parameter matrices in the multi-head self-attention
module (Vaswani et al., 2017). For a given input sequence X ∈ Rs×d of length s, the multi-head
self-attention mechanism is defined as follows:


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          h
                                                                          !
                                                         i
                                          X            XWQK  XT
                       MultiHead(X) =          softmax   √                  XWVi O                   (5)
                                           i
                                                           d

                                                          i
Where h is the number of self-attention heads while WQK        ∈ Rd×d and WVi O ∈ Rd×d are low-
rank virtual matrices obtained by grouping the query, key, value and output projection matrices at
each head (Elhage et al., 2021; Dar et al., 2022). A full derivation of Equation 5 from the original
formulation by Vaswani et al. (2017) is provided in Appendix B.

2.2.1     T HE Q UERY-K EY M ATRIX
                                                   i
For any given head i, the query-key matrix WQK         is commonly interpreted as a bi-linear form
       d     d
gi : R × R → R that represents the relevance between keys and queries. However, it is also
                          i
possible to consider WQK      as a linear transformation that maps inputs to a query representation
   i         i
XQ = XWQK , similar to that considered in Brody et al. (2023)1 . With the head’s attention score
matrix Ai ∈ [0, 1]s×s , for a given sequence length s, obtained as:
                                                       Xi XT
                                                         Q
                                      Ai = softmax       √                                      (6)
                                                           d

This process is illustrated for normalized inputs in the right-most section of Figure 3. Essentially, the
role of the WQK matrix and the layer normalization parameters is to find an affine transformation
over HS such that, when superimposed on itself, brings related terms closer together and keeps
unrelated terms apart.
                                                         i
It is important to mention that for k < d, the matrix WQK    cannot be inverted, as it won’t have a full
rank. This implies, by the rank-nullity theorem, that for each head, there must be a set of d − k query
vectors Qinull ⊂ Rd that map to the zero vector and, as a consequence, attend to all keys equally.
Conversely, there must also exist a set of d − k keys Kinull ⊂ Rd that are attended to by all queries
equally, with a pre-softmax attention score of zero.


Figure 3: Visualization of the self-attention process for a single head. Left: Layer normalization
projects the input features on the surface of the hyper-sphere HS . Center Left: A scaling parameter
γ is commonly applied after normalization; it transforms the hyper-sphere into a hyper-ellipsoid.
Center Right: A bias term β is also applied after normalization; it displaces the hyper-ellipsoid
away from the origin. Right: The input features are mapped to a query representation (in red) by
the matrix WQK and superimposed over their previous representation to obtain the self-attention
scores.


2.2.2     T HE VALUE -O UTPUT M ATRIX AND THE R ESIDUAL S TREAM
To understand the role of the WV O matrix within the transformer, we now consider the update step
after multi-head attention at a given layer l:
                             Xl+1 = Xl + MultiHead(LayerNorm(X))                                     (7)
   1                                      i     i    T
       An alternative key representation XK = XWQK       can also be considered


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that by plugging in Equation 5 and Equation 6, the layer update can be re-written as:
                                                            h
                                                            X
                                       Xl+1 = Xl +              Ai XVi                                  (8)
                                                            i

where
                                     XVi = LayerNorm(Xl )WVi O                                          (9)

It can be seen that the multi-head attention mechanism consists of the sum of h individual updates,
each one given by one of the attention heads. Within each head, all words in the sequence propose
an update XVi , and these are aggregated according to their attention scores Ai . In Equation 9, the
           i
matrix WOV     transforms the normalized inputs in HS into a set of updates in the same latent space as
the residual stream. Furthermore, we propose that the WVi O matrix is better understood as a second
key-value store (Sukhbaatar et al., 2015; Geva et al., 2021) within the attention layer. To see why,
consider its Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) (Millidge & Black, 2022): WVi O = U ΣV T . By
substituting in Equation 9, we obtain:
                                                                T
                                       XVi = (QV O KOV
                                                    i    i
                                                       )VOV                                            (10)
where
                                        QV O = LayerNorm(X)
                                         i
                                        KOV = (U Σ)T                                                   (11)
                                         i          T
                                        VOV   =V

The left singular vectors, associated with the columns of U Σ ∈ Rd×d , act as a library of “keys”
   i
KOV    against which the normalized features Xl ∈ HS are compared. While the corresponding
right singular vectors, associated with rows in V T ∈ Rd×d , act as the output values VOV      i
                                                                                                   that
define the direction in which to update the information in the residual stream for a given key. This
interpretation is motivated by the results of Millidge & Black (2022), where it is shown that the right
singular vectors V T of the WV O matrix tend to have interpretable meanings when decoded using
WE , with some of the transformer heads consistently representing a single topic in most of their
singular vectors. We would also like to mention that, similar to the WQK matrix, the WOV matrix
has at least d − k singular values equal to zero. This means that multiple queries QV O will map to
the zero vector and thus won’t update the information in the residual stream, allowing the model to
skip the update process if necessary.
To conclude, we highlight that the proposed interpretation of attention behaves very similarly to
that of the feed-forward module given by Geva et al. (2021), as both calculate relevance scores
and aggregate sub-updates for the residual stream. However, the way the scores and updates are
calculated is very different. The attention module relies primarily on dynamic context for its scores
and values, while the feed-forward module relies on static representations.

2.3   T HE W ORD E MBEDDING M ATRIX AND O UTPUT P ROBABILITIES

Once all the attention and feed-forward updates have been applied, the output probabilities of the
network can be obtained as follows (Xiong et al., 2020):
                              PY = softmax LayerNorm(XL )WET

                                                                                              (12)

Equation 12 can be interpreted as measuring the similarity between the final layer representation
XL when projected to HS , and √       each of the embedding vectors in WE . Given that all vectors in the
projection have the same norm d, the only relevant factor in deciding the output probability dis-
tribution PY [t,:] ∈ [0, 1]|V | , at a given timestep t, is the location of its corresponding vector XL[t,:]
within HS . This behavior is very similar to that described by the von Mises-Fisher distribution
(Fisher, 1953), as both represent distributions parameterized by a reference vector within a hyper-
sphere. Nonetheless, in the case of transformers, the support of the distribution is defined over a
discrete set of points in Rd instead of the entire surface of HS , as it is for the von Mises-Fisher.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Distance between the normalized embeddings LayerNorm(WE ) and different transforma-
tions of the embedding matrix WE .

                     Setting                     Mean ℓ2 Distance     Mean Cosine Distance
                     Original                      23.747 (0.432)        <0.001 (<0.001)
                     Centered √                    24.872 (0.432)         0.150 (0.035)
                     Scaled by d         √          2.413 (1.862)        <0.001 (<0.001)
                     Centered + Scaled by d        14.591 (1.469)         0.150 (0.035)


In the case where layer normalization includes scaling and bias parameters γ and β, the output
probabilities are calculated as follows:
                                 PY = softmax XˆL ΓWET + βWET

                                                                                          (13)

where XˆL is the projection of XL to HS and Γ is a diagonal matrix such that Γii = γi . The effect
of Γ on the representation is that of transforming HS into an ellipsoid (see the center-left section of
Figure 3) while βWET acts as a bias that assigns higher probability to certain tokens independent of
the input.
In both cases (with and without bias and scale parameters), the proposed interpretation aligns with
that of iterative refinement within transformers (Jastrzebski et al., 2017; nostalgebraist, 2020; Elhage
et al., 2021; Geva et al., 2022; Belrose et al., 2023), given that intermediate representations Xl can
always be converted into output probabilities using Equation 12.

3       E XPERIMENTS
This section presents our experimental results. All experiments were done on a RTX 4090 GPU us-
ing pre-trained weights from the 124M parameter version of GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019; Karpathy,
2023) 2 .

3.1       I MPACT OF L AYER N ORMALIZATION ON THE W ORD E MBEDDINGS

To measure the impact of layer normalization on the position of the embedding vectors we ∈ WE ,
we calculated both the ℓ2 and cosine distances between the layer-normalized weights and the fol-
lowing settings:

           • Original: The original word embeddings without any modification
           • Centered: Original + centering around the mean E[we ]
                                                                                                √
           • Scaled: Original divided by the average vector norm E[||we ||] and multiplied by       d
           • Centered + Scaled: Original + centering + scaling

The results in Table 1 show that the mean cosine distance between the original word embeddings
and the embeddings after normalization is close to zero, meaning that projection onto HS does not
modify the orientation of the embedding vectors. The results also confirm this when centering is
applied, as the cosine distance increases significantly when the original vectors are displaced from
the origin and towards the mean. On the other hand, it can be seen that the ℓ2 distance is high
for all settings except for when
                             √ scaling is applied without centering. Given an average norm of
E[||we ||] = 3.959 and for d = 27.713 we can conclude that the original word embeddings lie
between the origin and HS rather than on its surface, with different embeddings having different
norms.
We hypothesize that variance in the norm of embedding vectors (SD(||we ||) = 0.434) is likely to
be a result of the use of the word embedding matrix as a classification layer (see Equation 13). To
verify whether this is the case, we select the top and bottom 5 embedding vectors based on the three
following criteria:
    2
        Code to replicate all experiments will be made available upon acceptance


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table 2: Top 5 and Bottom 5 tokens from the word embedding matrix.
                 Position        Norm        Scaled Norm    Norm + Bias   Scaled Norm + Bias
                  Top 1      SPONSORED       \xa9\xb6\xe6        ,                the
                  Top 2        \x96\x9a         tremend         the                 ,
                  Top 3     soDeliveryDate     \x96\x9a          .                and
                  Top 4         enegger           senal        and                  a
                  Top 5        Reviewer         millenn          -                 in
                 Bottom 5        for               -           \xc0             \x07
                 Bottom 4        an                (           \x07             \x0f
                 Bottom 3        on              “\n”          \x10         oreAndOnline
                 Bottom 2         in               ,           \x11             \x06
                 Bottom 1         at               .           \xfe             \xc1



        • Norm: The norm of the original embedding vector wE
        • Scaled Norm: The norm of the embedding vector when scaled by the Layer Norm param-
          eter Γ
        • Norm + Bias: The norm of the original embedding vector plus the bias scores obtained
          from βWET
        • Scaled Norm + Bias: The sum between the Scaled Norm and the bias scores.

The sorted tokens in Table 2 show that considering only the norm of the embeddings is not enough,
as tokens that are not commonly used (like ‘SPONSORED’ and ‘soDeliveryDate’) have the highest
norms, while common words like ‘for’, ‘an’, ‘on’ and ‘in’ have the lowest norm. After considering
the scaling parameter Γ, we observe that punctuation signs like the newline character or the comma
‘,’ have the lowest norm, and that there is no clear pattern on the top tokens. After considering
bias, we see that the distribution of top tokens clearly shifts, with punctuation symbols and common
words now at the top and uncommon bytes at the bottom. Finally, note that when both scale and bias
are considered, the top tokens are consistent with some of the most common words in the English
language: ‘the’, ‘and’, ‘a’ and ‘in’ with the only exception being the comma character, which is also
very common in natural language, while the bottom tokens are related to uncommon bytes and an
anomalous token.

3.2     P ROBING ATTENTION H EADS WITH N ORMALIZED R EPRESENTATIONS OF C OMMON
        N OUNS

Next, we probe the attention heads at layers 0, 5 and 11 of the GPT-2 model using as inputs the 100
most common nouns taken from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) (Davies,
2010). First, we transform the embedding matrix WE according to the normalization parameters
specific to each layer (see Figure 3) and then multiply the normalized embeddings WˆE by either
WQK or WV O . To decode the output from WQK , we retrieve the top-k closest embedding vectors
from WˆE based on dot product similarity. For WV O , we add the head-specific and layer-specific
output biases (see Equation S.8) to obtain the “update vectors”. These update vectors are then added
to the original embeddings from WE and transformed according to the normalization parameters
from the last layer; then, we retrieve the top-k closest embeddings from the original WE embedding
matrix based on dot product similarity.

3.2.1    Q UERY-K EY T RANSFORMATIONS
In Table D. 1, we present partial results for the query-key transformations at layer 0, given the
query inputs ‘time’, ‘life’ and ‘world’. We note that some of the heads preserve the meaning of the
query, as is the case for heads 1, 5 and 10, possibly looking for repetition, while others look for
keys that precede it. Such precedence heads might help to disambiguate the meaning of the words,
with examples like: ‘Showtime’ vs. ‘spacetime’, ‘battery life’ vs. ‘wildlife’ and ‘underworld’ vs.
‘Westworld’. Other heads appear to be looking for contextual associations, as is the case for head
2, which seems to relate ‘world’ with dates and concepts from the First and Second World wars.
When looking at deeper layers (as shown in Table D. 2 & D. 3), we were not able to identify any
meaningful patterns on the query transformations, suggesting that these layers might look for more
complex patterns that cannot be measured by probing.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2.2    K EY-VALUE T RANSFORMATIONS
In Table D. 4, we present partial results for the key-value transformations using the same three
sample inputs. For most heads at layer 0, the meaning of the input key is kept as is. However,
when the sum of all the heads is considered, we see a slight shift in the meaning of the words. For
heads at layer 5 (shown in Table D. 5), we see that although most of the heads preserve the meaning
of the input keys ‘life’ and ‘world’ (and around half of the heads for the input ‘time’), the sum of
all heads does change the word meaning dramatically, and without a clear output pattern. As our
experiment is limited to testing a single input key at a time, it might be possible that updates in
this layer rely more heavily on the contextual composition between multiple keys, which we did not
capture. Finally, in the last layer (Table D. 6), we see that most individual heads map to seemingly
arbitrary values, with only a few preserving the meaning of the input key. However, when the sum of
the heads is considered, the layer preserves the meaning of the input keys. To test the hypothesis that
meaning-preserving heads dominated the layer update, we measured the norm of the output values
for each head (before adding the layer-specific bias βO ). We found that, in most cases, these heads
do not have higher norms. Instead, heads promoting common tokens like ‘the’, ‘,’ and ‘and’ had the
highest norms. These results suggest that some heads at the last layer work together to preserve the
meaning of the input keys and mitigate the network’s bias towards common tokens.

3.3     P ROBING THE S INGULAR V ECTORS OF THE V IRTUAL ATTENTION M ATRICES

3.3.1    S INGULAR V ECTORS OF THE K EY-VALUE M ATRIX
To verify whether the key-value interpretation of WV O matrix proposed in subsubsection 2.2.2 is
correct, we probe each of its singular vectors (as proposed in Millidge & Black (2022)). For the left
singular vectors U (scaled by Σ), we use the normalized embeddings WˆE as a probe, while for the
right singular vectors V T , we use the original embeddings WE . Given that all singular values are
constrained to be positive, we get two possible singular vector pairs corresponding to each singular
value: (u, v) and (−u, −v). For ease of analysis, we choose the signed pair with its v component
closest to any of the embeddings we ∈ WE , using the dot product similarity.
We did not observe any interpretable pattern for the attention heads at layer 0 and found only one
interpretable head at layer 5 (head 10), which referred to terms in politics and chemistry. However,
we found that most heads in layer 11 were interpretable (except for heads 5, 7 and 9) and present the
results for all heads in Appendix E. An illustrative case of these patterns is head 3, where most of
its singular vector mappings are related to jobs or industries. For example, ‘Dairy’ maps to ‘USDA’
(the United States Department of Agriculture), ‘engine’ to ‘drivers’, ‘trading’ to ‘Sales’ and so on.
Similar patterns were present in other heads, listed as follows:

        • Head 0: Formatting and punctuation               • Head 6: Suffixes and Prefixes related
          symbols (end of text, new line, brack-             to the ending and beginning of words
          ets and parenthesis)                             • Head 8: Punctuation symbols
        • Head 1: Gender words                             • Head 10: Proper Nouns (First and Last
        • Head 2: Proper Nouns (Places)                      names)
        • Head 3: Jobs / Industries                        • Head 11: The identity function (input
        • Head 4: Letters and Numbers                        similar to the output)

We found that these patterns were consistent with those obtained in the key → value results from
Table D. 6, implying that the subject-specific behavior of the singular vectors is reflected in the
input-output transformations of the attention heads. These results complement previous work from
Millidge & Black (2022), in which only the right singular vectors V T were considered.

3.3.2    S INGULAR V ECTORS OF THE Q UERY-K EY M ATRIX
In additional experiments on the SVD of the WQK matrix, we found that some singular vector
pairs had clear associations. For example, in head 0 of layer 0, we found some associations related
to programming languages (‘self, class, =, import’ → ‘Python’) and digital cameras (‘Video, 264,
minutes’ → ‘Nikon, lineup, shot, camera’) but we could not identify any specialization for the heads


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in this layer. Surprisingly, we did find that heads at the last layer had identifiable patterns on their
left singular vectors (associated with the queries) consistent with those listed for the WV O matrix
(punctuation for head 0, gender for head 1, and so on), but no clear patterns were identified for the
right singular vectors.



3.4   V ISUALIZING I TERATIVE R EFINEMENT

Finally, we visualize how the information in the
residual stream is updated (i.e. the iterative re-
finement process) leveraging dimensionality re-
duction techniques, as shown in Figure 4. For
this, we chose the test sentence ‘To kill two
birds with one stone’, as the predictability of
its last token, ‘stone’, given the previous con-
text was high (correctly predicted by the model)
and none of the words in the sentence repeated.
To project the high dimensional embeddings
into 3D space, we used UMAP (McInnes et al.,
2018), with Laplacian Eigenmap initialization
(Belkin & Niyogi, 2001; Kobak & Linderman,
2021), and we fit the transform using the first
10,000 embedding vectors from WE to accu-
rately reflect proximity in the original embed-
ding space. We show the original embedding
tokens as reference (in blue) and plot the tra-
jectory of the second-to-last token, ‘one’, as
we process the entire sequence (with added po-
sitional embeddings) throughout the network.
For each layer, we transform the latent rep- Figure 4: UMAP 3D projection of the phrase ‘To
resentations in the residual stream using the kill two birds with one stone’.
normalization parameters from the final output
layer before projecting with UMAP. It can be
seen that the representation of the second-to-last token shifts from its original meaning (‘one’) to-
wards the meaning of the next token (‘stone’). Although the figure also shows the magnitude and
direction of each update in the trajectory, it is important to mention that these quantities might have
been modified due to the dimensionality reduction process.



4     C ONCLUSION

We have presented a new interpretation of transformer models based on the geometric intuition be-
hind each of its components. First, we showed how layer normalization can be better understood as
a projection of latent features in Rd to a (d − 1)-dimensional hyper-sphere and provide experimen-
tal evidence that the word embeddings learned by GPT-2 are distributed toward different directions
of the hyper-sphere, we also demonstrate that the parameters of the final normalization layer are
crucial in obtaining high-scoring tokens consistent with high-frequency tokens in the English lan-
guage. Second, we discussed the role of the WQK and WV O matrices as transformations related to
the hyper-sphere, with WQK as an affine transformation that overlaps queries and keys, and WV O
as a key-value map between the hyper-sphere and the original embedding space. These intuitions
were experimentally tested with probing experiments, showing promising results in understanding
the role of query-key attention in earlier layers and extending the results from Millidge & Black
(2022) on the subject-specific nature of the WV O matrix in attention heads at deeper layers. Finally,
we integrated these ideas and the impact of each component on the residual stream to provide visual
evidence of how the iterative refinement process works within transformers, illustrating the journey
that occurs from a previous token to the next.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Mikhail Belkin and Partha Niyogi. Laplacian eigenmaps and spectral techniques for embedding and
 clustering. Advances in neural information processing systems, 14, 2001.
Nora Belrose, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Halawi, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Stella
  Biderman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Eliciting latent predictions from transformers with the tuned
  lens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08112, 2023.
Shaked Brody, Uri Alon, and Eran Yahav. On the expressivity role of layernorm in transformers’
  attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02582, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Xiangning Chen, Chen Liang, Da Huang, Esteban Real, Kaiyuan Wang, Yao Liu, Hieu Pham, Xu-
  anyi Dong, Thang Luong, Cho-Jui Hsieh, et al. Symbolic discovery of optimization algorithms.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06675, 2023.
Guy Dar, Mor Geva, Ankit Gupta, and Jonathan Berant. Analyzing transformers in embedding
  space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.02535, 2022.
Mark Davies. The corpus of contemporary american english as the first reliable monitor corpus of
 english. Literary and linguistic computing, 25(4):447–464, 2010.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multi-
  modal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. A mathematical framework for
  transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 1, 2021.
Ronald Aylmer Fisher. Dispersion on a sphere. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series
  A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 217(1130):295–305, 1953.
Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are
 key-value memories. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
 Language Processing, pp. 5484–5495, 2021.
Mor Geva, Avi Caciularu, Kevin Wang, and Yoav Goldberg. Transformer feed-forward layers build
 predictions by promoting concepts in the vocabulary space. In Proceedings of the 2022 Confer-
 ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 30–45, 2022.
Google. Palm 2 technical report. Google AI, 2023. URL https://ai.google/static/
  documents/palm2techreport.pdf.
Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Devansh Arpit, Nicolas Ballas, Vikas Verma, Tong Che, and Yoshua Bengio.
  Residual connections encourage iterative inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.04773, 2017.
Andrej Karpathy. Github - karpathy/nanogpt: The simplest, fastest repository for training/finetuning
  medium-sized gpts., 2023. URL https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT.
Dmitry Kobak and George C Linderman. Initialization is critical for preserving global data structure
 in both t-sne and umap. Nature biotechnology, 39(2):156–157, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and
  projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
Beren Millidge and Sid Black. The singular value decompositions of transformer weight matrices are
  highly interpretable. https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/mkbGjzxD8d8XqKHzA/
  the-singular-value-decompositions-of-transformer-weight, 2022.
nostalgebraist. Interpreting gpt: The logit lens. https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/
  AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens, 2020.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. OpenAI, 2023. URL https://cdn.openai.com/papers/
  gpt-4.pdf.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jason Weston, Rob Fergus, et al. End-to-end memory networks. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Eric Windsor. Re-examining layernorm. https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/
  jfG6vdJZCwTQmG7kb/re-examining-layernorm, 2022.
Ruibin Xiong, Yunchang Yang, Di He, Kai Zheng, Shuxin Zheng, Chen Xing, Huishuai Zhang,
  Yanyan Lan, Liwei Wang, and Tieyan Liu. On layer normalization in the transformer architecture.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10524–10533. PMLR, 2020.
Zhuofan Zong, Guanglu Song, and Yu Liu. Detrs with collaborative hybrid assignments training.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12860, 2022.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     G EOMETRIC T RANSFORMATIONS WITHIN L AYER N ORMALIZATION
A.1    M EAN A LONG D IMENSIONS AS V ECTOR P ROJECTION
                                        →
                                        −
If we consider the unit-norm vector √1d 1 , it can be shown that the mean along dimensions µ is the
                         →
                         −
projection of x onto √1d 1 :
                                                                    !
                                   1 →−           1            1 →−   1 →−
                          proj(x, √ 1 ) =                 x· √ 1 √ 1
                                    d           1 →
                                                  −
                                                                d      d
                                             || d 1 ||2
                                               √
                                                          !
                                                     1 →−    1 →−
                                         = x· √ 1 √ 1
                                                      d       d
                                                   →
                                                   −!
                                                x· 1      1 →−
                                         =       √       √ 1
                                                   d       d
                                                                                              (S.1)
                                                   →
                                                   −!
                                                x· 1 →   −
                                         =               1
                                                  d
                                                   d
                                                         !
                                                1X         →
                                                           −
                                         =            xi 1
                                                d i
                                               →
                                               −
                                         = µ1
                                         =µ

For µ = [µ, µ, . . . , µ] ∈ Rd .

A.2    S TANDARD D EVIATIONS AS N ORM S CALING

             (2023) show that the division by σ acts as a scaling factor that modifies the norm of
Brody et al. √
x − µ to be d:
                                         v
                                         u d
                                         u1 X
                                    σ=t           (xi − µ)2
                                            d i
                                              v
                                              u d
                                           1 u X                                              (S.2)
                                       = √ t (xi − µ)2
                                            d    i
                                          1
                                       = √ ||x − µ||2
                                           d


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    A DDITIVE F ORMULATION OF M ULTI -H EAD S ELF -ATTENTION
Vaswani et al. (2017) define the self-attention mechanism as follows:

                                                                 QK T
                      SelfAttention(X, WQ , WK , WV ) = softmax √       V                       (S.3)
                                                                   d
where
                                            Q = XWQ
                                            K = XWK                                             (S.4)
                                            V = XWV

                  R               R                   R
Such that WQ ∈ d×k , WK ∈ d×k and WV ∈ d×v are projection matrices from the original
model dimension d to intermediate dimension k and value dimension v, respectively. For multi-
head attention, multiple projection matrices WQi , WK       i
                                                              , WVi are considered, one for each head
i ∈ [1, . . . , h] (with h being the number of heads). In this case, the value dimension v is commonly
set equal to k and an extra projection matrix WO ∈ Rhk×d is introduced to combine information
from all heads as follows (Vaswani et al., 2017):
                        MultiHead(X) = Concat([head1 , . . . , headh ])WO
                                                                                                (S.5)
                           where headi = SelfAttention(X, WQi , WK
                                                                 i
                                                                   , WVi )

Given that the concatenation happens along the row dimension of each head, it is possible to re-write
multi-head self-attention as follows:
                                      h
                                      X
                   MultiHead(X) =          SelfAttention(X, WQi , WK
                                                                   i
                                                                     , WVi )WOi
                                       i
                                                                                                (S.6)
                        where WO = Concat[WO1 , . . . , WOh ]

Such that each WOi ∈ Rk×d denotes an element of the partition of matrix WO alongside the row
dimension. Combining Equation S.4 and Equation S.6 we obtain a single formula for multi-head
self-attention:
                                                        i T
                                 h
                                                                !
                                X            XWQi WK        XT
                MultiHead(X) =      softmax          √            XWVi WOi
                                 i
                                                       d
                                 h
                                                            !
                                                   i
                                X            XWQK      XT
                             =      softmax       √           XWVi O
                                 i
                                                     d


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     I MPACT OF B IAS T ERMS IN M ULTI -H EAD S ELF -ATTENTION
C.1   B IAS IN THE Q UERY AND K EY P ROJECTIONS

In case the projection given by Equation S.4 contains bias terms βQ , βK ∈ Rk , the attention score
matrix from Equation 6 is calculated as follows:
                               X i X T + XW i β T + βQ W i T X T + βQ β T
                                Q          Q K          k              K
                 Ai = softmax                     √                                                (S.7)
                                                    d

In the bias formulation, three new terms are introduced. First, WQi βK   T
                                                                            ∈ Rd , which can be thought
of as a reference vector for queries, such that queries similar to it get higher attention scores. Given
that the same “bias score” will be broadcasted along all the different keys of the same query, the
network will ignore this term due to the shift-invariance of the softmax function. More interesting
                           i T
is the second term βQ WK       ∈ Rd , which acts as a reference for keys. Given that its bias score is
broadcasted along queries, it will result in higher attention scores (in all queries) for keys similar to
                                        T
the reference. Finally, the term βQ βK     ∈ R acts as a global bias and, similar to WQi βK   T
                                                                                                , will be
ignored by the network.

C.2   B IAS IN THE VALUE AND O UTPUT P ROJECTIONS

If the value projection in Equation S.4 contains a bias term βV ∈ Rk , and the output projection in
Equation S.5 contains a bias term βO ∈ Rd . The layer update in Equation 8 can be re-written as
follows:
                                                 h
                                               X                        T
                           Xl+1 = Xl + βO +         Ai Xvalue
                                                          i
                                                              + βV WOi                        (S.8)
                                                   i
                     T
Here, the term βV WOi ∈ Rd is a bias on the update direction of head i, while βO ∈ Rd acts as a
bias on the entire layer’s update.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     ATTENTION H EAD T RANSFORMATIONS FOR L AYERS 5 AND 11
D.1     Q UERY-K EY T RANSFORMATIONS

             Table D. 1: Transformation of Queries Across Attention Heads at Layer 0

                                                       Query → Keys
 Head       time                                life                           world
 0          Level, [?], offenders               battery, Battery, Battery      legraph, Vers, Malf
 1          time, time, Time                    Life, life, life               World, world, world
 2          cinematic, Priest, priest           Notre, fetal, abortion         1914, Churchill, 1916
 3          space, lunch, mid                   augh, ertain, ough             under, Nether, Fort
 4          soft, heavy, tool                   Middle, Hans, Middle           ether, Unt, Know
 5          time, time, Time                    life, Life, Life               world, World, world
 6          Rated, chirop, u                    Fukushima, chirop, ulic        ipt, u, Meta
 7          Show, bed, Movie                    pro, wild, Wild                Disc, West, West
 8          java, framework, watch              shark, sharks, Wild            edit, ”$:/, movie
 9          stones, pal, cards                  Trojan, malware, Wi            Rogers, COUNTY, Rd
 10         time, time, Time                    life, life, Life               world, world, World
 11         Wine, a, food                       PHI, everal, Span              agus, true, ‘,’

             Table D. 2: Transformation of Queries Across Attention Heads at Layer 5

                                                       Query → Keys
 Head     time                           life                              world
 0        depend, annot, reason          so, inf, char                     Lab, dev, Dev
 1        they, themselves, Vers         they, Im, depend                  come, once, haven
 2        Nepal, ”:[”, —”                ‘. . . .’, ‘. . . ’, Home         posted, Logged, ideologically
 3        appeared, actually, had        posted, axle, .avascript          aryl, Ala, GA
 4        attract, CP, contained         misconception, (?, trophy         separatists, activists, extremists
 5        Plum, rice, Vers               Sniper, too, hides                Prim, Bright, am
 6        en, annually, –                following, Generator, Library     §§, tournaments, StarCraft
 7        Wis, def, individual           y, ier, od                        Af, Gh, agle
 8        condition, intensive, inf      prol, operation, splend           Ard, marketplace, dev
 9        post, market, destinations     She, steal, etc                   strategy, pd, budget
 10       jugg, continuously, Center     essim, enter, tast                exploration, jugg, PLAY
 11       straight, interview, fucking   –, Eva, related                   spotlight, television, TV


            Table D. 3: Transformation of Queries Across Attention Heads at Layer 11

                                                       Query → Keys
 Head     time                              life                           world
 0        UNCLASSIFIED, opausal, ster       opausal, backstage, piece      routine, cat, ocular
 1        assion, upp, pir                  pir, Virgin, appa              Frontier, theater, onies
 2        heid, GI, rict                    heid, apy, brance              region, urgy, encyclopedia
 3        opic, href, Hitchcock             susceptibility, space, opic    league, space, opic
 4        gy, lots, whatever                his, whichever, gy             whichever, whatever, underworld
 5        olesterol, tx, erc                olesterol, avy, iana           wealth, Digest, Market
 6        ones, volatile, RIS               volatile, olesterol, idency    wealth, useum, theatre
 7        whichever, ivalent, lower         mortal, whichever, living      -$, complex, world
 8        ove, HTTP, metaphysical           spiritual, metaphysical, bio   Endless, metaphysical, Marvel
 9        Productions, actic, fare          stuff, ience, Productions      entertainment, stuff, World
 10       -, code, ing                      -, core, ola                   core, Labs, ourse
 11       emb, ivan, Union                  Tour, etc, iona                pires, si, Tour



                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2     K EY-VALUE T RANSFORMATIONS

                Table D. 4: Transformation of Keys Across Attention Heads at Layer 0

                                                      Key → Values
 Head      time                               life                             world
 0         time, Time, time                   life, choice, senal              world, World, worlds
 1         time, TIME, time                   life, lihood, life               world, Goes, ship
 2         time, [?], Minutes                 life, Life, life                 world, world, World
 3         time, Time, theless                life, Life, life                 world, World, worlds
 4         time, time, Time                   life, Life, Life                 world, World, world
 5         time, Time, Time                   life, Life, Life                 world, World, worlds
 6         time, time, Time                   life, life, Life                 world, world, Feather
 7         time, eless, times                 life, Experience, Life           world, World, Abyss
 8         time, iversary, melodies           life, challeng, conservancy      world, worlds, droid
 9         time, time, recall                 [?], local, Main                 [?], world, local
 10        equivalents, igation, planes       life, ento, planner              world, ento, Tanzania
 11        time, Time, Time                   life, Life, +++                  world, World, Trials
 Sum       time, etime, watch                 Indigo, life, crew               world, Unleashed, World


                Table D. 5: Transformation of Keys Across Attention Heads at Layer 5


                                                      Key → Values
 Head    time                                  life                         world
 0       BuyableInstoreAndOnline, [?], time    life, advertising, Life      world, opathy, qus
 1       MON, Sophia, time                     mallow, cause, unn           world, Cav, fect
 2       time, qualified, understatement       life, life, Life             world, World, auri
 3       )?, ¿), ?’                            \] =>, life, \\” >           world, \] =>, %”
 4       time, TIME, Sabha                     Izan, eworld, ieu            world, izons, orld
 5       destro, time, rall                    life, Life, agre             world, toget, enthusi
 6       time, time, TIME                      life, Life, life             world, World, WORLD
 7       time, corrid, patch                   life, Life, life             world, mathemat, redes
 8       NetMessage, [?], ibu                  venge, idth, aten            ULTS, Magikarp, [?]
 9       [?], [?], amina                       raviolet, los, SPONSORED     Kraft, quickShipAvailable, Berks
 10      time, contrace, Symphony              life, Life, life             world, World, worlds
 11      otle, ide, Ide                        framing, plot, plots         ittee, rf, pawn
 Sum     externalActionCode, ]), issance       ahon, awa, ]”                Magikarp, Hig, ETHOD


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table D. 6: Transformation of Keys Across Attention Heads at Block 11


                                                     Key → Values
 Head   time                                  life                            world
 0      \n, ”, “                              {, ¿, ”#                        [, [* ,[
 1      player, party, Party                  youth, House, Youth             party, Trump, party
 2      Lisp, Ö, ¨                           [?], Quincy, Yemen              Scotland, Osborne, Scotland
 3      Weather, cinem, weather               life, euth, Life                world, Worlds, geop
 4      b, k, 2                               inav, d, 4                      i, V, Rivals
 5      Part, Show, part                      Well, Well, saw                 sees, works, View
 6      Sub, AM, BR                           West, West, East                Sub, Under, ob
 7      Journal, Air, Online                  home, Home, house               home, Home, internet
 8      ‘,’, the, and                         ‘,’, the, and                   the, ‘,’, and
 9      interaction, impression, experience   encounter, belief, encounters   reservations, Illusion, illusions
 10     time, TIME, Time                      life, life, LIFE                world, world, worlds
 11     time, time, Time                      life, LIFE, life                world, oy, door
 Sum    time, Time, time                      life, Life, Life                world, Worlds, worlds


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    WV O SVD PER H EAD FOR L AYER 11

                 Table E. 7: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 0

    Rank   Top-3 Left Words                            Top-3 Right Words
     0     shenan, cryst, encount                      DragonMagazine, ertodd, soDelivery-
                                                       Date
     1     another, Iv, sil                            trave, BuyableInstoreAndOnline, con-
                                                       vol
     2     Sebastian, Luke, humankind                  quickShipAvailable,         EStream,
                                                       MpServer
     3     rans, thereby, hem                          BuyableInstoreAndOnline,     acknow,
                                                       Buyable
     4     sectional, [+], Winged                      ThumbnailImage, \ufffd\ufffd\u58eb,
                                                       Orderable
     5     abl, isc, Ah                                etheless, olson, llah
     6     <|endoftext|>, Advertisements, cest         <|endoftext|>, Advertisements, kin-
                                                       dred
      7    ococ, ilan, guest                           pard, MBA, uid
      8    ]., ],, ];                                  [, [*, [
      9    \n\n, ),, cakes                             \n\n, Quote, Quote
     10    snaps, Bills, Texans                        lineback, Chargers, Packers
     11    )..., ...), ).”                             (\u00a3, (, (?,
     12    pen, cle, Orioles                           .””, [, .”)
     13    ](, drm, Updated                            \n\n, [/, [/
     14    RBI, Field, Triple                          RHP, RBI, Negro
     15    pod, illus, Maple                           ipeg, aboriginal, ”\u2026
     16    am, ’m, hearted                             SPONSORED, Newsletter, ....
     17    Document, whit, Scott                       SPONSORED, tsky, Ras
     18    gen, idd, anned                             Ukrain, prin, rul
     19    Ryder, icz, abet                            istries, plet, Gad


                                               18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Table E. 8: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 1

  Rank    Top-3 Left Words                            Top-3 Right Words
    0     Customers, However, Customer                \u899a\u9192,         natureconservancy,
                                                      racuse
    1     mint, Anne, Marie                           hers, actress, Denise
    2     ook, Child, ooks                            parents, Parents, Children
    3     gow, abad, BEL                              boy, student, Guy
    4     eries, girl, girls                          Girl, girl, Queen
    5     Marie, Sue, Patricia                        Woman, woman, woman
    6     Him, les, LCS                               Person, Persons, Person
    7     ndra, Joint, rity                           Her, Her, femin
    8     Coach, recapt, Players                      Players, Coach, coaches
    9     istries, WAYS, INAL                         god, Allaah, God
   10     Ens, offspring, statute                     male, males, Woman
   11     Junction, hole, Abdullah                    girl, daddy, Neighbor
   12     HR, ig, akings                              Major, Major, minors
   13     reunion, Madison, mes                       boys, males, Girls
   14     asting, uba, ynt                            mom, moms, Jim
   15     ately, ynam, OUS                            doctoral, apprentice, Child
   16     ifier, Come, Weekly                         class, owners, Class
   17     Confederation, ATE, ingredient              Students, Students, Ms
   18     athon, jen, candidates                      Candidate, candidate, traveler
   19     Pres, ently, Secure                         character, Characters, Character


                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Table E. 9: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 2

  Rank    Top-3 Left Words                            Top-3 Right Words
    0     orpor, rul, Bolivia                         Adelaide, Edmonton, Calgary
    1     ball, ERY, hem                              Filipino, Ultron, ANC
    2     \u30f3\u30b8, else, Lib                     Ruby, Scarborough, Erit
    3     verb, Lamar, Ankara                         Detroit, Detroit, Wenger
    4     iana, amacare, edia                         Zoro, Shelby, Tehran
    5     Gw, otle, Rangers                           \u00ed, Jinn, Texans
    6     ration, Rim, ially                          Yang, McCain, Yang
    7     detector, OTOS, Petersen                    Chilean, Pharaoh, ffen
    8     ald, benefit, ahon                          Petersburg, Henderson, Kessler
    9     scope, whe, verse                           acio, Mits, Jacobs
   10     Gators, Laden, SEAL                         Malfoy, Swanson, Romney
   11     Lilly, \u00e9t, lla                         Greenwood, Collins, Byrne
   12     ister, ority, isters                        Niagara, Maharashtra, soDeliveryDate
   13     Paulo, nesota, Clayton                      Loki, \u011f, Finnish
   14     creen, Cron, Base                           Pike, Krishna, Satoshi
   15     lake, SP, seeing                            Alberta, Arlington, McKin
   16     Bowie, ystem, rey                           Bowie, Murray, Utah
   17     head, ding, ressed                          Bulgar, Warcraft, Crimean
   18     Venom, elman, lyn                           SJ, Brit, Gordon
   19     wright, ansas, arta                         NXT, Metroid, Aether


                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table E. 10: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 3

  Rank    Left Words                                 Right Words
    0     suburbs, restaur, \ufffd                   DragonMagazine, BuyableInstoreAn-
                                                     dOnline, \ufffd\u9192
    1     Dairy, farm, Veget                         USDA, Dairy, cows
    2     engine, drivers, Motor                     Drivers, drivers, driver
    3     trading, trade, shoppers                   Sales, retailers, shoppers
    4     instrument, musical, guitar                Billboard, halftime, Grammy
    5     sail, boat, sailing                        sail, sailing, autical
    6     teachers, teacher, school                  teachers, uberty, curric
    7     baker, kindergarten, bakery                baker, SERV, kindergarten
    8     apparel, prison, recruiting                Sail, Prison, jail
    9     shelter, indoors, shelters                 shelters, shelter, Radiant
   10     tribe, fish, fish                          dred, whales, fisheries
   11     workers, jobs, job                         workers, worker, subcontract
   12     Derrick, tribe, Tribal                     Seg, forest, Derrick
   13     chess, Chess, seating                      Chess, chess, Sheldon
   14     Soy, Satellite, astronauts                 Soy, Satellite, transmissions
   15     Anim, visa, Imm                            exhib, Anim, Imm
   16     medicine, diagnose, doctors                Doctors, hospital, doctor
   17     boxing, trainer, spar                      boxing, spar, UFC
   18     gun, firearm, Sheriff                      ITV, Decoder, Geral
   19     gambling, tournaments, tournament          gambling, Gaming, tournaments


                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table E. 11: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 4

  Rank    Top-3 Left Words                           Top-3 Right Words
    0     them, their, him                           cloneembedreportprint, \u899a\u9192,
                                                     \u30b5\u30fc\u30c6\u30a3
    1     iator, ive, ibur                           natureconservancy, Canaver, \u25fc
    2     if, born, forces                           the, ., ,
    3     ually, ,., therein                         Buyable, misunder, lehem
    4     irk, struct, actly                         1, 2, 9
    5     uku, handle, eenth                         nineteen, seventeen, seventy
    6     ensional, insk, ploy                       M, M, m
    7     allowance, \u2605, ther                    ii, Bs, B
    8     ylon, works, plays                         EDITION, o\u011f, nt
    9     ysc, oreal, Friend                         B, K, B
   10     redits, rossover, ameron                   F, K, k
   11     Tiger, urses, aught                        N, W, C
   12     aughter, gling, eland                      L, l, L
   13     othe, cano, ensity                         S, s, S
   14     ISTORY, hum, pots                          H, H, h
   15     gers, iegel, ki                            S, s, S
   16     ya, seq, est                               selves, T, i
   17     tl, ictionary, latch                       R, R, D
   18     Fres, pine, delay                          R, u, llah
   19     Shades, went, culosis                      G, G, S


                                              22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table E. 12: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 5

  Rank    Top-3 Left Words                           Top-3 Right Words
    0     assail, challeng, achie                    ertodd, \u25fc, \ufffd\u9192
    1     WARE, padding, req                         \u9f8d\u5951\u58eb,        StreamerBot,
                                                     soDeliveryDate
    2     uing, anche, Inquis                        heit, MpServer, partName
    3     ward, ops, actory                          builds, projects, Building
    4     ary, bell, vis                             ouf, unt, article
    5     ments, Poo, emo                            Will, Will, terday
    6     abdom, book, Til                           reads, read, writing
    7     admission, Fighters, agy                   model, Models, ilib
    8     line, lines, se                            line, lines, Hold
    9     iness, less, ood                           udic, ridden, usky
   10     absence, inar, Miko                        place, Must, must
   11     hawk, nect, aff                            esson, sees, scene
   12     ie, een, ennett                            Say, ighting, features
   13     Peaks, construed, anguages                 finding, find, Find
   14     ming, mers, pling                          ufact, Put, say
   15     Authority, urated, disregard               record, records, Record
   16     cript, Seen, Crash                         Written, course, arium
   17     ually, gladly, ously                       tions, show, find
   18     im, ading, Expand                          image, Image, Image
   19     NX, W, ees                                 swer, \u30c7\u30a3, report


                                              23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table E. 13: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 6

  Rank    Top-3 Left Words                           Top-3 Right Words
    0     issue, txt, Princ                          isSpecialOrderable, DragonMagazine,
                                                     \ufffd\ufffd
    1     mes, same, resa                            guiActiveUn, Yanuk, Beir
    2     eatured, avier, AMES                       quickShipAvailable, BuyableInstore-
                                                     AndOnline, RH
    3     Levine, estone, Bronx                      skirts, Els, Bris
    4     lder, xit, Sav                             Sov, grap, Al
    5     xual, ss, soup                             Orient, owship, toile
    6     rices, glers, lishing                      Uni, Tik, en
    7     imation, hammer, nels                      BAD, Ze, sa
    8     saturated, lying, Past                     Ry, AG, Val
    9     activity, ozy, oko                         Ay, AW, Ay
   10     ows, aghan, ergy                           Gul, cl, Nex
   11     yrs, ish, hood                             Wh, Har, Mart
   12     omp, grandmother, MS                       sidx, Alb, CTR
   13     ses, ski, doctor                           AD, ython, Ty
   14     heed, Monthly, angan                       OPS, Tur, Tam
   15     Agency, VP, lex                            Red, Grey, Redd
   16     FORE, sil, hing                            wcsstore, uci, Winged
   17     idences, ining, ahl                        Ste, Pend, hal
   18     iance, taxpayers, anches                   Fuj, appl, Zamb
   19     ischer, apo, hiatus                        Zamb, Zer, Nek


                                              24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table E. 14: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 7

  Rank    Top-3 Left Words                           Top-3 Right Words
    0     shortest, ses, mentally                    iHUD, DragonMagazine, Downloadha
    1     our, ourselves, we                         ourselves, ours, our
    2     himself, lements, them                     \u899a\u9192, natureconservancy, er-
                                                     todd
    3     etitive, EStream, workshop                 FTWARE, SourceFile, \ufffd\u9192
    4     \u0627\u0644, holders, mileage             your, Free, Your
    5     am, ’m, myself                             my, myself, me
    6     themselves, auder, ighthouse               Companies, theirs, THEIR
    7     stract, hop, \u00a2                        soDeliveryDate, Civil, civilian
    8     bage, ros, hyster                          bage, aukee, Free
    9     shop, acter, Shop                          Humans, ourning, electronically
   10     ¡+, myself, pse                            my, myself, markets
   11     Hold, SE, istant                           ilage, roups, usra
   12     uffs, VG, GG                               verty, Leilan, Soft
   13     sters, ual, ted                            machine, machine, business
   14     making, weights, mare                      centrif, istani, culture
   15     uador, oust, ertain                        us, ours, our
   16     vable, cam, ophy                           system, System, systems
   17     exch, velength, un                         Games, abeth, gaming
   18     latex, Edwards, Conway                     Commercial, Community, community
   19     ificial, rating, nces                      ificial, System, technology


                                              25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table E. 15: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 8

  Rank    Top-3 Left Words                           Top-3 Right Words
    0     the, in, a                                 \ufffd\ufffd\ufffd,       guiActiveUn,
                                                     cloneembedreportprint
    1     *., ., determin                            ,, the, -
    2     and, ,, Un                                 arnaev, DragonMagazine, BuyableIn-
                                                     storeAndOnline
    3     ?”, ?), ?),                                ?’”, TPPStreamerBot, ’,”
    4     ,’”, GIF, ,”                               Orderable, \ufffd, \ufffd
    5     .’”, They, .’                              .’”, ’.”, ).”
    6     ,’, \u2010, ,’”                            ,’”, ’,, ,’
    7     ,’, ,’”, ’,’                               ,’”, ,’, ’,”
    8     .’, ,’, ’.                                 .’, ,’, ’.
    9     her, she, She                              she, hers, her
   10     \ufffd, \ufffd, “                          \ufffd, \ufffd, “
   11     ”..., ”,”, ”,                              )”,, ),”, ”),
   12     ).”, ”)., ...”                             ).”, .”[, ”).
   13     us, ),”, our                               ),”, ).”, .”)
   14     ));, );, ),                                ”,, ’,, ));
   15     ]., ];, ],                                 };, ];, ’;
   16     ..., ...”, ...                             ...], :], ...”
   17     ?], !], .]                                 \u2026], !], ?]
   18     ();, her, He                               hers, ();, His
   19     \u00ad, \u300f, You                        \u300f, ¿., \u00ad


                                              26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table E. 16: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 9

  Rank    Top-3 Left Words                           Top-3 Right Words
    0     esthes, Eat, pts                           DragonMagazine, Canaver, naturecon-
                                                     servancy
    1     ups, motors, hinted                        confir, \ufffd, unlaw
    2     pursue, pursuit, Frie                      ticket, Desire, iferation
    3     posted, dates, rece                        achievement, unlocking, Hilbert
    4     differential, prise, ushing                acceptance, handled, accepting
    5     Hide, etsu, LET                            optimizations, prioritize, emphasized
    6     ously, uffer, ca                           opsis, \u30df, stall
    7     ann, Horn, Specifications                  restraint, notice, surprises
    8     supremacy, argon, ifier                    ACTIONS, Contin, rue
    9     ling, ceived, inf                          errors, misunderstanding, accuracy
   10     ittal, ampton, feld                        denotes, denote, hazard
   11     inf, andy, ery                             plagiar, mentors, recommending
   12     Soon, \ufffd, \ufffd                       lax, Talks, Fell
   13     cia, war, Fighters                         dissatisf, consum, dissatisfaction
   14     NAS, Schwar, Streamer                      delet, sidx, inem
   15     Glory, uan, ment                           Reviewed, Congratulations, congratula-
                                                     tions
   16     frey, clay, essional                       quirks, Integration, distinguishing
   17     uck, marked, Request                       appreciation, Guidelines, guidelines
   18     prints, forcefully, Cel                    conviction, convictions, impressions
   19     utic, endez, inging                        disag, bruising, spo


                                              27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table E. 17: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 10

  Rank    Top-3 Left Words                            Top-3 Right Words
    0     above, former, dm                           \u25fc, Downloadha, Canaver
    1     Cohen, oku, Corporation                     be, ache, the
    2     liar, Ross, Irving                          Rossi, Mind, Zen
    3     Treatment, MT, tubing                       etts, Taylor, Tan
    4     Torch, dt, Honour                           Divinity, marqu, vine
    5     ==, Sinn, imitation                         Stafford, Bradford, Halo
    6     asks, fitted, caution                       BW, BW, Berger
    7     encer, hero, success                        Gon, Johnny, PATH
    8     Chung, anke, IRE                            Chennai, Carey, Carmen
    9     Commodore, iom, attract                     curry, Cunningham, clam
   10     earth, CS, oyal                             Sov, Trin, paralle
   11     ramid, el, DIT                              Hilton, diarr, \ufffd\u9192
   12     ulla, alde, uality                          McInt, alde, Idle
   13     cam, write, ports                           Cave, Chal, Connie
   14     buf, anne, Emin                             Dwar, Dwarf, Das
   15     job, play, job                              buquerque, Liber, reb
   16     ASC, ector, Order                           Sorceress, Alic, Astro
   17     ting, enced, te                             Forest, Kan, tree
   18     ater, Turner, UAL                           \u9f8d\ufffd, Omn, Gamma
   19     Matrix, RIP, oping                          Fed, STEP, Rand


                                              28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table E. 18: Left and Right Singular Vectors at Layer 11 - Head 11

  Rank    Top-3 Left Words                            Top-3 Right Words
    0     8, 9, 6                                     \u899a\u9192, cloneembedreportprint,
                                                      StreamerBot
    1     ”, [?], ,                                   DragonMagazine, cloneembedreport-
                                                      print, ertodd
    2     puff, rem, Ey                               \ufffd\ufffd\u58eb, catentry, Flavoring
    3     air, compressor, exchange                   air, blow, nose
    4     burn, burning, burns                        burns, burning, burn
    5     smoke, blowing, sky                         smoke, clouds, airflow
    6     light, shade, lighting                      light, illumination, Light
    7     break, breaks, Bre                          breaks, breaker, broken
    8     finger, air, registrations                  finger, finger, Feet
    9     rolls, roll, rolled                         Rolls, rolls, Ludwig
   10     opening, opened, closing                    opened, closes, opening
   11     ause, blank, generating                     rawdownloadcloneembedreportprint,
                                                      ause, sburg
   12     anne, \u0639, sprayed                       \u30fc\ufffd, \ufffd\ufffd, iltration
   13     ear, audio, Ear                             ear, ears, Ear
   14     goggles, watched, devotion                  ideos, TPS, goggles
   15     leaf, slashed, hunger                       gou, ouri, margins
   16     voices, voic, Hand                          voic, leash, voiced
   17     short, Short, short                         shorten, shortened, short
   18     tones, tones, tone                          bells, tone, marrow
   19     drawn, connected, ieties                    wu, River, Awakening


                                              29
