Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W HAT M ATTERS TO You? T OWARDS V ISUAL R EPRE -
SENTATION A LIGNMENT FOR ROBOT L EARNING

    Ran Tian1 , Chenfeng Xu1 , Masayoshi Tomizuka1 , Jitendra Malik1 , Andrea Bajcsy2
 1
    UC Berkeley 2 Carnegie Mellon University



                                            A BSTRACT

          When operating in service of people, robots need to optimize rewards aligned
          with end-user preferences. Since robots will rely on raw perceptual inputs, their
          rewards will inevitably use visual representations. Recently there has been excite-
          ment in using representations from pre-trained visual models, but key to making
          these work in robotics is fine-tuning, which is typically done via proxy tasks like
          dynamics prediction or enforcing temporal cycle-consistency. However, all these
          proxy tasks bypass the human’s input on what matters to them, exacerbating spuri-
          ous correlations and ultimately leading to behaviors that are misaligned with user
          preferences. In this work, we propose that robots should leverage human feedback
          to align their visual representations with the end-user and disentangle what mat-
          ters for the task. We propose Representation-Aligned Preference-based Learning
          (RAPL), a method for solving the visual representation alignment problem and
          visual reward learning problem through the lens of preference-based learning and
          optimal transport. Across experiments in X-MAGICAL and in robotic manipula-
          tion, we find that RAPL’s reward consistently generates preferred robot behaviors
          with high sample efficiency, and shows strong zero-shot generalization when the
          visual representation is learned from a different embodiment than the robot’s.



1     I NTRODUCTION

Imagine that a robot manipulator is tasked with cleaning your kitchen countertop. To be successful,
its reward function should model your preferences: what you think an orderly countertop looks like
(e.g., plates should be stacked by color), how objects should be handled during cleaning (e.g., cups
should be moved one-at-a-time but food scraps should be pushed in large groups), and what parts of
the countertop should be avoided (e.g., always stay away from the expensive espresso machine).
A long-standing approach to this problem has been through inverse reinforcement learning (IRL),
where the robot infers a reward from demonstrations. Fundamental work in IRL (Abbeel & Ng,
2004; Ziebart et al., 2008) argues for matching features between the expert and the learner during
reward inference, more formally known as optimizing Integral Probability Metrics (IPMs) (Sun
et al., 2019; Swamy et al., 2021). While there are many ways to do this matching, optimal transport
has recently been used to optimize IPMs defined on high-dimensional feature spaces in a principled
manner (Xiao et al., 2019; Dadashi et al., 2021; Papagiannis & Li, 2022; Luo et al., 2023).
The question remains, what are good features for the learner to match? While traditional work used
hand-engineered features defined on low-dimensional states of the world that the robot could do
state estimation on (e.g. object pose) (Levine et al., 2011; Finn et al., 2016), large vision models
trained via self-supervised/unsupervised learning promise representations for robotics that directly
operate on raw image inputs and capture more nuanced features automatically (e.g., object color
and shape) (Xiao et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2023; Karamcheti et al., 2023). However, automatically
extracting relevant visual features that incentivize preferred robot behavior and minimize spurious
correlations remains an open challenge (Zhang et al., 2020). Previous works use proxy tasks during
representation learning to imbue some prior human knowledge about attributes that are relevant
(Brown et al., 2020), such as assuming access to action labels and doing behavior cloning (Haldar
et al., 2023a;b) or performing temporal cycle-consistency learning (Dadashi et al., 2021). The former
requires additional signals that may be hard to obtain (i.e., actions), while the latter assumes that


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Visual Representation Alignment

                                                        ∣ 𝜙) ! )                  𝜙" !
                                                                                     ∗
                              max 𝑃(       ≻      ≻                                    [   ∼ 𝒟]
                              "!                                                                     Policy Learning via
                              #


                                                                         ∼ 𝜋# ]
Human Visual Representation
                                                                                                   OT-based Visual Reward
        → 𝜙!                                                                                      ↔ max 𝑟 𝜙) !∗ [     ]
                                𝜙) !%           𝜙) !∗                                                &  "


                                                                         𝜙" !
                                                                            ∗
                                                                              [
Figure 1: Representation-Aligned Preference-based Learning (RAPL), is an action-free visual
representation learning method using easy-to-provide human preference feedback on video demos.
Using the human preference triplets, the robot goes from paying attention to the end-effector (ϕ̃0H ) to
paying attention to the objects and the goal region (ϕ̃∗H ) at the end of alignment. The aligned repre-
sentation is used to construct an optimal transport-based visual reward for robot behavior learning.
temporal consistency signal is sufficient to extract what matters to the task, potentially ignoring
other features that matter to the demonstrator (e.g., avoiding undesired regions).
Since robots ultimately operate in service of people, recent works advocate that the robot should
explicitly engage in a representation alignment process with the end-user. These works leverage user
feedback such as human-driven feature selection (Bullard et al., 2018; Luu-Duc & Miura, 2019),
interactive feature construction (Bobu et al., 2021; Katz et al., 2021) or similarity-queries (Bobu
et al., 2023a) to learn human-centric representations. However, these approaches either operate on
pre-defined feature sets or in low-dimensional state spaces (e.g., positions). In the visual domain,
(Zhang et al., 2020) uses manually-defined reward signals to learn representations which disentangle
high versus low reward images; unfortunately, when the main objective is reward learning in the first
place, this approach is not feasible.
Instead of hoping to extract human-centric visual representations via proxy tasks that bypass human
input or require action labels per video frame, we propose that robots use easy-to-provide human
preference feedback—where the human is asked to compare two or more video demonstrations—to
align their visual representations with what matters to the end-user (Figure 1).
We first formalize the visual representation alignment problem for robotics as a metric learning
problem in the human’s representation space. We then propose Representation-Aligned Preference-
based Learning (RAPL), a tractable video-only method for solving the alignment problem and learn-
ing visual robot rewards via optimal transport. Across experiments in X-Magical (Zakka et al., 2022)
and in robotic manipulation, we find that RAPL’s reward consistently generates preferred robot be-
haviors with high sample efficiency, and shows strong zero-shot generalization when the visual
representation is learned on a different embodiment than the robot’s.

2     P ROBLEM S ETUP
Human Policy. We consider scenarios where the robot R wants to learn how to perform a task for
human H. The human knows the desired reward r∗ which encodes their preferences for the task. The
                                                     ∗
human acts via an approximately optimal policy πH      : O → UH based on their underlying reward
function. Instead of directly consuming the raw perceptual input, research suggests that humans
naturally build visual representations of the world (Bonnen et al., 2021) that focus on task-relevant
attributes (Callaway et al., 2021). We model the human’s representation model as ϕH : O → ΦH ,
mapping from the perceptual input o ∈ O to the human’s latent space ΦH which captures their task
and preference-relevant features.
                                               ∗
Robot Policy. We seek to learn a robot policy πR : O → UR which maps from image observations
to actions that maximizes a reward:
                                                   hX∞                  i
                           ∗
                         πR  = arg max Eo∼p(o|πR )     γ t · r(ϕR (ot )) ,               (1)
                                           πR
                                                                   t=0

where γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor and o = {o , o1 , . . .} is the image observation trajectory
                                                                   0

induced by the robot’s policy. The robot’s reward r relies on a visual representation, ϕR : O → ΦR ,
which maps from the image observation o ∈ O to a lower-dimensional latent space, ΦR . In general,
this could be hand-crafted, such as distances to objects from the agent’s end-effector (Ziebart et al.,
2008; Levine et al., 2011; Finn et al., 2016), or the output of an encoder pre-trained on large-scale


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


datasets (Chen et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2023). Before the robot can optimize for πR , it is faced with
two questions: what visual representation ϕR should it use to encode observations, and which reward
                                                 ∗
r should it optimize to align its behavior with πH ?

3     RAPL: R EPRESENTATION -A LIGNED P REFERENCE -BASED L EARNING
In this work, we leverage pre-trained visual encoders but advocate that robots fine-tune them with
preference-based human feedback to extract features that are relevant for how the end-user likes the
task to be performed. Preference-based feedback, where a user is asked to compare two or more
trajectories, has been shown to be easier for end-users to provide compared to direct labelling or
giving near-optimal demonstrations (Wirth et al., 2017). However, we are the first to use preference-
based human feedback to align pre-trained visual models with user preference for robot learning.
Once the robot has an aligned representation, what reward should it optimize to generate preferred
behaviors? To reduce the sample complexity, we use optimal transport methods to design a visual
reward (Villani et al., 2009), and focus the preference feedback exclusively on fine-tuning the rep-
resentation. Since optimal transport methods are a way to optimize Integral Probability Metrics in
a principled manner, the transport plan exactly yields a reward which maximizes feature matching
between the learner and the expert in our aligned representation space.
In this section, we first formally state the visual representation alignment problem by drawing upon
recent work in cognitive science (Sucholutsky & Griffiths, 2023) and then detail our approximate so-
lution, Representation-Aligned Preference-based Learning (RAPL), through the lens of preference-
based learning and optimal transport. In addition to this section’s content, we also provide more
details about comparisons between our work and previous work in Appendix A.2 and A.1.

3.1   T HE V ISUAL R EPRESENTATION A LIGNMENT P ROBLEM FOR ROBOTICS

We follow the formulation in Sucholutsky & Griffiths (2023) and bring this to the robot learning
domain. Intuitively, visual representation alignment is defined as the degree to which the output
of the robot’s encoder, ϕR , matches the human’s internal representation, ϕH , for the same image
observation, o ∈ O, during task execution. We utilize a triplet-based definition of representation
alignment as in (Jamieson & Nowak, 2011) and (Sucholutsky & Griffiths, 2023).

Definition 1 (Triplet-based Representation Space) Let o = {ot }Tt=0 be a sequence of image
observations over T timesteps, ϕ : O → Φ be a given representation model, and ϕ(o) :=
{ϕ(o0 ), . . . , ϕ(oT )} be the corresponding embedding trajectory.   For some distance metric d(·, ·)
and two observation trajectories oi and oj , let d ϕ(oi ), ϕ(oj ) be the distance between their em-
bedding trajectories. The triplet-based representation space of ϕ is:
                        n                                                                o
                  Sϕ = (oi , oj , ok ) : d ϕ(oi ), ϕ(oj ) < d ϕ(oi ), ϕ(ok ) , oi,j,k ∈ Ξ ,

                                                                                                  (2)
where Ξ is the set of all possible image trajectories for the task of interest.

Intuitively, this states that the visual representation ϕ helps the agent determine how similar two
videos are in a lower-dimensional space. For all possible triplets of videos that the agent could see,
it can determine which videos are more similar and which videos are less similar using its embedding
space. The set Sϕ contains all such similarity triplets.

Definition 2 (Visual Representation Alignment Problem) Recall that ϕH and ϕR are the human
and robot’s visual representations respectively. The representation alignment problem is defined as
learning a ϕR which minimizes the difference between the two agents’ representation spaces, as
measured by a function ℓ which penalizes divergence between the two representation spaces:
                                           min ℓ(SϕR , SϕH ).                                      (3)
                                            ϕR


3.2   R EPRESENTATION I NFERENCE VIA P REFERENCE - BASED L EARNING

Although this formulation sheds light on the underlying problem, solving Equation 3 exactly is
impossible since the functional form of the human’s representation ϕH is unavailable and the set


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SϕH is infinite. Thus, we approximate the problem by constructing a subset S̃ϕH ⊂ SϕH of triplet
queries. Since we seek a representation that is relevant to the human’s preferences, we ask the
human to rank these triplets based on their preference-based notion of similarity (e.g., r∗ (ϕH (oi )) >
r∗ (ϕH (oj )) > r∗ (ϕH (ok )) =⇒ oi ≻ oj ≻ ok ). With these rankings, we implicitly learn ϕH via a
neural network trained on these triplets.
We interpret a human’s preference over the triplet (oi , oj , ok ) ∈ S̃ϕH via the Bradley-Terry model
(Bradley & Terry, 1952), where oi is treated as an anchor and oj , ok are compared to the anchor in
terms of similarity as in Equation 2:
                                                                         i        j
                                                        e−d(ϕH (o ), ϕH (o ))
                P(oi ≻ oj ≻ ok | ϕH ) ≈                                                      .   (4)
                                           e−d(ϕH (oi ), ϕH (oj )) + e−d(ϕH (oi ), ϕH (ok ))
A natural idea would be to leverage the human’s preference feedback to do direct reward prediction
(i.e., model both d and ϕH via a single neural network to approximate r∗ ), as is done in tradi-
tional preference-based reward learning (Christiano et al., 2017). However, we find empirically
(Section 5.2) that directly learning a high-quality visual reward from preference queries requires a
prohibitive amount of human feedback that is unrealistic to expect from end-users (Brown et al.,
2019; Bobu et al., 2023b).
Instead, we focus all the preference feedback on just representation alignment. But, this raises
the question what distance measure d should we use? In this work, we use optimal transport as a
principled way to measure the feature matching between any two videos. For any video o and for
                                                                                          PT
a given representation ϕ, let the induced empirical embedding distribution be ρ = T1 t=0 δϕ(ot ) ,
where δϕ(ot ) is a Dirac distribution centered on ϕ(ot ). Optimal transport finds the optimal coupling
µ∗ ∈ RT ×T that transports one embedding distribution, ρi , to another video embedding distribution,
ρj , with minimal cost. This approach has a well-developed suite of numerical solution techniques
(Peyré et al., 2019) which we leverage in practice (for details on this see App. A.3).
Our final optimization is a maximum likelihood estimation problem:
                                         X
                         ϕ̃H := max               P(oi ≻ oj ≻ ok | ϕH ).                            (5)
                                  ϕH
                                       (oi ,oj ,ok )∈S̃ϕH

Since the robot seeks a visual representation that is aligned with the human’s, we set: ϕR := ϕ̃H .

3.3   P REFERENCE -A LIGNED ROBOT B EHAVIOR VIA O PTIMAL T RANSPORT

Given our aligned visual representation, we seek a robot policy πR whose behavior respects the
end-user’s preferences. Traditional IRL methods (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al., 2008) are built
upon matching features between the expert and the learner. Leveraging this insight, we use optimal
transport methods since the optimal transport plan is equivalent to defining a reward function that
encourages this matching (Kantorovich & Rubinshtein, 1958).
Specifically, we seek to match the embedded observation occupancy measure induced by the robot’s
policy πR , and the embedded observation occupancy measure of a human’s preferred video demon-
stration, o+ . Thus, the optimal transport plan yields the reward which is optimized in Equation 1:
                                               T
                                               X                          ′
                            r(otR ; ϕR ) = −           c ϕR (otR ), ϕR (ot+ ) µ∗t,t′ ,              (6)
                                               t′ =1
where µ∗ is the optimal coupling between the empirical embedding distributions induced by the
robot and the expert. This reward has been successful in prior vision-based robot learning (Haldar
et al., 2023b;a; Guzey et al., 2023) with the key difference in our setting being that we use RAPL’s
aligned visual representation ϕR for feature matching (for details on the difference between our
approach and prior OT based visual reward see Appendix A.1).

4     E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN
We design a series of experiments to investigate RAPL’s ability to learn visual rewards and generate
preferred robot behaviors.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Preference Dataset: S̃ϕH . While the ultimate test is learning from real end-user feedback, in this
work we use a simulated human model as a first step. This allows us to easily ablate the size of the
preference dataset, and gives us privileged access to r∗ for direct comparison. In all environments,
the simulated human constructs the preference dataset S̃ϕH by sampling triplets of videos uniformly
at random from the set1 of video observations Ξ̃ ⊂ Ξ, and then ranking them with their reward r∗
as in Equation 4.
Independent & Dependent Measures. Throughout our experiments we vary the visual reward
signal used for robot policy optimization and the preference dataset size used for representation
learning. We measure robot task success as a binary indicator of if the robot completed the task with
high reward r∗ .
Controlling for Confounds. Our ultimate goal is to have a visual robot policy, πR , that takes as
input observations and outputs actions. However, to rigorously compare policies obtained from
different visual rewards, we need to disentangle the effect of the reward signal from any other policy
design choices, such as the input encoders and architecture. To have a fair comparison, we follow the
approach from (Zakka et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2023) and input the privileged ground-truth state
into all policy networks, but vary the visual reward signal used during policy optimization. Across
all methods, we use an identical reinforcement learning setup and Soft-Actor Critic for training
(Haarnoja et al., 2018) with code base from (Zakka et al., 2022).
In Section 5, we first control the agent’s embodiment to be consistent between both representation
learning and robot optimization (e.g., assume that the robot shows video triplets of itself to the hu-
man and the human ranks them). In Section 6, we relax this assumption and consider the more
realistic cross-embodiment scenario where the representation learning is performed on videos of a
different embodiment than the robot’s. For all policy learning experiments, we use 10 expert demon-
strations as the demonstration set D+ for generating the reward (more details in Appendix A.3).


5     R ESULTS : F ROM R EPRESENTATION TO B EHAVIOR A LIGNMENT

We first experiment in the toy X-Magical environment (Zakka et al., 2022), and then move to the
realistic IsaacGym simulator.

5.1    X-M AGICAL

Tasks. We design two tasks inspired by kitchen coun-
tertop cleaning. The robot always has to push objects
to a goal region (e.g., trash can), shown in pink at the
top of the scene in Figure 2. In the avoiding task, the
end-user prefers that the robot and objects never enter
an off-limits zone during pushing (blue box in left Fig-
ure 2). In the grouping task, the end-user prefers that
objects are always pushed efficiently together (instead of
one-at-a-time) towards the goal region (center, Figure 2).
Privileged State & Reward. For avoiding, the true Figure 2: X-Magical & IsaacGym tasks.
state s is 7D: planar robot position (pR ∈ R2 ) and ori-
entation (θR ), planar position of the object (pobj ∈ R2 ), distance between goal region and ob-
ject, (dobj2goal ), and distance between the off-limits zone and the object (dobs2obj ). The human’s
              ∗
reward is: ravoid    (s) = −dgoal2obj − 2 · I(dobs2obj < dsafety ), where dsafety is a safety dis-
tance and I is an indicator function giving 1 when the condition is true. For grouping, the state
                                                                                          ∗
is 9D: s := (pR , θR , pobj1 , pobj2 , dgoal2obj1 , dgoal2obj2 ). The human’s reward is: rgroup (s) =
− max(dgoal2obj1 , dgoal2obj2 ) − ||pobj1 − pobj2 ||2 .
Baselines. We compare our visual reward, RAPL, against (1) GT, an oracle policy obtained under
r∗ , (2) RLHF, which is vanilla preference-based reward learning (Christiano et al., 2017; Brown
    1
      To minimize the bias of this set on representation learning, we construct Ξ̃ such that the reward distribution
of this set under r∗ , is approximately uniform. Future work should investigate the impact of this set further,
e.g., (Sadigh et al., 2017).


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                           GT   RAPL   RLHF    TCC
                      Avoiding                                                                                            Grouping
                                                                (A)                     (B)
 never makes progress



                                                    Disliked                                                 Disliked      never makes progress


                                                                (C)                     (D)


                  enters user's "off limits" area                                                                        only pushes one target
                                                    Disliked                                                 Disliked



                                                                (E)                      (F)



                                                    Preferred                                                Preferred             pushes two objects together
 achieves task w/o entering "off limits" area


Figure 3: X-Magical. (left & right) examples of preferred and disliked videos for each task. (center)
reward associated with each video under each method. RAPL’s predicted reward follows the GT
pattern: low reward when the behavior are disliked and high reward when the behavior are preferred.
RLHF and TCC assign high reward to disliked behavior (e.g., (D)).

                                                      Avoiding                                             Grouping


                                                                      GT        RAPL     RLHF        TCC

Figure 4: X-Magical. Policy evaluation success rate during policy learning. Colored lines are the
mean and variance of the evaluation success rate. RAPL can match GT in the avoiding task and
outperforms baseline visual rewards in grouping task.
et al., 2019) that directly maps an image observation to a scalar reward, and (3) TCC (Zakka et al.,
2022; Kumar et al., 2023) which finetunes a pre-trained encoder via temporal cycle consistency
constraints using 500 task demonstrations and then uses L2 distance between the current image
embedding and the goal image embedding as reward. We use the same preference dataset with 150
triplets for training RLHF and RAPL.
Visual backbone. We use the same setup as in (Zakka et al., 2022) with the ResNet-18 backbone
pre-trained on ImageNet. The original classification head is replaced with a linear layer that outputs
a 32-dimensional vector as our embedding space, ΦR := R32 . The TCC representation model is
trained with 500 demonstrations using the code from (Zakka et al., 2022). Both RAPL and RLHF
only fine-tune the last linear layer. All representation models are frozen during policy learning.
Hypothesis. RAPL is better at capturing preferences beyond task progress compared to direct
reward prediction RLHF or TCC visual reward, yielding higher success rate.
Results. Figure 3 shows the rewards over time for three example video observations in the avoid
(left) and group task (right). Each video is marked as preferred by the end-user’s ground-truth
reward or disliked. Across all examples, RAPL’s rewards are highly correlated with the GT rewards:
when the behavior in the video is disliked, then reward is low; when the behavior is preferred, then
the reward is increasing. TCC’s reward is correlated with the robot making spatial progress (i.e., plot
(E) and (F) where observations get closer to looking like the goal image), but it incorrectly predicts
high reward when the robot makes spatial progress but violates the human’s preference ((C) and (D)
in Figure 3). RLHF performs comparably to RAPL, with slight suboptimality in scenarios (C) and
(D). Figure 4 shows the policy evaluation success rate during RL training with each reward function
(solid line is the mean, shaded area is the standard deviation, over 5 trials with different random
seeds.). Across all environments, RAPL performs comparably to GT (avoid success: ≈ 80%,
group success: ≈ 60%) and significantly outperforms all baselines with better sample efficiency,
RAPL takes 10 epochs to reach 70% success rate in the avoid task (GT requires 100) and takes 100
epochs to reach 40% success rate in the avoid task (GT requires 150), supporting our hypothesis.

                                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Reward of Preferred Demo                                             Optimal Transport Plan
                                                                    𝜙&'%(           𝜙 !""            𝜙#$%   1


                                                 Expert Demo


           Reward of Disliked Demo

                                               Preferred Demo


                                              Disliked Demo
                                                                                                            0

      GT     RAPL   RLHF   MVP-OT    TCC-OT



Figure 5: Manipulation. (center) Expert, preferred, and disliked video demo. (left) reward associ-
ated with each video under each method. RAPL’s predicted reward follows the GT pattern. RLHF
assigns high reward to disliked behavior. (right) OT coupling for each representation. Columns are
embedded frames of expert demo. Rows of top matrices are embedded frames of preferred demo;
rows of bottom matrices are embedded frames of disliked demo. Peaks exactly along the diagonal
indicate that the frames of the two videos are aligned in the latent space; uniform values in the ma-
trix indicate that the two videos cannot be aligned (i.e., all frames are equally “similar” to the next).
RAPL matches this structure: diagonal peaks for expert-and-preferred and uniform for expert-and-
disliked, while baselines show diffused values no matter the videos being compared.
5.2        ROBOT M ANIPULATION

In the X-Magical toy environment, RAPL outperformed progress-based visual rewards, but direct
preference-based reward prediction was a competitive baseline. Moving to the more realistic robot
manipulation environment, we want to 1) disentangle the benefit of our fine-tuned representation
from the optimal transport reward structure, and 2) understand if our method still outperforms direct
reward prediction in a more complex environment?
Task, Privileged State & Reward. We design a robot manipulation task in the IsaacGym physics
simulator (Makoviychuk et al., 2021). We replicate the tabletop grouping scenario, where a Franka
robot arm needs to learn that the end-user prefers objects be pushed efficiently together (instead
of one-at-a-time) to the goal region (light blue region in right of Figure 2). The state s is 18D:
robot proprioception (θjoints ∈ R10 ), 3D object positions (pobj1,2 ), and object distances to goal
(dgoal2obj1,2 ). The grouping reward is identical as in Section 5.1.
Baselines. In addition to comparing RAPL against (1) GT and (2) RLHF, we ablate the representa-
tion model but control the visual reward structure. We consider five additional baselines that all use
optimal transport-based reward but operate on different representations: (3) MVP-OT which learns
image representation via masked visual pre-training; (4) Fine-Tuned-MVP-OT, which fine-tunes
MVP representation using images from the task environment; (5) R3M-OT, which is a ResNet-18
encoder (Nair et al., 2022) pre-trained on the Ego4D data set (Grauman et al., 2022) via a learning
objective that combines time contrastive learning, video-language alignment, and a sparsity penalty;
(6): ImageNet-OT, which is a ResNet-18 encoder pre-trained on ImageNet; (7) TCC-OT (Dadashi
et al., 2021) which embeds images via the TCC representation trained with 500 task demonstrations.
We use the same preference dataset with 150 triplets for training RLHF and RAPL.
Visual model backbone. All methods except MVP-OT and Fine-Tuned-MVP-OT share the same
ResNet-18 visual backbone and have the same training setting as the one in the X-Magical experi-
ment. MVP-OT and Fine-Tuned-MVP-OT use a off-the-shelf visual transformer (Xiao et al., 2022)
pre-trained on the Ego4D data set (Grauman et al., 2022). All representation models are frozen
during robot policy learning.
Hypotheses. H1: RAPL’s higher success rate is driven by its aligned visual representation. H2:
RAPL outperforms RLHF with lower amounts of human preference queries.
Results: Reward prediction & policy learning. In the center of Figure 5 we show three video
demos: an expert video demonstration, a preferred video, and a disliked video. On the right of
Figure 5, we visualize the optimal transport plan comparing the expert video to the disliked and
preferred videos under visual representations ϕRAPL , ϕTCC-OT , ϕMVP-OT . Intuitively, peaks exactly


                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


along the diagonal indicate that the frames of the two videos are aligned in the latent space; uni-
form values in the matrix indicate that the two videos cannot be aligned (i.e., all frames are equally
“similar” to the next). RAPL’s representation induces precisely this structure: diagonal peaks when
comparing two preferred videos and uniform when comparing a preferred and disliked video. In-
terestingly, we see diffused peak regions in all transport plans under both TCC-OT and MVP-OT
representations, indicating their representations struggle to align preferred behaviors and disentan-
gle disliked behaviors. This is substantiated by the left of Figure 5, which shows the learned reward
over time of preferred video and disliked video. Across all examples, RAPL rewards are highly
correlated to GT rewards while baselines struggle to disambiguate, supporting H1. A more de-
tailed quantitative analysis on the relationship between the learned visual reward and the end-user’s
ground-truth reward is shown in Appendix A.8.
Figure 6 shows the policy evaluation history dur-
ing RL training with each reward function. We see
RAPL performs comparably to GT (succ. rate:
≈ 70%) while all baselines struggle to achieve a
success rate of more than 10%. It’s surprising that
RLHF fails in a more realistic environment since
its objective is similar to ours, but without explic-
itly considering representation alignment. To further
investigate this, we apply a linear probe on the final    GT     RAPL     RLHF    MVP-OT    TCC-OT
embedding and visualize the image heatmap of what         Fine-Tuned-MVP-OT   R3M-OT    ImageNet-OT
each method’s final embedding pays attention to in Figure 6: Manipulation. Success during
Figure 11 in the Appendix. RLHF is biased towards robot policy learning for each visual reward.
paying attention to irrelevant areas that can induce
spurious correlations; in contrast RAPL focuses on the task-relevant objects and the goal region.
Results: Sample complexity. We further study the sensitivity
of RAPL and RLHF to the preference query dataset size. For
RLHF, we double the preference query dataset during reward
model training to 300 queries (detailed in App. A.5). Pol-
icy performance is improved, indicating that with more feed-
back data, preference-based reward prediction could yield an
aligned policy. Nevertheless, RAPL outperforms RLHF by
75% with 50% less training data, supporting H2. While all the
RAPL results above used 150 preference queries to train the
representation, we also train a visual representation with 100,
50, and 25 preference queries. Figure 7 shows the success rate    Figure 7: Manipulation. RAPL
of the robot manipulation policy for each version of RAPL.        sample efficiency analysis. RAPL
We note that RAPL achieves a 45% success rate even when           can achieve ≈ 45% success rate
trained on only 25 preference queries.                            with only 25 preference queries.
Additional Complex Manipulation Task with Visual Distractors. Finally, we implemented a
more complex robot manipulation task to further validate RAPL’s ability to disentangle both seman-
tic and low-level visual features that underlie an end-user’s preferences under visual distractors. The
detailed task description and results are reported in Appendix A.7. We find that RAPL significantly
outperforms all baselines in this more complex manipulation and preference-learning task.

6   R ESULTS : Z ERO -S HOT G ENERALIZATION ACROSS E MBODIMENTS

So far, the preference feedback used for aligning the visual representation was given on videos o ∈ Ξ̃
generated on the same embodiment as that of the robot. However, in reality, the human could give
preference feedback on videos of a different embodiment than the specific robot’s. We investigate if
our approach can generalize to changes in the embodiment between the preference dataset S̃H and
the robot policy optimization.
Tasks & Baselines. We use the same setup for each environment as in Section 5.
Cross-Domain Agents. In X-Magical, reward functions are always trained on the short stick agent,
but the learning agent is a gripper in avoid and a medium stick in grouping task. In manipulation
we train RAPL and RLHF on videos of the Franka, but deploy the rewards on the Kuka robot.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Avoiding                                  Grouping


                                       GT    RAPL    RLHF     TCC

Figure 8: Cross-Embodiment: X-Magical. Policy evaluation success rate during policy learning.
Colored lines are the mean and variance of the evaluation success rate. RAPL achieves a comparable
success rate compared to GT with high learning efficiency, and outperforms RLHF and TCC.

Hypothesis. RAPL enables zero-shot cross-embodiment generalization of the visual reward com-
pared to other visual rewards.
Results. Figure 8 and Figure 9 show the policy evaluation histories during RL training with each re-
ward function in the cross-embodiment X-Magical environment and the manipulation environment.
We see that in all cross-embodiment scenarios, RAPL achieves a comparable success rate compared
to GT and significantly outperforms baselines which struggle to achieve more than zero success rate,
supporting H1. See more results in App. A.6.
We note an interesting finding in the X-Magical
grouping task when the representation is trained
on videos of the short stick agent, but the learn-
ing agent is the medium stick agent (see Fig-
ure 14 in Appendix). Because the short stick
agent is so small, it has a harder time keep-
ing the objects grouped together; in-domain re-
sults from Section 5 show a success rate of ≈
60% (see Figure 4). In theory, with a well-
specified reward, the task success rate should         GT     RAPL     RLHF   MVP-OT    TCC-OT
increase when the medium stick agent does the          Fine-Tuned-MVP-OT   R3M-OT   ImageNet-OT
task, since it is better suited to push objects to-
gether. Interestingly, when the short stick visual Figure 9: Cross-Embodiment: Manipulation.
representation is transferred zero-shot to the Colored lines are the mean and variance of the
medium stick, we see precisely this: RAPL’s success rate during policy learning.
task success rate improves by 33% under cross-
embodiment transfer (succ. rate ≈ 80%). This finding indicates that RAPL can learn task-relevant
features that can guide correct task execution even on a new embodiment.

7   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we presented a video-only, preference-based learning method for solving the visual
representation alignment problem. We demonstrated that with an aligned visual representation,
reward learning via optimal transport feature matching can generate successful robot behaviors with
high sample efficiency, and shows strong zero-shot generalization when the visual reward is learned
on a different embodiment than the robot’s.
Although in this work we focused on controlled simulation experiments, future work should validate
RAPL with real human feedback and robotic hardware experiments. Though our method shows bet-
ter sample efficiency than RLHF, asking humans for preference queries should be done strategically
(e.g., via active learning), should be robust to noisy feedback, and could be improved by leverag-
ing multi-modality (e.g., preferences & language feedback). While our current approach was an
offline fine-tuning method, future work onto online visual reward fine-tuning from human feedback
is an exciting direction. Finally, incorporating feedback from multiple humans (e.g., crowd-sourced
multimodal preferences) are also an exciting future direction.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1, 2004.
Erdem Biyik and Dorsa Sadigh. Batch active preference-based learning of reward functions. In
  Conference on robot learning, pp. 519–528. PMLR, 2018.
Andreea Bobu, Marius Wiggert, Claire Tomlin, and Anca D Dragan. Feature expansive reward learn-
  ing: Rethinking human input. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM/IEEE International Conference
  on Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 216–224, 2021.
Andreea Bobu, Yi Liu, Rohin Shah, Daniel S Brown, and Anca D Dragan. Sirl: Similarity-based
  implicit representation learning. International Conference on Human Robot Interaction, 2023a.
Andreea Bobu, Andi Peng, Pulkit Agrawal, Julie Shah, and Anca D Dragan. Aligning robot and
  human representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01928, 2023b.
Tyler Bonnen, Daniel LK Yamins, and Anthony D Wagner. When the ventral visual stream is not
  enough: A deep learning account of medial temporal lobe involvement in perception. Neuron,
  109(17):2755–2766, 2021.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Daniel Brown, Wonjoon Goo, Prabhat Nagarajan, and Scott Niekum. Extrapolating beyond sub-
  optimal demonstrations via inverse reinforcement learning from observations. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 783–792. PMLR, 2019.
Daniel Brown, Russell Coleman, Ravi Srinivasan, and Scott Niekum. Safe imitation learning via fast
  bayesian reward inference from preferences. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1165–1177. PMLR, 2020.
Kalesha Bullard, Sonia Chernova, and Andrea L Thomaz. Human-driven feature selection for a
  robotic agent learning classification tasks from demonstration. In 2018 IEEE International Con-
  ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 6923–6930. IEEE, 2018.
Frederick Callaway, Antonio Rangel, and Thomas L Griffiths. Fixation patterns in simple choice
  reflect optimal information sampling. PLoS computational biology, 17(3):e1008863, 2021.
Annie S Chen, Suraj Nair, and Chelsea Finn. Learning generalizable robotic reward functions from”
  in-the-wild” human videos. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2021.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Robert Dadashi, Léonard Hussenot, Matthieu Geist, and Olivier Pietquin. Primal wasserstein imita-
  tion learning. International Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.
Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Guided cost learning: Deep inverse optimal control
  via policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 49–58. PMLR,
  2016.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Gird-
  har, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995–19012, 2022.
Irmak Guzey, Yinlong Dai, Ben Evans, Soumith Chintala, and Lerrel Pinto. See to touch: Learning
  tactile dexterity through visual incentives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12300, 2023.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Siddhant Haldar, Vaibhav Mathur, Denis Yarats, and Lerrel Pinto. Watch and match: Supercharg-
  ing imitation with regularized optimal transport. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 32–43.
  PMLR, 2023a.
Siddhant Haldar, Jyothish Pari, Anant Rai, and Lerrel Pinto. Teach a robot to fish: Versatile imitation
  from one minute of demonstrations. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2023b.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Kevin G Jamieson and Robert D Nowak. Low-dimensional embedding using adaptively selected or-
  dinal data. In 2011 49th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing
  (Allerton), pp. 1077–1084. IEEE, 2011.
Leonid Vasilevich Kantorovich and SG Rubinshtein. On a space of totally additive functions. Vestnik
  of the St. Petersburg University: Mathematics, 13(7):52–59, 1958.
Siddharth Karamcheti, Suraj Nair, Annie S Chen, Thomas Kollar, Chelsea Finn, Dorsa Sadigh,
  and Percy Liang. Language-driven representation learning for robotics. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12766, 2023.
Sydney M Katz, Amir Maleki, Erdem Bıyık, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. Preference-based learning
  of reward function features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.02727, 2021.
Sateesh Kumar, Jonathan Zamora, Nicklas Hansen, Rishabh Jangir, and Xiaolong Wang. Graph
  inverse reinforcement learning from diverse videos. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 55–
  66. PMLR, 2023.
Sergey Levine, Zoran Popovic, and Vladlen Koltun. Nonlinear inverse reinforcement learn-
  ing with gaussian processes. In J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett, F. Pereira, and K.Q.
  Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 24. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2011. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2011/file/c51ce410c124a10e0db5e4b97fc2af39-Paper.pdf.
Yicheng Luo, zhengyao jiang, Samuel Cohen, Edward Grefenstette, and Marc Peter Deisen-
  roth. Optimal transport for offline imitation learning. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  MhuFzFsrfvH.
Hoai Luu-Duc and Jun Miura. An incremental feature set refinement in a programming by demon-
  stration scenario. In 2019 IEEE 4th International Conference on Advanced Robotics and Mecha-
  tronics (ICARM), pp. 372–377. IEEE, 2019.
Yecheng Jason Ma, Shagun Sodhani, Dinesh Jayaraman, Osbert Bastani, Vikash Kumar, and Amy
  Zhang. Vip: Towards universal visual reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training.
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance
  gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A univer-
  sal visual representation for robot manipulation. Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
Georgios Papagiannis and Yunpeng Li. Imitation learning with sinkhorn distances. In Joint Eu-
  ropean Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 116–131.
  Springer, 2022.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gabriel Peyré, Marco Cuturi, et al. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data
  science. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.
Dorsa Sadigh, Anca D Dragan, Shankar Sastry, and Sanjit A Seshia. Active preference-based learn-
  ing of reward functions. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2017.
Pierre Sermanet, Kelvin Xu, and Sergey Levine. Unsupervised perceptual rewards for imitation
  learning. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2016.
Lin Shao, Toki Migimatsu, Qiang Zhang, Karen Yang, and Jeannette Bohg. Concept2Robot:
  Learning manipulation concepts from instructions and human demonstrations. In Proceedings
  of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2020.
Daniel Shin, Anca D Dragan, and Daniel S Brown. Benchmarks and algorithms for offline
  preference-based reward learning. Transactions on Machine Learning, 2023.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Ilia Sucholutsky and Thomas L Griffiths. Alignment with human representations supports robust
   few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11990, 2023.
Wen Sun, Anirudh Vemula, Byron Boots, and Drew Bagnell. Provably efficient imitation learning
 from observation alone. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6036–6045. PMLR,
 2019.
Gokul Swamy, Sanjiban Choudhury, J Andrew Bagnell, and Steven Wu. Of moments and match-
  ing: A game-theoretic framework for closing the imitation gap. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 10022–10032. PMLR, 2021.
Ajay Kumar Tanwani, Pierre Sermanet, Andy Yan, Raghav Anand, Mariano Phielipp, and Ken
  Goldberg. Motion2vec: Semi-supervised representation learning from surgical videos. In 2020
  IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2174–2181. IEEE, 2020.
Jeremy Tien, Jerry Zhi-Yang He, Zackory Erickson, Anca D Dragan, and Daniel S Brown. Causal
   confusion and reward misidentification in preference-based reward learning. International Con-
   ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Christian Wirth, Riad Akrour, Gerhard Neumann, Johannes Fürnkranz, et al. A survey of preference-
  based reinforcement learning methods. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(136):1–46,
  2017.
Huang Xiao, Michael Herman, Joerg Wagner, Sebastian Ziesche, Jalal Etesami, and Thai Hong
  Linh. Wasserstein adversarial imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08113, 2019.
Tete Xiao, Ilija Radosavovic, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Masked visual pre-training for
  motor control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06173, 2022.
Chenfeng Xu, Bichen Wu, Zining Wang, Wei Zhan, Peter Vajda, Kurt Keutzer, and Masayoshi
  Tomizuka. Squeezesegv3: Spatially-adaptive convolution for efficient point-cloud segmentation.
  In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
  Proceedings, Part XXVIII 16, pp. 1–19. Springer, 2020.
Chenfeng Xu, Shijia Yang, Tomer Galanti, Bichen Wu, Xiangyu Yue, Bohan Zhai, Wei Zhan, Peter
  Vajda, Kurt Keutzer, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Image2point: 3d point-cloud understanding with
  2d image pretrained models. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 638–656. Springer,
  2022.
Kevin Zakka, Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Jeannette Bohg, and Debidatta
  Dwibedi. Xirl: Cross-embodiment inverse reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, pp. 537–546. PMLR, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amy Zhang, Rowan McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning invari-
 ant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2020.
David Zhang, Micah Carroll, Andreea Bobu, and Anca Dragan. Time-efficient reward learning via
  visually assisted cluster ranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00169, 2022.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   M OTIVATING QUESTIONS

Inspired by the appendix of (Karamcheti et al., 2023), in this section, we list some motivating ques-
tions that may arise from reading the main paper.
Q1. The experiments all consider preferences beyond task progress. If the end-user’s preference
is only progress, can RAPL achieve comparable performance compared to the SOTA TCC-based
visual reward (Zakka et al., 2022)?
To investigate this, we return to the X-Magical group-               RAPL   TCC
ing task (middle plots in Figure 2) where a short stick
robot needs to push two objects to goal. We removed the
grouping preference so the ground truth task reward is
consistent with the original benchmark in (Zakka et al.,
2022). We trained RAPL with 150 preference queries
and compare it with the TCC reward model trained us-
ing 500 demonstrations. In Figure 10, we show the pol-
icy evaluation success rate during policy learning. We see Figure 10: X-Magical. Progress-only
that RAPL has comparable final success rate compared to reward success rate.
TCC and has a more stable policy training, showing that it can learn a superset of preferences when
compared to TCC.
Q2. What makes RAPL different from prior robot learning works that use optimal transport (OT)
based visual rewards?
Indeed, OT-based visual rewards have become increasingly popular for learning robot manipulation
(Haldar et al., 2023b;a; Guzey et al., 2023). However, key to making the OT-based visual reward
successful in Haldar et al. (2023b) is fine-tuning the representation model via behavior cloning tasks.
This helps the model to capture some task-relevant information at the cost of requiring action labels.
Furthermore, by relying on action labels, it is unclear if the learned reward can generalize to a
different embodiment. Instead, our approach learns the representation only using preference queries
(no action labels) and can generalize to embodiments.
Q3. Why do MVP-OT and TCC-OT achieve near 0 success rate in the robot manipulation experi-
ments in Figure 6 and Figure 9?
Recall that both MVP-OT and TCC-OT use optimal transport to match the embedding distribu-
tion of the robot and the expert, but they vary which visual representation they use to obtain the
embedding.
The MVP encoder is trained via masked autoencoding (He et al., 2022) to reconstruct heavily
masked video frames. As such, it captures representations amenable to per-pixel reconstruction.
Prior work (Karamcheti et al., 2023) has demonstrated that this representation struggles with higher-
level problems (e.g., language-based imitation). We hypothesize this is why MVP-OT struggles to
capture preference-relevant features and does not lead to aligned robot behaviors. Our results are
also consistent with the experiments in (Haldar et al., 2023b) where an OT-based visual reward with
a pre-trained MVP representation model gives near 0 success rate for manipulation tasks.
The TCC encoder is trained via temporal cycle-consistency constraints, and as such captures repre-
sentations that encode solely task progress (e.g., distance to the goal image). Such a representation
works well when goal reaching is the only preference of the end user. In our tabletop grouping task,
the end user cares about goal reaching, but they also prefer moving the two objects together to goal
region over moving the objects one-by-one. Thus if the robot happens to push one object towards the
goal during policy learning, TCC-OT will reward this behavior (since this image is getting “closer”
to the goal image) even though this is not preferred by the user.

A.2   E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

Visual robot rewards promise to capture task preferences directly from videos. Self-supervised
approaches leverage task progress inherent in video demonstrations to learn how “far” the robot


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is from completing the task (Zakka et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023) while other
approaches identify task segments and measure distance to these subgoals (Sermanet et al., 2016;
Tanwani et al., 2020; Shao et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). However, these approaches fail to model
preferences during task execution that go beyond progress (e.g., spatial regions to avoid during
movement). Fundamental work in IRL uses feature matching between the expert and the learner
in terms of the expected state visitation distribution to infer rewards (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ziebart
et al., 2008), and recent work in optimal transport has shown how to scale this matching to high
dimensional state spaces (Xiao et al., 2019; Dadashi et al., 2021; Papagiannis & Li, 2022; Luo et al.,
2023). However, key to making this matching work from high-dimensional visual input spaces is a
good visual embedding. Previous works used proxy tasks, such as behavior cloning (Haldar et al.,
2023a;b) or temporal cycle-consistency learning (Dadashi et al., 2021), to train the robot’s visual
representation. In contrast to prior works that rely on hard-to-obtain action labels or using only self-
supervised signal, we propose an OT-based visual reward that is trained purely on videos (no action
labels needed) that ranked by the end-user’s preferences.
Preference-based learning. While demonstrations have been the data of choice for reward learning
in the past, an increasingly popular approach is to use preference-based learning (Christiano et al.,
2017; Sadigh et al., 2017; Biyik & Sadigh, 2018; Wirth et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2019; Stiennon
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022; Shin et al., 2023). Here the human is asked to compare two (or more)
trajectories (or states), and then the robot infers a map from ranked trajectories to a scalar reward.
This feedback is often easier for people to give than kinesthetic teaching or fine-grained feedback
(Shin et al., 2023). At the same time, prior works and our experiments show that directly predicting
the reward from preference queries and high-dimensional input suffers from high sample inefficiency
and causal confusion (Bobu et al., 2023b; Tien et al., 2022). To mitigate this issue, (Brown et al.,
2020) augments multiple self-supervised objectives like inverse dynamics prediction or enforcing
temporal cycle-consistency with the preference learning loss, but this requires additional signals like
actions and the additional self-supervised objective may bias the learned rewards towards capturing
spurious correlations.
Representation alignment in robot learning. Representation alignment studies the agreement
between the representations of two learning agents. As robots will ultimately operate in service
of people, representation alignment is becoming increasingly important for robots to interpret the
world in the same way as we do. Previous work has leveraged user feedback, such as human-driven
feature selection (Bullard et al., 2018; Luu-Duc & Miura, 2019), interactive feature construction
(Bobu et al., 2021; Katz et al., 2021), or similarity-implicit representation learning (Bobu et al.,
2023a), to learn aligned representations for robot behavior learning. But they either operate on
a manually defined feature set or learning features in low-dimensional state space settings (e.g.,
positions). In the visual domain, (Zhang et al., 2020) uses a per-image reward signal to align the
image representation with the preferences encoded in the reward signal; however, when the main
objective is learning the human’s reward then assuming a priori access to such a reward signal
is not feasible. Instead, our work utilizes human preference feedback to align the robot’s visual
representations with the end user and optimal transport as our embedding-based reward function.

A.3   O PTIMAL T RANSPORT BASED R EWARD

Setup. Let o = {ot }t=Tt=1 be a trajectory of observations, where T is the trajectory length. Let
D+ ⊂ SϕH be a dataset of preferred videos from the preference video dataset and DR be the set of
videos induced by a given robot policy πR . We denote ϕ : Rh,w,3 → Rne as an observation encoder
that maps a h × w RGB image to a ne dimensional embedding. For any video o, let the induced
                                              PT
empirical embedding distribution be ρ = T1 t=0 δϕR (ot ) , where δϕR (ot ) is a Dirac distribution
centered on ϕR (ot ).
Background. Optimal transport finds the optimal coupling µ∗ ∈ RT ×T that transports the robot
embedding distribution, ρR , of a robot video oR ∈ DR to the expert video embedding distribution,
ρ+ for o+ ∈ D+ , with minimal cost (as measured by a distance function, e.g. cosine distance). This
comes down to an optimization problem that minimizes the Wasserstein distance between the two
distributions:
                                             T XT
                                            X                     ′
                         µ∗ = arg min              c ϕ(otR ), ϕ(ot+ ) µt,t′ .                   (7)
                                µ∈M(ρR ,ρ+ ) t=1 t′ =1



                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where M(ρR , ρ+ ) = {µ ∈ RT ×T : µ1 = ρR , µT 1 = ρ+ } is the set of coupling matrices and
c : RnR × Rn+ → R is a cost function defined in the embedding space (e.g., cosine distance).
The optimal transport plan gives rise to the following reward signal that incentivizes the robot to
stay within the expert demonstration distribution by explicitly minimizing the distance between the
observation distribution and expert distribution:
                                              T
                                              X                          ′
                           r(otR ; ϕR ) = −           c ϕR (otR ), ϕR (ot+ ) µ∗t,t′ .              (8)
                                              t′ =1


Regularized optimal transport. Solving the above optimization in Equation 7 exactly is generally
intractable for high dimensional distributions. In practice, we solve a entropy regularized version
of the problem following the Sinkhorn algorithm (Peyré et al., 2019) which is amenable to fast
optimization:
                                       XT X T
                     µ∗ = arg min               c ϕ(otR ), ϕ(ot+ ) µt,t′ − ϵH(µ),

                                                                                                (9)
                           µ∈M(ρR ,ρ+ ) t=1 t′ =1

where H denotes the entropy term that regularizes the optimization and ϵ is the associated weight.
Choosing an o+ to match with πR . The reward (8) requires matching the robot to an expert
observation video. To choose this expert observation, we follow the approach from (Haldar et al.,
2023a). During policy optimization, given a robot’s trajectory’s observation oR induced by the robot
policy πR , we select the the “closest” expert demonstration o∗+ ∈ D+ to match the robot behavior
with. This demonstration selection happens via:
                                                         T
                                                       T X
                                                       X                           ′
                     o∗+ = arg min       min                        c ϕ(otR ), ϕ(ot+ ) µt,t′ .   (10)
                            o+∈D+ µ∈M(ρR ,ρ+ ) t=1
                                                            t′ =1


Figure 11: Manipulation: Attention Map. Visualization of attention map for RLHF-150 demos,
RLHF-300 demos, and RAPL with 150 demos for both Franka and Kuka (cross-embodiment) im-
ages. Each entry of the figure shows two image snapshots from the relevant demonstration set with
the attention map overlaid. Bright yellow areas indicate image patches that contribute most to the
final embedding; darker purple patches indicate less contribution. ϕRLHF −150 is biased towards
paying attention to irrelevant areas that can induce spurious correlations; in contrast RAPL learns to
focus on the task-relevant objects and the goal region. ϕRLHF −300 ’s attention is slightly shifted to
objects while still pays high attention to the robot embodiment.


A.4   ATTENTION M AP FOR RAPL AND RLHF

In Figure 11 we visualize the attention map with a novel use of linear permutation and kernel
inflation (Xu et al., 2022). Specifically, we use channel-averaged 2D feature map (i.e., activation
map) as our attention map (Xu et al., 2020). Different from previous works that operate 2D feature
maps, our approach utilizes a linear mapping W ∈ RCin ×Cout on a 1D feature, which is average-
pooled from a 2D feature F2D ∈ RCin ×H×W . Mathematically, the procedure can be formulated


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as                                                PH×W i
                                             WT × i   F2D
                                    F̂1D =                                                 (11)
                                                 H ×W
where F̂1D ∈ RCout ×1 is the aligned features from our proposed RAPL by W ∈ RCin ×Cout .
Inspired by Xu et al. (2022), we can inflate the 1D linear mapping W ∈ RCin ×Cout into 2D and
keep the kernel size as 1, i.e., W ∈ RCin ×Cout → Winf late ∈ RCin ×Cout ×1×1 . Then above
equation can be equally represented as
                                                             PH×W i
                                    T                         i    F̂2D
                          F̂2D = Winf  late × F 2D , F̂ 1D =                             (12)
                                                              H ×W
We average the F̂2D ∈ RCout ×H×W in channel dimension, and visualize the output as our attention
map. A visualization of the full process is shown in Figure 12.


Figure 12: Attention Map Visualization Method. (top) Visualization of our RAPL architecture.
(bottom) Visualization of our process for creating a 2D attention map.


A.5   A DDITIONAL RLHF RESULTS : A BLATION ON F EEDBACK DATASET S IZE

In Section 5.2, it’s surprising that RLHF fails to learn a
robot policy in a more realistic environment since its ob-
jective is similar to ours, but without explicitly consider-
ing representation alignment. To further investigate this,
we apply a linear probe on the final embedding and visu-
alize the image heatmap of what RAPL’s (our represen-
tation model trained with 150 training samples), RLHF-
150’s (RLHF trained with 150 samples), and RLHF-
300’s (RLHF trained with 300 samples samples) final
embedding pays attention to in Figure 11.
We see that ϕRAP L learns to focus on the objects, the
contact region, and the goal region while paying less at-
tention to the robot arm; ϕRLHF −150 is biased towards Figure 13: Manipulation. RAPL out-
paying attention to irrelevant areas that can induce spu- performs RLHF by 75% with 50% less
rious correlations (such as the robot arm and background training data.
area); ϕRLHF −300 ’s attention is slightly shifted to objects
while still pays high attention to the robot embodiment.
When deploying ϕRLHF −300 in Franka manipulation policy learning, we observe that policy per-
formance is slightly improved (indicating that with more feedback data, preference-based reward
prediction could yield to an aligned policy), but RAPL still outperforms RLHF by 75% with 50%
less training data, supporting the hypothesis: RAPL outperforms RLHF with lower amounts of
human preference queries.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6          A DDITIONAL C ROSS -E MBODIMENT R ESULTS : X-M AGICAL & K UKA M ANIPULATION

Figure 14 shows the rewards over time for the three cross-embodiment video observations (marked
as preferred by the end-user’s ground-truth reward or disliked) in the avoid (left) and group task
(right). Across all examples, RAPL ’s rewards are highly correlated with the GT rewards even
when deployed on a cross-embodiment robot.


                                                                                     GT   RAPL   RLHF      TCC
        Cross-Domain: Avoiding                                                                                            Cross-Domain: Grouping
                                                                    (A)                          (B)
                     never makes progress



 Disliked                                                                                                          Disliked      never makes progress

                                                                    (C)                          (D)


 Disliked               enters user's "off limits" area                                                                        only pushes one target
                                                                                                                   Disliked
                                                                     (E)                         (F)


 Preferred    achieves task w/o entering "off limits" area                                                         Preferred             pushes two objects together


Figure 14: Cross-Embodiment: X-Magical. RAPL can distinguish preferred and disliked videos
in the cross-embodiment setting.

Figure 15 shows the rewards over time for the two cross-embodiment video observations (marked as
preferred by the end- user’s ground-truth reward or disliked). Across all examples, RAPL ’s rewards
are highly correlated with the GT rewards even when deployed on a cross-embodiment robot.
Reward of Kuka Preferred Demo B                                                                  Cross-Embodiment: Optimal Transport Plan
                                                                                                       𝜙&'%(      𝜙 !""                 𝜙#$%              1


                                                             Franka Expert Demo A


 Reward of Kuka Disliked Demo C

                                                             Kuka Preferred Demo B


                                                             Kuka Disliked Demo C
                                                                                                                                                          0
       GT     RAPL       RLHF       MVP-OT        TCC-OT


Figure 15: Cross-Embodiment: Manipulation. (center) Expert video on Franka robot, preferred
video on Kuka, and disliked Kuka video demo. (left) Reward associated with each video under each
method. RAPL’s predicted reward generalizes to the Kuka robot and follows the GT pattern. (right)
OT plan for each representation. Columns are embedded frames of expert demo on Franka robot.
Rows of top matrices are embedded frames of preferred demo on Kuka; rows of bottom matrices
are embedded frames of disliked demo on Kuka. Peaks exactly along the diagonal indicate that the
frames of the two videos are aligned in the latent space; uniform values in the matrix indicate that
the two videos cannot be aligned (i.e., all frames are equally “similar” to the next). RAPL matches
this structure: diagonal peaks for expert-and-preferred and uniform for expert-and-disliked, while
baselines show diffused values no matter the videos being compared.


A.7          A DDITIONAL COMPLEX ROBOT MANIPULATION TASK WITH VISUAL DISTRACTORS

In this section, we consider a more complex robot manipulation task to further validate RAPL’s abil-
ity to disentangle visual features that underlie an end-user’s preferences. We increase the difficulty
of the the robot manipulation environment described in subsection 5.2 by adding visual distrac-
tors that are irrelevant to the human’s preferences (left figure in Figure 16). The environment has


                                                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                        GT     RAPL     RLHF     MVP-OT
                                                                         Fine-Tuned-MVP-OT     R3M-OT     ImageNet-OT



Figure 16: Clutter task: Complex robot manipulation with visual distractors. (left) Visualiza-
tion of preferences. Green (preferred behavior): the Franka arm grasps the green rectangular prism
and uses that to push the red rectangular prism to the goal region. Red (negative behavior): the
Franka arm fails to grasp the rectangular prism. (right) Policy training results for our method and
additional baselines.

multiple objects on the table of various colors—red, green, and goal-region-blue—and some of the
objects are cubes while others are rectangular prisms. The Franka robot arm needs to learn that the
end-user prefers to push the rectangular objects (instead of the cubes) efficiently together (instead
of one-at-a-time) to the goal region.
Task Complexity & Feature Entanglement. Compared to the manipulation task described in
subsection 5.2, the Franka arm needs to learn representations that can disentangle both semantic
preference (grouping) and low-level preference (shape) from RGB images under visual distractors
(object color). In addition, the Franka arm needs to learn to grasp the rectangular prism first and
use that to push the second rectangular prism, as it is difficult to directly push the rectangular prism
stably using the robot finger gripper, thus increasing the task difficulty.
Privileged State & Reward. The state s is 34D: robot proprioception (θjoints ∈ R10 ), 3D object po-
sitions (pobj1,2 , pobj1,...,4 ), and object distances to goal (dgoal2obj1,2 , dgoal2obj1,...,4 ). The simulated
             rect      cube                                              rect           cube
human’s reward is:
               ∗
              rgroup (s) = − max(dgoal2objrect,1 , dgoal2objrect,2 ) − ||pobj1rect − pobj2rect ||2
                                       4
                                       X
                               − 0.1         ||pobjicube − pobji,init ||2 .
                                                                 cube
                                       i=1

Baselines. In addition to comparing RAPL against (1) GT and (2) RLHF, we ablate the representa-
tion model but control the visual reward structure. We consider four additional baselines that all use
an optimal transport-based reward but operate on different representations: (3): MVP-OT which is
a off-the-shelf visual transformer (Xiao et al., 2022) pre-trained on the Ego4D data set (Grauman
et al., 2022) via masked visual pre-training; (4): Fine-Tuned-MVP-OT which fine-tunes MVP-OT
using images from the task environment via LoRA (Hu et al., 2021); (5): R3M-OT which is an off-
the-shelf ResNet-18 encoder (Nair et al., 2022) pre-trained on the Ego4D data set (Grauman et al.,
2022) via a learning objective that combines time contrastive learning, video-language alignment,
and a sparsity penalty; (6): ImageNet-OT which is an off-the-shelf ResNet-18 encoder pre-trined
on ImageNet. We use the same preference dataset with 150 triplets for training RLHF and RAPL.
Results. The right plot in Figure 16 shows the policy evaluation history during RL training with
each reward function. We see RAPL performs comparably to GT (succ. rate: ≈ 65%) while all
baselines struggle to achieve a success rate of more than ≈ 10% with the same number of epochs.

A.8    S PEARMAN ’ S CORRELATION BETWEEN GT AND LEARNED VISUAL REWARDS

In this section, we conduct a quantitative analysis to investigate the relationship between the learned
visual reward and the end-user’s ground-truth reward. Specifically, for each robot manipulation
task, we compute the average Spearman’s correlation coefficient between the learned visual reward


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the end-user’s ground-truth reward across 100 video trajectories. We can observe from Table 1
that our learned visual reward shows a stronger correlation to the end-user’s ground-truth reward
compared to baselines.

                                               Spearman’s Correlation
                Franka Group (Sec. 5.2)        Kuka Group (Sec. A.6)        Franka Clutter (Sec. A.7)
 RAPL                      0.59                          0.47                          0.61
 RLHF                      0.38                          0.31                          0.26
 MVP-OT                     -0.1                         0.02                          0.08
 Fine-                     0.19                          0.02                          0.11
 Tuned-
 MVP-OT
 ImageNet-                 -0.09                         0.12                          -0.02
 OT
 R3M-OT                    0.03                          -0.14                         -0.17

Table 1: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between the GT reward and each learned reward.


A.9    ROBOT M ANIPULATION : RLHF P ERCEIVED VS . T RUE S UCCESS

We investigated if the poor RLHF performance in Fig-
ure 6 can be attributed to poor RL optimization or to poor                     RLHF
visual reward structure. We compared the true success
rate of the RLHF policy (under the true human’s mea-
sure of success) to the “perceived” performance under the
RLHF reward. These results are visualized in Figure 17:
purple is the true success rate and black is the “perceived”
reward under the RLHF learned reward. We see that after
350 epochs, the RLHF learned reward perceives the pol-
icy as achieving a high reward. However, as shown in the
manuscript’s Figure 6 and in Figure 17, the true success         Figure 17: Manipulation. True success
rate is still near zero. This indicates that the RL optimiza-    rate of the RLHF policy (purple) versus
tion is capable of improving over time, but it is optimizing     the “perceived” performance under the
a poor reward signal that does not correlate with the true       RLHF reward (black).
measure of success.


                                                   20
