Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P LANNING WITH AN E NSEMBLE OF W ORLD M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Motion planning is of critical importance for safe navigation in complex urban
         environments. Historically, motion planners (MPs) have been evaluated using
         procedurally-generated simulators like CARLA. However, such synthetic bench-
         marks are not reflective of real-world multi-agent interactions. nuPlan, a recently
         released MP benchmark, addresses this limitation by augmenting real-world driv-
         ing logs with closed-loop simulation logic, effectively turning the fixed dataset
         into a reactive “gym” simulator. We evaluate the quality of nuPlan’s Default-Gym
         and find that it does not accurately reflect real-world human behavior, particularly
         for cities with unique driving behaviors (e.g., Boston drivers tend to be more ag-
         gressive than Pittsburgh drivers). Therefore, we propose city-specific gyms (e.g.,
         a Boston-Gym and Pittsburgh-Gym) to evaluate planning performance. Evaluat-
         ing a state-of-the-art planner with our proposed ensemble of gyms yields a drop in
         performance, suggesting that a good planner must adapt to different environments.
         Leveraging this insight, we present City-Driver, a model-predictive control (MPC)
         based planner that unrolls a city-specific world model that adapts to different driv-
         ing conditions. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that City-Driver achieves
         state-of-the-art results on the nuPlan benchmark, reducing test error from 6.4% to
         4.8%.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Motion planning (MP) is a critical component of the autonomy stack. Autonomous Vehicles (AVs)
must carefully plan their motion to navigate in complex urban environments to safely reach their
goal destination, avoid collisions, and abide by the rules of the road. Motion planners are typically
trained and evaluated in synthetic environments like CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017) and AirSim
(Shah et al., 2017). However, such simulated environments notoriously suffer from a sim-to-real
gap due to systematic biases and a lack of real-world diversity. Instead, we focus on the recent
nuPlan planning benchmark (Caesar et al., 2021), which makes use of real driving logs to create
environments for training and evaluation. Such data-driven simulation is a core enabling technology
in current autonomy stacks through the use of resimulation and log playback (Caesar et al., 2021).
We believe that such data-driven reactive benchmarks may represent a watershed moment in the
development of motion planners, provided that one can trust the world simulator.
Although nuPlan evaluates algorithms on ego-centric forecasting accuracy (defined as the C1 metric
(Caesar et al., 2021)) and motion planning in a non-reactive world (C2), our work focuses on mo-
tion planning in a reactive world (C3) as this most closely resembles real-world deployment. Recent
methods like PDM-C (Dauner et al., 2023) have dramatically improved planning performance in
reactive environments by combining model-predictive control (MPC) with classical planning algo-
rithms like the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) (Treiber et al., 2000).
To better understand PDM-C, we visualize its performance in nuPlan’s reactive simulator. Sur-
prisingly, we find that nuPlan’s default evaluation environment (which we refer to as the Default-
Gym, akin to simulation environments used in reinforcement learning) dramatically differs from the
recorded behavior of human drivers. Importantly, nuPlan’s Default-Gym endows agents with un-
realistic behaviors and unrealistically over-populates the drivable region (cf. Fig 2). As shown in
Figure 1, simulated agents have smaller distance to the ego-vehicle in the Default-Gym than in real-
world driving logs. This is the primary reason for the surprising fact that the ground-truth human
motion plan achieves only an accuracy of 93.12% under the Default-Gym, as reported in Dauner
et al. (2023).


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Real World Min-Gap            Default-Gym Min-Gap            City-Gym Min-Gap


 Proportion



                                     PIT                            PIT                           PIT
 Proportion


                                      SIN                           SIN                          SIN



                                       Minimum gap between agents [m]
Figure 1: Per-City Behavior Statistics. We compare the distance (min gap) between the ego-vehicle
and lead agent in PIT (Pittsburgh) and SIN (Singapore) using three different simulators. We plot the
real-world distribution on the left, Default-Gym in the center and city-specific gym on the right.
We find that the min-gap distribution in our proposed city-specific gyms closely model real-world
behavior statistics. In contrast, the Default-Gym has significantly different distribution.



This raises the question; how do we find the “right” simulator? We posit that a realistic simulator
should closely mimic recorded agent behavior when the ego-vehicle acts exactly as in the original
driving log. This suggests that human performance can be used as a metric for evaluating the quality
of a simulator. By optimizing agent behaviors for this metric, we can build a more realistic gym that
improves realism (as measured by human performance across the entire dataset). Moreover, we find
that optimizing within city-specific datasets further improves realism, allowing us to effectively build
city-specific gyms. For example, agents in our Boston-Gym drive more aggressively (compared to
Pittsburgh) by accelerating faster and maintaining a smaller gap to the lead vehicle.
Armed with our city-specific gyms, we can now evaluate the SOTA planners (such as PDM-C) across
an ensemble of gym environments. We notice a considerable drop in performance. Unsurprisingly,
PDM-C’s model of the world was tuned for the Default-Gym. Recall that MPC produces a motion
plan by internally unrolling a world model and optimizing for a plan that minimizes a cost function
in that world. One can improve accuracy by simply using the appropriate City-Gym when unrolling.
We refer to MPC-based planners that use City-Specific world models as City-Drivers. Intuitively,
a Boston-Driver should outperform the default PDM-C in the Boston-Gym. However, since the
nuPlan benchmark does not provide access to such city information, we learn a city classifier to
adaptively select PDM-C’s driver model based on city-specific driving characteristics. City-Driver,
our simple model-predictive control (MPC) based planner, achieves state-of-the-art results on the
nuPlan benchmark.
Contributions. We present three major contributions


              • We demonstrate that nuPlan’s Default-Gym does not accurately reflect real-world human
                behavior. We quantify the realism of C3 and propose city-specific alternatives.

              • We present City-Driver, an adaptive planner based on model-predictive control (MPC) that
                unrolls and executes city-specific driver models to safely navigate in diverse scenarios.

              • We conduct extensive experiments to ablate our design choices and demonstrate that our
                simple method achieves state-of-the-art results on the nuPlan benchmark.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    C2 (Human Driver Replay)               C3 (Default-Gym)               C4 (ReactiveReplay-Gym)


Figure 2: We visualize three simulation settings (Human Driver Replay, Default-Gym, and
ReactiveReplay-Gym). We visualize a driving log from PIT at timestep=45 (total=150 timesteps).
The ego vehicle is shown in Yellow, other agents are shown in Gray, and the road graph is shown
in Blue lines. We notice that the Default-Gym over-populates the scenario by projecting parked
cars onto the road graph. This significantly differs from the recorded agent behaviour (as seen in
the human driver replay). As a result, human planning performance drops in the Default-Gym (cf.
Table 3). We address this issue with our proposed ReactiveReplay-Gym, which allows agents to
follow their ground-truth trajectory while remaining reactive to other agents.


2   R ELATED W ORKS
Rule-Based Planning. Although recent work focuses on learning robust policies by predicting goal-
conditioned way-points, cost-volumes, and reward functions, rule based planners still outperform
learning-based approaches on real data (Dauner et al., 2023). Rule-based planners are well studied
(Stentz, 1994; LaValle & Kuffner Jr, 2001; Reeds & Shepp, 1990; González et al., 2015; Zhou et al.,
2022), and have been widely adopted due to their safety guarantees and interpretability (Thrun
et al., 2006; Bacha et al., 2008; Leonard et al., 2008; Urmson et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2015).
Given the current longitudinal position, velocity, and distance to the leading vehicle, rule-based
planners estimate longitudinal acceleration to safely progress towards the goal state. The Intelligent
Driver Model (IDM) (Treiber et al., 2000) is a classic non-learned algorithm for vehicle motion
planning that relies on graph-based search to reach a goal while employing a PID velocity controller
to avoid collisions with other vehicles. Dauner et al. (2023) extends the IDM by sampling multiple
trajectories and unrolling a world model to select an optimal trajectory with minimum cost (e.g. time
to collision). This improves collision avoidance without resulting in overly conservative motion
plans.
Trajectory Optimization. Motion planning is often framed as an optimization problem of a hand-
designed cost function, which is then minimized to generate the desired trajectory Buehler et al.
(2009); Montemerlo et al. (2008); Fan et al. (2018); Ziegler et al. (2014). To simplify this process,
cost functions assume a quadratic objective function or divide the planning task into its lateral and
longitudinal components. Approaches such as A* Ajanovic et al. (2018), RRT Karaman & Fraz-
zoli (2011), and dynamic programming Fan et al. (2018) are commonly used to search for optimal
solutions. Phan-Minh et al. (2020) generates a set of trajectories and evaluates them based on a
predefined cost, selecting the trajectory with the lowest cost. While these methods are attractive due
to their parallelizability, interpretability and functional guarantees, they are not robust when applied
to real-world driving scenarios and require significant effort to fine-tune.
Conventional trajectory optimization approaches typically aim to compute a complete trajectory that
spans from the initial configuration to the desired goal configuration. However, given the inherently
dynamic and uncertain nature of the driving environment, precise long-horizon motion plans cannot
be predicted in advance. Model-predictive control (MPC) has gained prominence in recent years for
real-time path planning (Rastelli et al., 2014; LaValle, 2006; Karaman & Frazzoli, 2010; Pongpun-
wattana & Rysdyk, 2004) because it adopts an iterative cost minimization strategy to select a locally
optimal trajectory for each timestep. This allows MPC-based algorithms to adapt to changes in the
environment.
Data-Driven Simulation. In recent years, many machine learning-based motion planners have
emerged, leveraging the availability of simulator environments like CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2017), AirSim (Shah et al., 2017), and others. However, current simulators are limited because they


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Evaluation Type                   Ego Simulation       Agent Simulation   Agent Path   Gym
 Log Replay (C1)                   Open loop            Open loop          GT           None
 Closed Loop (non-reactive) (C2)   Closed loop          Open loop          GT           None
 Closed Loop (reactive, C3)        Closed loop          Closed loop        Road graph   Default
 Closed Loop (reactive, C4)        Closed loop          Closed loop        GT           ReactiveReplay
Table 1: nuPlan Evaluation Setup. The nuPlan benchmark introduces three evaluation environ-
ments (C1, C2 and C3). Open loop evaluation implies the all agents (including the ego-vehicle)
follow their ground truth trajectory (e.g. world on rails). In contrast, closed loop evaluation means
the agents must plan and act in the simulated environment. Visualizing the Default-Gym reveals
that all agents (including parked cars) are projected onto the lane-graph leading to an overpoluated
drivable region. This dramatically differs from the human driver replay as shown in Figure 1 and
2. Therefore, we introduce the ReactiveReplay-Gym which allows agents to traverse along their GT
trajectory while also reacting to surrounding vehicles.


rely on synthetic data generated from video game engines and have insufficient visual fidelity. Im-
portantly, they lack the necessary diversity of driving scenarios required for comprehensive training
and evaluation. More recently, Montali et al. (2023) introduce the Waymo sim agents challenge
which evaluates simulators by comparing the accuracy of all agents against their ground-truth tra-
jectories. Furthermore, CommonRoad (Althoff et al., 2017) offers a driving dataset and a planning
benchmark with partially collected real-world data and partly hand-crafted.
In contrast, nuPlan (Caesar et al., 2021) augments real-world driving logs with closed-loop simula-
tion logic, effectively turning the fixed dataset into a reactive simulator. nuPlan has released 1300
hours of real world driving logs from various cities including Las Vegas, Boston, Pittsburgh, and
Singapore. Driving in each city presents its unique set of driving challenges. For example, Las Ve-
gas has many high density pick-up and drop-off locations, and intersections with 8 parallel driving
lanes per direction. In Boston, drivers tend to double park, creating distinct route challenges.


3   E VALUATION WITH A C ITY-S PECIFIC G YM

nuPlan (Caesar et al., 2021) evaluates motion planners using a data-driven reactive world model
(which we refer to as a Gym). Simulated agents are endowed with rule-based planning policies that
react to the ego-vehicle’s plan. In this section, we discuss the limitations of nuPlan’s Default-Gym
and describe our proposed modifications to improve realism of nuPlan’s reactive world model.
nuPlan Evaluates Motion Planners with Reactive Simulators. The nuPlan dataset releases 1300
hours of real-world driving logs. From these driving logs, nuPlan carefully curates thousands of
15-seconds clips to capture interesting scenarios (e.g. unprotected left turns). These driving logs
are used to evaluate both open-loop and closed-loop planning performance. nuPlan evaluates open-
loop performance with ego-centric forecasting accuracy (C1). nuPlan offers closed-loop simulation
with planning evaluation in a non-reactive world where all agents except the ego-vehicle replay their
ground-truth trajectory (C2), and planning evaluation in a reactive world (C3) where all agents react
to the ego-vehicle using rule-based planners (e.g. IDM (Treiber et al., 2000)). Our work focuses on
C3 since this most closely resembles real world deployment. The IDM planner used for all other
agents is initialized using hyperparameters (θi , ∀i ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}) for the target velocity, minimum
gap, headway time, maximum acceleration, and maximum deceleration. These parameters allow the
IDM to simulate realistic driving behavior.
Reactive Gyms are Realistic Simulators. Ideally, motion planners should be evaluated on real
vehicles in-the-wild. However, testing planning algorithms in densely populated areas (where most
challenging planning scenarios occur) is prohibitively dangerous. Therefore, we opt to use a data-
driven reactive simulator. We posit that reactive simulators are a good proxy for real-world driving
performance, provided that we can trust the simulated environment.
How Can We Quantify the Realism of a Gym? A realistic simulator should closely mimic
recorded agent behavior when the ego-vehicle acts exactly as in the original driving log. To quan-
tify the realism of a gym, we evaluate the performance of human drivers (using recorded logs) in
the given gym. To our surprise, the ground-truth human motion plan only achieves an accuracy of


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


93.12% in nuPlan’s Default-Gym (C3) as shown in Table 3. In Figure 2, we note that simulated
agent behaviours (subfigure b) are dramatically different from ground-truth agent behavior (subfig-
ure a). This is because all agents in nuPlan’s Default-Gym are snapped onto the road graph. Conse-
quently, this unrealistically overpopulates the road, leading to lower human driver performance.
Limitations of the Default-Gym. To address the above limitation of the Default-Gym (C3), we
allow simulated agents to traverse on the ground-truth trajectory without snapping to the road graph
(C4) as shown in Figure 2(c). Unsurprisingly, this improves the human performance to 93.52% (cf.
Table 3). However, there is still room for improvement.
Each City Needs Its Own Gym. We note that nuPlan’s Default-Gym uses a single world model
(defined by a single set of IDM hyperparameters θDEF ) that control agent behaviors across all cities
in the dataset. As a result, the evaluation protocol assumes that all agents behave similarly across
cities. However, we find that this assumption does not hold. As shown in Figure 3, Boston drivers
maintain a smaller gap to the leading vehicle when compared to Pittsburgh drivers, motivating the
need for city-specific gyms. We optimize agent behaviours (θCIT Y ) for each city using human
accuracy as our objective function,

                            θCIT Y = max M (H, W (θ0j , θ1j , θ2j , θ3j , θ4j ))                   (1)
                                        j∈S

where H is the human planner, W is the IDM-based world model and S is the set of all possible
parameters for θ. We optimize θCIT Y using grid-search over S. We tabulate the hyperparameters
for each city-specific gym in Table 4.
Using this ensemble of city-specific gyms, we can evaluate the performance of planners in a variety
of environments. In addition to simulating per-city driving characteristics, we can simulate out-
of-distribution behaviors. For example, we can simulate Boston-like driving behavior (using the
Boston-Gym) for driving logs collected in Pittsburgh.

4   P LANNING WITH A C ITY-S PECIFIC D RIVER

In this section, we provide relevant background on PDM-C (Dauner et al., 2023). Further, we discuss
how to leverage insights about city-specific gyms to improve MPC-based planners.
PDM-C is Actually An MPC-based Planner. PDM-C is a state-of-the-art rule-based planner that
improves upon the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM). Recall that the IDM is a car following model that
employs a simple longitudinal PID velocity controller along a given reference path. PDM-C converts
the IDM to an MPC-based planner by internally unrolling a world model and returning a plan that
minimizes a cost function over that world model. PDM-C generates a set of IDM path proposals by
modulating longitudinal velocities and lateral offsets to the reference path and scores each proposals
based on its internal world model. The path proposal with the highest score is executed. The scoring
function uses metrics similar to the Default-Gym (e.g. time to collision, ego progress to goal) while
a constant velocity forecast is used as the internal world model. We refer readers to Dauner et al.
(2023) for further details.
Improving PDM-C’s World Model. We evaluate PDM-C’s performance on the Default-Gym and
our proposed ensemble of city-specific gyms in Table 3 and Table 6. Unsurprisingly, we notice a
drop in performance from 93.61 to 92.90 in C3 and 93.02 to 91.83 in C4. We posit that because
PDM-C’s internal world model (which we refer to as a driver model) is a non-reactive, city-agnostic
constant velocity forecaster that is well-tuned for the Default-Gym. Instead of relying on a non-
reactive constant velocity world model, we can use a city-specific reactive world model (similar to
that used for evaluation in C3 or C4). Specifically, when evaluating PDM-C in the Boston-Gym, we
expect that using a Boston-Driver will improve planning performance. We find the optimal values
of the IDM hyperparameters (θCIT Y ) using Equation 1.
City Identification for Adaptive Planning. To accurately identify the right driver model to use with
PDM-C, we need city-level information. However, since the nuPlan benchmark does not provide
this information, we learn a classifier to identify the city from local maps. We use LaneNet (Caesar
et al., 2021) which is inspired by LaneGCN (Liang et al., 2020). LaneNet takes a vectorized road
graph of radius R around the ego-vehicle as input and predicts the city. The network consists of


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Models (Dauner et al., 2023)   City     C1 (Open Loop)     C2 (Non-Reactive)       C3 (Reactive)
    PDM-O                          All           80.01               77.70                79.36
    PDM-C                          All           67.23               94.49                93.61
    PDM-H                          All           79.50               94.49                93.61

Table 2: Baseline Performance. We show SoTA methods (PDM-O, PDM-C, PDM-H) achieve high
performance across C1, C2, C3 on the nuPlan test set. Note that PDM-C and PDM-H produces the
same accuracy for C3, since they both execute the same short-horizon plan. As such, we focus on
C3 accuracy since that evaluates planners in a true reactive world, provided that one can trust the
world simulator.

       Models                            City   C3 (Default-Gym)    C4 (ReactiveReplay-Gym)
       PDM-C (Dauner et al., 2023)        All          93.61                   93.02
       Human Replay Planner               All          93.12                   93.52

Table 3: Default-Gym vs ReactiveReplay-Gym. Recent SoTA methods (Dauner et al., 2023) have
dramatically improved performance by leveraging model predictive control (MPC) methods that
evaluate the goodness of potential actions by unrolling a world model. We also evaluate human
performance, but curiously find it underperforms SoTA for a reactive world (C3). We find the C3
simulator is unrealistic because it over-populates the drivable region (see Fig.2) and endows agents
with unrealistic behaviors. We build a better simulator (C4) by modifying these behavioral rules,
modestly improving human performance to 93.52. Table 5 presents even larger improvements for
city-specific simulators (Citi-Gyms), suggesting these are more realistic.


several multi-scale graph convolution modules followed by a fully connected layer to classify the
city. We use standard cross-entropy loss to learn this classifier. We get a classification accuracy of
96%. This allows us to employ the correct city-specific driver models in our MPC-based planner.

5     E XPERIMENTS
nuPlan Dataset. We perform all evaluation on the nuPlan MP benchmark (Caesar et al., 2021). The
dataset includes driving logs collected in Boston, Pittsburgh, Las Vegas and Singapore, and provides
around 10M scenarios, each 20-30 seconds long. nuPlan identifies 73 types of interesting sce-
narios e.g. {changing lane, starting left turn, unprotected right turn,
etc.}, but only evalutes 14 in the official benchmark.
Evaluation Setup and Metrics. As described in Section 3, the nuPlan benchmark provides three
evaluation settings: C1, C2 and C3. In addition, we propose C4, which we claim is more realistic.
We evaluate the above mentioned setups using metrics that broadly cover traffic rule violations,
human driving similarity, vehicle dynamics and progress towards the goal. The metrics used for
C1 are ADE and FDE. The metrics used for C2 and C3 are ego progress along expert trajectory,
speed limit compliance, driving direction compliance, time to collision within bounds, and ego is
comfortable. The overall score tabulated in Table 2- 8 is computed using a weighted average of the
above metrics. For more details about the metrics, please refer to (Caesar et al., 2021).
Implementation Details. We use the codebases of Dauner et al. (2023) and Caesar et al. (2021)
for this work. We modify PDM-C (Dauner et al., 2023) by adding additional longitudinal velocities
and lateral offsets to the reference path. In addition, we create additional proposals using hyper-
parameters such as min gap to lead agents, headway time, maximum acceleration and maximum
deceleration. In total, our planner generates around 150 proposals per timestep. We train our city
classification network for 20 epochs using Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014) with a learning
rate of 5e−5. We pick the radius R for the map data as 100.
ReactiveReplay-Gym More Closely Resembles the Real-World. We evaluate the human
driver (log) replay planner provided by nuPlan codebase. Human performance on our proposed
ReactiveReplay-Gym (which allows agents to follow their ground-truth trajectory and react to other
agents) outperforms the Default-Gym (which projects all cars to the road graph) by 0.4% as in Ta-


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 BOS


                                                                                                                    SIN

                                                                        Default


 PIT


                                                                                                                    PIT

                                                                            LAS


Figure 3: Agent Behaviours in Different Gyms. We visualize different agent behaviors (City-
Gyms) on three nuPlan scenarios in Pittsburgh. a) Left: Agents tailgate other vehicles more in
Boston than in Pittsburgh. This is due to the high acceleration and lower min gap of the BOS-
Gym compared to PIT-Gym (cf. Table 4). b) Center: Agents in LAS-Gym have a higher max
acceleration compared to agents in the Default-Gym. c) Right: Agents in SIN-Gym have a higher
max acceleration and high min gap in compared to PIT-Gym. We include videos of these scenarios
in the supplement.

 City              Target Vel. (θ0 )   Min Gap (θ1 )   Headway Time (θ2 )   Max Acceleration (θ3 )   Max Deceleration (θ4 )
 Default (θDEF )          10                1.0               1.5                    1.0                      2.0
 PIT (θP IT )             10                2.0               0.5                    1.5                      3.0
 BOS (θBOS )              10                1.0               1.5                    2.0                      3.5
 SIN (θSIN )              10                2.5               1.5                    2.0                      1.0
 LAS (θLAS )              10                1.0               0.5                    1.5                      0.5

Table 4: Optimizing City-Specific Gyms. We optimize per-city gyms (θCIT Y ) using the objec-
tive function in Equation 1. The City-Gym models (θCIT Y ) are optimized to mimic the recorded
behaviours of human drivers for that city such that the human ego-vehicle driver achieves high ac-
curacy. These parameters are also used for the City-Driver model.


ble 3. Moreover, we highlight unrealistic agent behaviours of C3 in Figure 2(b) compared to the log
replay in Figure 2(a). In contrast, we argue that C4 agents’ behaviour in Figure 2(c) matches the log
replay.
Insights from City-Specific Gyms. We compare the optimized hyperparameters of each city-
specific gyms (θCIT Y ) from Table 4. We present salient observations below:

        • Simulated agents in the Default-Gym drive less aggressively than real drivers in PIT and
          BOS. The Default-Gym has lower maximum acceleration and maximum deceleration com-
          pared to PIT and BOS.
        • Drivers in BOS and LAS tailgate other vehicles more aggressively (lower min gap) to PIT
          and SIN. We can also observe this phenomenon in Figure 3 between BOS and PIT on the
          left.
        • BOS seems to have the most aggressive drivers and LAS seems to have least aggressive
          ones, as defined by maximum acceleration and maximum deceleration.

Ensemble of City-Specific Gyms offers Simulator more Realism. As discussed in Section 3,
a simulator becomes realistic when the Gym mimics recorded behaviour of agents when the ego
vehicle is on world-on-rails. From Table 5, we note that ensemble of city-specific gyms (which we
call City-Gym) improves over the default-Gym by 0.97%.


                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Models                            City   Gym Models                C4
              Human (Log) Replay Planner        All    ReactiveReplay-Gym       93.52
                                                All    City-Gym                 94.49
Table 5: City-Specific Gyms Improve Simulation Realism. nuPlan evaluates performance in
a single world simulator (C3 with Default-Gym), which we show does not accurately capture
real-world agent behaviors (Human performance in the Default-Gym and real-world in Figure 1).
ReactiveReplay-Gym reactive logic is same as Default-Gym in C3. We create a more realistic world
simulator for each of the deployed cities (PIT, BOS, SIN and LAS), and interestingly, find different
agent behaviors are appropriate for different cities. Log replay (human) performance is better in
city-specific gyms. Additionally, we find that statistics computed from our city-specific world mod-
els match those computed from actual city data (Figure 1).


     Models     Driver Models        City    Gym Models      C3 (City-Gym)      C4 (City-Gym)
     PDM-C      Constant Velocity    PIT     PIT-Gym              90.26               89.84
                Constant Velocity    BOS     BOS-Gym              92.80               90.94
                Constant Velocity    SIN     SIN-Gym              93.58               93.55
                Constant Velocity    LAS     LAS-Gym              94.99               93.01
     Ours       PIT-Driver           PIT     PIT-Gym              92.21               91.10
                BOS-Driver           BOS     BOS-Gym              93.52               92.05
                SIN-Driver           SIN     SIN-Gym              94.26               94.87
                LAS-Driver           LAS     LAS-Gym              96.00               93.50
     PDM-C      Constant Velocity    All     City-Gym             92.90               91.83
     Ours       City-Driver          All     City-Gym             93.99               92.88
Table 6: City-Specific Driver Models. We show the performance of model-predictive control
(MPC) algorithms that unroll a (ego) world model. We specifically evaluate the performance of
different world models, including a default non-reactive world (where other agents move with con-
stant velocity, as in PDM-C (Dauner et al., 2023)) and various reactive worlds (including Pittsburgh-
Driver, Boston-Driver, etc.). We find that City-Driver models consistently improve in performance
over prior art across a variety of gym environments, by up to 1.8%.



PDM-C Baseline Performs Worse on City-Specific Gyms. In comparison to PDM-C baseline
performance on C3 and C4 with Default-Gym (as in Table 3), we notice a drop in performance of
0.71% and 1.19% on C3 and C4 when evaluated on ensemble of city-specific Gyms. As discussed
in Section 4, this can be attributed to the constant velocity driver model used by PDM-C which is
agnostic to city-level agent behaviours.
City-Driver Adapts to Different Driving Conditions. City-Driver is a MPC-based planner that
unrolls and executes based on a city-specific world model. It demonstrates an improvement of 1.09%
in C3 and 1.05% in C4 over the PDM-C baseline, when evaluated on an ensemble of City-Gyms
as tabulated in Table 6. This shows that city-specific reactive driver models yield better planning
performance compared to constant-velocity. For example, in order to avoid collisions in Boston, it
is important for the ego-vehicle to also drive aggressively.
City-Gyms Evaluate Planner Robustness. City-Gyms allow one to evaluate a planner on out-of-
distribution behaviors. Interestingly, one can endow the same recorded logs with agent behaviors
learned from different cities. For example, we can evaluate PIT-Driver on Pittsburgh driving logs,
but endow agents with Boston-like behaviors. We can evaluate the robustness of the motion planners
by noting the variance in performance across all gyms. PDM-C and our model achieve a variance
of 1.62 and 2.20 respectively. Our model has a higher variance because it is explicitly optimized
for PIT. In addition, we note that the PIT-Driver model performs competitively on BOS and SIN
while poorly on LAS. This can be due to a large mismatch in min gap and maximum deceleration
between the PIT-Driver and LAS-Gym as shown in Table 4. Future work can address this limitation
by optimizing the Driver models at the scenario or agent level.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Models                          Driver Models         City    Gym          C4 (City-Gym)
     PDM-C (Dauner et al., 2023)     Constant velocity     PIT     PIT-Gym              89.84
                                     Constant Velocity     PIT     BOS-Gym              91.18
                                     Constant Velocity     PIT     SIN-Gym              91.73
                                     Constant Velocity     PIT     LAS-Gym              88.92
     Ours                            PIT-Driver            PIT     PIT-Gym              91.10
                                     PIT-Driver            PIT     BOS-Gym              90.77
                                     PIT-Driver            PIT     SIN-Gym              91.82
                                     PIT-Driver            PIT     LAS-Gym              88.39
Table 7: Robustness Evaluation. To robustly evaluate planners, we advocate a strategy where
given planners are evaluated against different agent behaviors, such as city-specific gyms (PIT-Gym,
BOS-Gym, etc.) for each city. The variance of PDM-C and our model are 1.62 and 2.2 respectively,
indicating that our model is less robust compared to PDM-C since it is explicitly optimized for PIT.
This limitation can be addressed by optimizing the Driver models for each scenario or agent.

                Models     Driver models        City   C2 (Default)      C3 (Default)
                PDM-C      Constant Velocity    All        94.49            93.61
                Ours       City-Driver          All        94.97            95.13
                Human      NA                   All         97.6            93.12
Table 8: nuPlan benchmark results. Planners are evaluated on the nuPlan test set on C2 and C3
metrics. Importantly, our City-Driver models dramatically improve over prior art on the default
nuPlan benchmark, reducing error from 6.4% to 4.8%. The online benchmark test set was not active
at the time of the paper submission. We attach additional visuals comparing our planner to PDM-C
in the supplement.


City-Driver Achieves SoTA Performance. We evaluate our proposed MPC-based planner with
city-specific driver models on C2 and C3 metrics in nuPlan benchmark. To ensure parity with
prior work, we use nuPlan’s Default-Gym. City-Driver outperforms PDM-C by 0.48% and 1.52%
in C2 and C3 respectively. We can infer that city-specific MPC-based planners which adapt to
agent behaviours can perform well on planning benchmarks. Future work can naturally extend our
city-level gym and driver models to optimize for particular scenarios and individual agents, further
improving simulator realism and pushing ahead planning benchmarks.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we evaluate the quality of nuPlan’s simulator and find that it does not accurately
reflect real-world human behavior. We propose alternate city-specific reactive world models to
evaluate planning performance and demonstrate that these simulated environments more closely
match log-replay. Lastly, we present City-Driver, an MPC-based planner that unrolls and executes
a city-specific world model that adapts to different driving conditions and achieves state-of-the-art
performance on the nuPlan closed-loop reactive benchmark.
Limitations. Since we use the IDM’s PID controller in both our gym and driver models, we inherit
the PID’s flaws. We note that the IDM can be too conservative (when it mistakes the parked vehicle
as lead vehicle and stops) or too aggressive (when traveling at high speeds along a curved road.
Secondly, the IDM does not interact with other agents except the lead vehicle. Therefore, this
may lead to lateral collisions as the PID controller only provides longitudinal velocity control. The
IDM parameters are optimized at the city level performance on the humans and not at agent level.
Hence, these set of parameters can simulate scenario where the agents can collide (For eg. min gap
parameter as 0.5m or 1m and we have a long vehicle like truck as lead agent to the ego).
Future Work. Although we primarily focus on building city-specific gyms and driver models using
the IDM, learning-based approaches can potentially yield better results. The human performance
on our proposed City-Gyms is still only 94.49%. This shows that simulator realism can be further
improved by optimizing our proposed metric per-agent.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Zlatan Ajanovic, Bakir Lacevic, Barys Shyrokau, Michael Stolz, and Martin Horn. Search-based
  optimal motion planning for automated driving. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
  Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 4523–4530. IEEE, 2018.

Matthias Althoff, Markus Koschi, and Stefanie Manzinger. Commonroad: Composable benchmarks
 for motion planning on roads. In 2017 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp. 719–726,
 2017. doi: 10.1109/IVS.2017.7995802.

Andrew Bacha, Cheryl Bauman, Ruel Faruque, Michael Fleming, Chris Terwelp, Charles Reinholtz,
  Dennis Hong, Al Wicks, Thomas Alberi, David Anderson, et al. Odin: Team victortango’s entry
  in the darpa urban challenge. Journal of field Robotics, 25(8):467–492, 2008.

Martin Buehler, Karl Iagnemma, and Sanjiv Singh. The DARPA Urban Challenge: Autonomous
 Vehicles in City Traffic. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 1st edition, 2009. ISBN
 3642039901.

Holger Caesar, Juraj Kabzan, Kok Seang Tan, Whye Kit Fong, Eric Wolff, Alex Lang, Luke Fletcher,
  Oscar Beijbom, and Sammy Omari. nuplan: A closed-loop ml-based planning benchmark for
  autonomous vehicles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11810, 2021.

Chenyi Chen, Ari Seff, Alain Kornhauser, and Jianxiong Xiao. Deepdriving: Learning affordance
  for direct perception in autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 2722–2730, 2015.

Daniel Dauner, Marcel Hallgarten, Andreas Geiger, and Kashyap Chitta. Parting with misconcep-
  tions about learning-based vehicle motion planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07962, 2023.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla: An
  open urban driving simulator. CoRL, 2017.

Haoyang Fan, Fan Zhu, Changchun Liu, Liangliang Zhang, Li Zhuang, Dong Li, Weicheng Zhu,
  Jiangtao Hu, Hongye Li, and Qi Kong. Baidu apollo em motion planner. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1807.08048, 2018.

David González, Joshué Pérez, Vicente Milanés, and Fawzi Nashashibi. A review of motion plan-
  ning techniques for automated vehicles. IEEE Transactions on intelligent transportation systems,
  17(4):1135–1145, 2015.

Sertac Karaman and Emilio Frazzoli. Incremental sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion
  planning. Robotics Science and Systems VI, 104(2):267–274, 2010.

Sertac Karaman and Emilio Frazzoli. Sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion planning. The
  international journal of robotics research, 30(7):846–894, 2011.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Steven M LaValle. Planning algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2006.

Steven M LaValle and James J Kuffner Jr. Randomized kinodynamic planning. The international
  journal of robotics research, 20(5):378–400, 2001.

John Leonard, Jonathan How, Seth Teller, Mitch Berger, Stefan Campbell, Gaston Fiore, Luke
  Fletcher, Emilio Frazzoli, Albert Huang, Sertac Karaman, et al. A perception-driven autonomous
  urban vehicle. Journal of Field Robotics, 25(10):727–774, 2008.

Ming Liang, Bin Yang, Rui Hu, Yun Chen, Renjie Liao, Song Feng, and Raquel Urtasun. Learn-
 ing lane graph representations for motion forecasting. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th
 European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 16, pp. 541–556.
 Springer, 2020.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nico Montali, John Lambert, Paul Mougin, Alex Kuefler, Nick Rhinehart, Michelle Li, Cole Gulino,
  Tristan Emrich, Zoey Yang, Shimon Whiteson, et al. The waymo open sim agents challenge.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12032, 2023.
Michael Montemerlo, Jan Becker, Suhrid Bhat, Hendrik Dahlkamp, Dmitri Dolgov, Scott Ettinger,
 Dirk Haehnel, Tim Hilden, Gabe Hoffmann, Burkhard Huhnke, Doug Johnston, Stefan Klumpp,
 Dirk Langer, Anthony Levandowski, Jesse Levinson, Julien Marcil, David Orenstein, Johannes
 Paefgen, Isaac Penny, Anna Petrovskaya, Mike Pflueger, Ganymed Stanek, David Stavens, An-
 tone Vogt, and Sebastian Thrun. Junior: The stanford entry in the urban challenge. J. Field Robot.,
 25(9):569–597, sep 2008. ISSN 1556-4959.
Tung Phan-Minh, Elena Corina Grigore, Freddy A Boulton, Oscar Beijbom, and Eric M Wolff.
  Covernet: Multimodal behavior prediction using trajectory sets. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14074–14083, 2020.
Anawat Pongpunwattana and Rolf Rysdyk. Real-time planning for multiple autonomous vehicles in
  dynamic uncertain environments. Journal of Aerospace Computing, Information, and Communi-
  cation, 1(12):580–604, 2004.
Joshue Perez Rastelli, Ray Lattarulo, and Fawzi Nashashibi. Dynamic trajectory generation using
  continuous-curvature algorithms for door to door assistance vehicles. In 2014 IEEE Intelligent
  Vehicles Symposium Proceedings, pp. 510–515. IEEE, 2014.
James Reeds and Lawrence Shepp. Optimal paths for a car that goes both forwards and backwards.
  Pacific journal of mathematics, 145(2):367–393, 1990.
Shital Shah, Debadeepta Dey, Chris Lovett, and Ashish Kapoor. Airsim: High-fidelity visual and
  physical simulation for autonomous vehicles. In Field and Service Robotics, 2017. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1705.05065.
Anthony Stentz. Optimal and efficient path planning for partially-known environments. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 1994 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation, pp. 3310–3317.
  IEEE, 1994.
Sebastian Thrun, Mike Montemerlo, Hendrik Dahlkamp, David Stavens, Andrei Aron, James
  Diebel, Philip Fong, John Gale, Morgan Halpenny, Gabriel Hoffmann, et al. Stanley: The robot
  that won the darpa grand challenge. Journal of field Robotics, 23(9):661–692, 2006.
Martin Treiber, Ansgar Hennecke, and Dirk Helbing. Congested traffic states in empirical observa-
 tions and microscopic simulations. Physical review E, 62(2):1805, 2000.
Chris Urmson, Joshua Anhalt, Drew Bagnell, Christopher Baker, Robert Bittner, MN Clark, John
  Dolan, Dave Duggins, Tugrul Galatali, Chris Geyer, et al. Autonomous driving in urban environ-
  ments: Boss and the urban challenge. Journal of field Robotics, 25(8):425–466, 2008.
Chengmin Zhou, Bingding Huang, and Pasi Fränti. A review of motion planning algorithms for
  intelligent robots. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 33(2):387–424, 2022.
Julius Ziegler, Philipp Bender, Thao Dang, and Christoph Stiller. Trajectory planning for bertha
  — a local, continuous method. In 2014 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium Proceedings, pp.
  450–457, 2014. doi: 10.1109/IVS.2014.6856581.


                                                11
