Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F EW-S HOT D ETECTION OF M ACHINE -G ENERATED
T EXT USING S TYLE R EPRESENTATIONS
 Rafael Rivera Soto1,3,† , Kailin Koch1 , Aleem Khan3 ,
 Barry Chen1 , Marcus Bishop2 , Nicholas Andrews3,†
 1
   Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
 2
   U.S. Department of Defense 3 Johns Hopkins University



                                               A BSTRACT
            The advent of instruction-tuned language models that convincingly mimic human
            writing poses a significant risk of abuse. However, such abuse may be counteracted
            with the ability to detect whether a piece of text was composed by a language model
            rather than a human author. Some previous approaches to this problem have relied
            on supervised methods by training on corpora of confirmed human- and machine-
            written documents. Unfortunately, model under-specification poses an unavoidable
            challenge for neural network-based detectors, making them brittle in the face of data
            shifts, such as the release of newer language models producing still more fluent text
            than the models used to train the detectors. Other approaches require access to the
            models that may have generated a document in question, which is often impractical.
            In light of these challenges, we pursue a fundamentally different approach not
            relying on samples from language models of concern at training time. Instead, we
            propose to leverage representations of writing style estimated from human-authored
            text. Indeed, we find that features effective at distinguishing among human authors
            are also effective at distinguishing human from machine authors, including state-
            of-the-art large language models like Llama-2, ChatGPT, and GPT-4. Furthermore,
            given a handful of examples composed by each of several specific language models
            of interest, our approach affords the ability to predict which model generated a
            given document. The code and data to reproduce our experiments are available at
            https://github.com/LLNL/LUAR/tree/main/fewshot iclr2024.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Recent interest in large language models (LLM) has resulted in an explosion of LLM usage by a
wide variety of users. Although much of this usage may be well-intentioned and benign, a growing
concern is the usage of LLM for deception, such as for phishing attacks, disinformation, spam, and
plagiarism (Hazell, 2023; Weidinger et al., 2022).
To minimize the risk of abuse of commercial systems, one recently proposed recourse is for those
systems to employ statistical watermarking techniques (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023). Although wa-
termarking may help mitigate some unintended consequences of LLM adoption, the advent of
open-source LLM with performance approaching that of commercial LLM and achievable on com-
modity hardware raises the possibility of circumventing watermarking mechanisms to generate
harmful content, potentially at a large scale. Thus, watermarking fails to completely address the issue
of malicious content.
One reasonable recourse is to develop automatic detection approaches that attempt to predict whether
a given document was composed by an LLM rather than by a human author. To this end, a number of
methods have been proposed, such as OpenAI’s AI Detector (Solaiman et al., 2019). An obvious
drawback of classification methods, particularly those based on deep learning, is that the resulting
models are susceptible to shifts in data distribution between training and deployment time for a
variety of reasons, such as limited training data or the non-stationary of text (D’Amour et al.,
2022). Furthermore, prior work in machine-text detection has found that in order to achieve good
    †
        Corresponding authors: rafaelriverasoto@jhu.edu, noa@jhu.edu


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    gpt4                                                                                        gpt4
    llama2                                                                                      llama2
    chatgpt                                                                                     chatgpt
    human                                                                                       human


      (a) Semantic document embeddings                          (b) Stylistic document embeddings

Figure 1: UMAP projections (McInnes et al., 2018) of semantic or stylistic representations of
writing samples in the Reddit domain composed by human or machine authors. We use SBERT as a
representative dense semantic embedding (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) and UAR as a representative
stylistic representation (Rivera-Soto et al., 2021). Each point shown is the result of embedding a
document containing at most 128 subword tokens for a standard vocabulary of size 50K. Despite
using prompts designed to elicit a variety of writing styles from the LLM, the stylistic representation
separates human from machine authors and machine authors from one another significantly better
than the semantic representation.



performance from such a classifier, it is necessary to train the model with documents generated by the
specific LLM one wishes to detect (Zellers et al., 2019). As a result, such models need to be updated
whenever new LLM are introduced, something which could be both impractical and expensive in
light of the frequent release of ever-improving models.
Human writing is characterized by a wide variety of stylometric features. In this paper, we explore
the question of whether LLM exhibit consistent writing style across a range of prompts, particularly
when explicitly prompted to generate text mimicking specific styles. In order to make the notion of
writing style more concrete, we propose to employ representations of style learned from large corpora
of writing samples by human authors that aim to capture invariant features of authorship (Wegmann
et al., 2022; Rivera-Soto et al., 2021). Figure 1 illustrates that such representations do indeed separate
documents composed by human authors from those composed by LLM. Moreover, we also observe
that text generated by any particular LLM follows a style distinct from the styles of human authors
and also distinct from those of other LLM. Thus, writing style affords the ability to detect not only
that a given document was composed by an LLM, but also to predict which LLM generated it, given
only a few example documents composed by each of several LLM of concern. The proposed approach
may therefore reveal that specific LLM are being abused, something which increases transparency
and accountability for companies disseminating LLM without appropriate controls or safeguards.
In light of the unavoidable distribution shifts stemming from the introduction of new LLMs, topics,
and domains, this work focuses on the few-shot setting. Specifically, our evaluations assess the ability
to detect writing samples produced by LLM unseen at training time, and in some cases, drawn from
new domains and dealing with new topics. Our approach outperforms prominent few-shot learning
methods as well as standard zero-shot baselines and differs significantly from prior work in that we
do not require access to the predictive distribution of the unseen LLM, like Mitchell et al. (2023), or
a large number of samples from it, like Zellers et al. (2019), to effectively detect text generated by
these models.
We also explore factors leading to effective style representations for this task, finding that contrastive
training on large amounts of human-authored text is sufficient to obtain useful representations, but that
in certain few-shot settings, training on additional LLM-generated documents significantly improves
performance. Finally, we release the datasets we generated as part of this work, which include
documents generated by a variety of language models.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    R ELATED W ORK

Perhaps the most widely-applied machine-text detector is OpenAI’s AI Detector, which is intended to
predict whether a given document was human- or machine-generated (Solaiman et al., 2019). The
model was trained using documents generated by GPT-2 comprising one class and documents drawn
from the corpus used to train GPT-2 comprising the other class. OpenAI released a similar classifier
for detecting ChatGPT in January 2023. As of this writing, OpenAI has withdrawn the AI Detector,
citing its low rate of accuracy. Indeed, it is well-known that supervised detectors may overfit various
properties of their training data, such as specific decoding strategies (Ippolito et al., 2020).
By perturbing the output logits of an LLM and thereby its decoded text, a recent proposal known
as watermarking, one may effectively detect text generated by LLM in some settings. For example,
Kirchenbauer et al. (2023) encode a watermark in generated text by splitting a model’s vocabulary into
so-called red and green lists, encouraging tokens from the green list to be sampled during decoding
more frequently than tokens from the red list. Because this line of work requires direct access to
a model and its vocabulary, the approach is most relevant for models deployed by an organization
through an API (He et al., 2022). However, adversaries may decline to generate watermarked text, for
example, by using their own LLM, or remove the watermark from API-generated text, for example,
by paraphrasing, which has emerged as an effective mechanism to circumvent the detection of
watermarked text (Krishna et al., 2023). We conduct a study comparing the proposed approach to
watermarking in Appendix E.
Much of the recent work on detecting machine-generated text has focused on training a classifier
using datasets of human- and machine-generated text (Jawahar et al., 2020), requiring access to a
model’s predictive distribution for comparison with other distributions (Mitchell et al., 2023), or
directly using a model to detect its own outputs (Zellers et al., 2019). Other work has looked at
patterns of repetition typical of LLM to rank documents according to their likelihoods of being
machine-generated (Gallé et al., 2021). In other recent work, the reliability of machine-text detectors
in general has been questioned on theoretical grounds (Sadasivan et al., 2023). Zero-shot detection of
machine-generated text is also a difficult task for human discriminators. Indeed, Dugan et al. (2020)
demonstrated that human annotators had difficulty pinpointing changepoints between passages of
documents composed by humans and those composed by machines, while Maronikolakis et al. (2021)
find that automatic detectors can outperform humans in certain settings.
Given the limitations of discriminative classifiers at detecting machine-written documents, one might
wonder whether generative approaches would be more robust. Unfortunately, deep generative models
are also vulnerable to distribution shifts in general (Nalisnick et al., 2019), whereas effective machine-
generated text detectors must be robust to shifts in topic, domain, and sampling techniques relative
to those employed at training time. Our proposed approach addresses this concern by using learned
stylistic representations, which are trained to ignore features that evolve over time, such as topic and
domain, and focus on stylistic features that authors use more consistently (Rivera-Soto et al., 2021;
Wegmann et al., 2022).

3    M ETHODS

Detection regimes The experiments in this paper deal with both the supervised and few-shot
learning regimes. In the supervised setting, we avail of a training corpus consisting of human- and
machine-written documents. The goal is to estimate a score proportional to the likelihood that
a held-out document was generated by an LLM. In contrast with the few-shot setting described
below, here we assume that we have at least hundreds but preferably thousands or more examples
composed by a variety of language models. In practice the likelihood estimate is implemented by
fine-tuning an underlying, pre-trained feature representation. We consider two such representations
in this paper, namely semantic representations, where features are obtained by fine-tuning pre-trained
representations based on masked language models, and style representations, where features are
obtained by fine-tuning pre-trained style representations, which we discuss in more detail below.
All being well, the resulting classifier would generalize to various test conditions, including novel
language models, topics, and domains, a question we examine in Appendix A.
In the few-shot setting we assume that for each LLM of concern we have a support sample, which
consists of a small number of in-distribution documents composed by that model. For example,


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


upon recognizing by manual inspection that some of their students’ assignments exhibit telltale signs
of machine-generation, such as hallucination, an instructor could use those essays in question as
the support sample. Alternatively, the instructor might proactively prepare the support sample by
prompting various LLM themself. The goal in this setting is to estimate the likelihood that one of the
LLM in question generated a given document, and if so, a secondary objective is to predict which
model generated the document.

Style representations A primary component of our proposed approach to detecting machine-
generated text is the notion of a style representation, something we employ to help our detectors
overcome the challenges of generalization to new LLM, topics, and domains. We denote a style
representation generically by f , which is taken to be some auxiliary model mapping a handful of
documents x1 , x2 , . . . , xK to a fixed-dimensional vector f (x1 , x2 , . . . , xK ), the representation of
that document collection. The mapping f is fit such that f (x1 , x2 , . . . , xK ) and f (x′1 , x′2 , . . . , x′L )
have large cosine similarity if and only if the writing style of x1 , x2 , . . . , xK is similar to that of
x′1 , x′2 , . . . , x′L .
We observe that writing style often comes into focus only after observing a sufficiently-large writing
sample. For example, the repeated usage of a rare word may be discriminative of a particular
author, but observing repeated word usage typically requires observing more than a few sentences.
Indeed, our best results are obtained by passing longer spans of text to the model by combining style
representations of multiple short documents using a learned aggregation mechanism.
In light of the highly nuanced nature of writing style, learning generalizable style representations
requires large amounts of data. To this end, prior work has leveraged the availability of proxy
author labels available in the form of account names on various social media platforms, such
as blogs, microblogs, technical fora, and product reviews. In this paper, we focus on Reddit
posts, which provide writing samples from authors discussing a wide variety of topics in various
communities, which are known as subreddits. Furthermore, these topics cover diverse author interests
and backgrounds, resulting in a corpus representing diverse styles. Our datasets are described in more
detail in §4.1.

Training style representations One of the primary challenges in learning style representations is
to disentangle invariant features of writing, such as style, from features that vary over time, such as
topic. To achieve this, we employ the following contrastive training strategy. Assuming our training
dataset includes histories of each contributing author’s writing spanning several months or years,
we pair writing samples composed at different points in time by the same author to yield positive
examples, and pair writing samples by different authors to yield negative examples (Andrews and
Bishop, 2019). As a point of comparison, we additionally include results using style representations
estimated using the approach of Wegmann et al. (2022), which differs in two significant ways. First,
non-episodic training is used, meaning that features are computed of individual documents rather
than episodes of multiple documents. Second, the approach relies on topic annotations, namely the
subreddit feature, to construct hard positives by pairing writing samples composed by a single author
discussing different topics, and hard negatives by pairing samples composed by different authors
discussing similar topics.

Proposed few-shot method An author-specific style representation f admits a straightforward
mechanism for few-shot detection. Specifically, suppose x1 , x2 , . . . , xK is a handful of documents
known to have been generated by a particular language model of interest, where we regard a
document to be short span of text of around the length of a social media post. Specifically, unless
otherwise specified, all documents considered in this work have length around 128 tokens according
to a fixed tokenizer. Given a handful of new of documents x′1 , x′2 , . . . , x′L at inference time, we
compute the cosine similarity between f (x1 , x2 , . . . , xK ) and f (x′1 , x′2 , . . . , x′ L ) to obtain a score
monotonically related to the estimated likelihood that x′1 , x′2 , . . . , x′L were composed by the same
source as x1 , x2 , . . . , xK . The score may be further calibrated to yield a meaningful confidence
estimate, say, by using Platt Scaling (Platt et al., 1999). Otherwise these scores must be thresholded
to yield same-author predictions.
In our experiments we focus on UAR, a RoBERTa-based architecture trained with a supervised
contrastive objective according to the recipe described in Rivera-Soto et al. (2021). We use the
reference implementation accompanying that work. We observed in preliminary experiments that


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


increasing the number of human authors contributing to the dataset used to train UAR improves
performance on the authorship attribution task and improves generalization. Therefore, we train
UAR using a larger dataset than in prior work, namely a corpus of Reddit comments composed by
five million authors that we describe in §5. In addition to this instance of UAR, we also prepare the
following variations.
Multi-LLM variation In our first variation, we initialize the model weights of UAR to those of the
instance above trained on the comments of five million Reddit users. We continue training the model
using posts by human authors drawn from the r/politics or r/PoliticalDiscussion subreddits,
as well as posts to these subreddits generated by LLM. In §4.1 we discuss the generation procedure
and the motivation for controlling the topic by restricting to these two subreddits. Because training
UAR involves optimizing a contrastive objective on each pair of episodes drawn from the same
training batch, we ensure that half of the episodes in each batch originate from human authors and
half from LLM. In this setting we regard a language model as an author distinct from other members
of its LLM family. For example, GPT2-large is taken to be distinct from GPT2-xl.
Multi-domain variation Previous work has shown that including multiple domains during training
can improve the quality of style representations (Rivera-Soto et al., 2021). To this end, we prepare a
variation of UAR by augmenting the comments of five million Reddit users with data drawn from
Twitter and StackExchange, ensuring that each training batch contains contributions from all three
domains. See Table 3 of Appendix C for further statistics of this augmented dataset.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   DATASETS

We distinguish between two kinds of language models, namely amply available and cheap (AAC)
models, and models that users are likely to want to detect (LWD). We use documents generated
by AAC models to estimate or fine-tune the feature representations described in §3 and hold out
documents generated by LWD models for evaluation. This framework is intended to simulate the
emergence of new LLM with more powerful capabilities, including the ability to better mimic human
authorship.
To create the AAC dataset, we generate documents using readily available and computationally
inexpensive models, namely GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and OPT (Zhang et al., 2022). For GPT-2
we use the large and xl variants, which have 774M and 1.5B parameters respectively. For OPT we
use two variations that have 6.7B and 13B parameters respectively. We generate text using human-
generated posts to r/politics and r/PoliticalDiscussion as input prompts. By restricting to
subreddits dealing with politics, a topic that was chosen for the substantial number of documents
dealing with it, we aim to control for topic, thereby introducing an inductive bias encouraging
representations learned from this dataset to separate machine and human authors on the basis of
features unrelated to topic. All prompts contain at least 64 tokens according to the GPT-2 tokenizer.
We generate completions using a variety of parameters described in Table 4a of Appendix C. In total,
we consider 64 combinations of decoding strategy, decoding value, temperature parameter, subreddit
prompt source, and model size. After generating the completions, we truncate each document to
the last sentence boundary before the 128th token, where we identify sentence boundaries using
spaCy (Honnibal and Montani, 2017). Controlling for topic and length is intended to ensure that
models trained with this corpus cannot easily distinguish between documents generated by human or
machine authors by learning extraneous features, namely topic and length.
We evaluate our proposed detection approaches using the LWD dataset that we now describe, as
well as M4 (Wang et al., 2023), a recently-released dataset containing documents generated by
multiple LLM in five domains. We construct the LWD dataset by generating text with Llama-2,
GPT-4, and ChatGPT using prompts of the form write an Amazon review in the style of the
author of the following review: 〈human review〉, where 〈human review〉 is a real Amazon
review. Prior work has shown that LLM have some ability to reproduce styles provided through
in-context examples (Reif et al., 2022; Patel et al., 2023). Thus, our data generation procedure aims
to induce stylistic variety to the extent currently possibly by state-of-the-art LLM, with the goal of
increasing the difficulty of our benchmark. More details on the LWD and M4 datasets may be found
in Appendix C.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2     F EW- SHOT AND ZERO - SHOT DETECTION BASELINES

We compare our proposed few-shot approach to Prototypical Networks (Snell et al., 2017) and
MAML (Finn et al., 2017), both prepared using an underlying RoBERTa model and trained
with the AAC dataset described in §4.1 together with human-generated posts to r/politics and
r/PoliticalDiscussion, where each distinct LLM contributing to the AAC corpus is regarded
as a single author. To confirm that the controls for topic and length discussed in §4.1 are also
helpful for our baseline approaches, we report additional ablation experiments on these choices in
Appendix B. Next, we introduce variations of our proposed approach in which we replace the UAR
representation with alternative embeddings, namely SBERT (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019)1 and
CISR (Wegmann et al., 2022)2 , the latter being a further authorship representation that leverages hard
negatives and hard positives at training time. Additionally, we introduce several zero-shot baseline
models, including two versions of the OpenAI Detector (Solaiman et al., 2019), one off-the-shelf
and one that we train ourselves using the AAC corpus and Reddit politics posts. Finally, we include
detectors based on metrics derived from GPT2-xl likelihood predictions, including Rank (Gehrmann
et al., 2019), LogRank (Solaiman et al., 2019), and Entropy (Ippolito et al., 2020).

4.3     M ETRICS

We use the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve to assess detection performance as the
corresponding detection threshold varies. To summarize the ROC curve and compare different
methods across operating points, we report the standardized partial area under the ROC curve
restricted to the range of operating points corresponding with false alarm rates not exceeding 1%,
which we denote by pAUC in this work. This allows us to better compare high-performing systems,
noting that the proposed few-shot learning methods achieve nearly-perfect scores when calculating
the area under the entire ROC curve, even when supplied with very few examples generated by LLM
of concern. Another rationale for using pAUC is that readers worried that users may mistrust systems
that raise too many false alarms will be most interested in the range of operating points corresponding
with low false-alarm rates. This is intended to help readers arrive at operating points that minimize
time-consuming followup inspection. However, we conduct similar experiments in Appendix F using
smaller writing samples and for which we report additional metrics, including the usual AUC and
FPR@95. We calculate pAUC using the roc_auc_score function from scikit-learn (Pedregosa
et al., 2011) by specifying the parameter max_fpr=0.01.

4.4     S INGLE - TARGET MACHINE TEXT DETECTION

In the experiment reported in this section, we assume access to a small in-distribution writing
sample generated by a specific LLM of concern, such as ChatGPT. The objective is to identify further
writing samples generated by this same model from among the documents in a large collection. This
evaluation reflects the setting where one would like to perform targeted detection of a particular LLM.
For example, an instructor might like to be alerted to cases where their students may have used a
particular LLM as a writing assistant. In §4.5 we evaluate the same detection approach in the setting
where the task is to identify documents generated by any of multiple LLM.
We evaluate all detection approaches considered using the evaluation corpus described in §4.1,
which contains documents composed by human authors or LWD models in five domains, namely
the Amazon documents we prepared and the documents from M4 drawn from domains other than
Reddit, which serves as the primary training domain. All documents are grouped into episodes of
N documents by the same human or machine author for the desired value of N , each document
containing a maximum of 128 tokens and ending at a sentence bounadary.
We apply the following procedure for each detection approach considered and each desired value
of N . For each evaluation domain and each LLM contributing episodes in that domain, we take each
episode generated by that LLM in turn to serve as the support sample, with all remaining episodes
generated by that LLM and all human-generated evaluation episodes serving as queries. However, in
the case of the MAML approach we take only the first 20 episodes by the LLM to serve as support
samples due to computational burden. We calculate a score for every query indicating how similar it
   1
       https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/paraphrase-distilroberta-base-v1
   2
       https://huggingface.co/AnnaWegmann/Style-Embedding


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is to the support sample, noting that the way this score is calculated depends on the detection method
being evaluated. Each score is paired with a label indicating whether the query was composed by the
same LLM as the support sample or was composed by a human author. Finally, we calculate a ROC
curve based on these scores and labels and its corresponding pAUC value.
The results of this calculation are shown in Table 1, which reports the mean and standard error over
all support samples, all evaluation domains, and all LLM for each detection approach considered
and each value of N . The proposed method based on representations of writing style outperforms
all other approaches. We note that the ProtoNet detector is trained on the AAC corpus and has 40M
more parameters than UAR, so the superior performance of the style representation methods is not
a consequence of larger model capacity. In Appendix D we break down these results according to
evaluation domain.
 Method                                     Training                              pAUC
                                            Dataset                      N =5             N = 10
 Few-Shot Methods
 UAR                                      Reddit (5M)                 0.905 (0.001)    0.9806 (0.0006)
 UAR                           Reddit (5M), Twitter, StackExchange    0.886 (0.001)    0.9676 (0.0008)
 UAR                                  AAC, Reddit (politics)          0.877 (0.001)    0.9400 (0.0013)
 CISR                           Reddit (hard negatives, positives)    0.839 (0.001)    0.9331 (0.0013)
 ProtoNet                             AAC, Reddit (politics)          0.871 (0.001)    0.9475 (0.0014)
 MAML                                 AAC, Reddit (politics)          0.662 (0.006)    0.6854 (0.0068)
 SBERT                                       Multiple                 0.621 (0.002)    0.7157 (0.0022)
 Zero-Shot Methods
 AI Detector (custom made)           AAC, Reddit (politics)          0.6510 (0.031)    0.6585 (0.0320)
 AI Detector (off-the-shelf)           WebText, GPT-xl               0.6028 (0.0250)   0.6011 (0.0249)
 Rank                                BookCorpus, WebText             0.5693 (0.0152)   0.5581 (0.0172)
 LogRank                             BookCorups, WebText             0.7640 (0.0360)   0.7749 (0.0378)
 Entropy                             BookCorpus, WebText             0.4984 (0.0005)   0.4977 (0.0002)
 Random                                                                    0.5               0.5

Table 1: Single-target detection results. Each model was evaluated on a common corpus of documents
involving unseen domains, topics, and LLM, organized into episodes of N documents. The standard
errors shown in parenthesis were estimated using bootstrapping.

To study the effect of the number N of documents comprising each episode, we vary N between
1 and 10, still truncating each document to the nearest sentence boundary before the 128th token.
The results are shown in Figure 2a. We observe that the version of UAR trained only with Reddit
performs best across the range, although other UAR variants perform well also. Note that stylistic
representations do not require AAC data during training to capture the style of machine generators.
Indeed, both UAR and CISR outperform methods that require AAC training data.
We also observe that metric-based approaches like ProtoNet outperform fast-adaptation approaches
like MAML, in which a new model is fitted to each support sample in turn. One reason for this may
be that MAML is limited to inputs of 512 tokens at inference time due to its underlying RoBERTa
model, which was chosen to match the underlying models used by other baseline approaches. In
contrast, metric-based approaches may combine representations of various spans of text together,
thus effectively increasing the context from which they make predictions. Another reason for this
discrepancy may be that fast-adaptation approaches are more prone to over-fitting the support sample.

4.5   M ULTIPLE - TARGET MACHINE TEXT DETECTION

In §4.4 we handled the case of detecting a single target language model. We now extend our
formulation to include multiple target language models, given support samples from each model.
Namely, for each detection approach and each N we perform the following calculation. For each
domain we repeat the following trial 1000 times. For each LLM contributing to the evaluation corpus
we randomly select a support sample composed by that LLM and take all remaining evaluation
episodes to serve as queries. For each query, we calculate a score for each support sample reflecting
its similarity to the query, and pair the minimum score with a label indicating whether the query was
composed by a human or an LLM. Finally, we calculate the pAUC based on these minimum scores


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   ProtoNet                    UAR Multi-LLM
      pAUC                                                    pAUC
       UAR Multi-domain
0.9                                                     0.9
                                                                                        UAR Multi-domain
0.8 UAR                    CISR            Multi-LLM 0.8                                    SBERT
                                                                          UAR
                         MAML
0.7                                                     0.7
                                                                                            CISR
0.6                              AI Detector            0.6
                            SBERT                                                       ProtoNet
         1        3         5         7 Documents               1         3         5        7 Documents

             (a) Single-target detection                            (b) Multiple-target detection

    Figure 2: Detection performance as the number of documents N comprising episodes varies.


and labels. The results in Figure 2b show the mean pAUC over all domains, all LLM, and all trials
against N for each detection approach.
We find that in this setting, the proposed approach with the multi-LLM authorship model performs
best, although the other UAR variants remain competitive, noting that this model is the only authorship
model considered which is explicitly trained to distinguish among LLM, including different versions
of the same LLM. We also note that the evaluation corpus contributing most to the difference is the
PeerRead component of M4, as shown in Appendix D, where we break down the results of this
experiment by evaluation dataset. Otherwise the results are similar for all evaluation domains.
Note that in this experiment, a key assumption is that each support sample is known to have originated
entirely from one of several LLM of concern. However, it may be possible, say, by manual inspection,
to ascertain that each of a handful of documents was generated by some LLM, but not necessarily all
by the same LLM. This setting is addressed in Appendix G.

4.6   ROBUSTNESS AGAINST PARAPHRASING ATTACKS

We now test the effectiveness of our proposed approach against an adversary that applies automatic
paraphrasing to LLM-generated text to evade detection. To simulate this scenario, we paraphrase
various evaluation episodes using DIPPER (Krishna et al., 2023) with a lexical diversity parameter of
20% as described below. All episodes in this experiment consist of N = 5 documents. We first repeat
the procedure described in §4.4 using the version of UAR trained on the comments of 5M Reddit
users, except that we now paraphrase a varying proportion of the episodes generated by the target
LLM other than the support sample. The results of this experiment are labeled by UAR Single-target
in Figure 3, along with the results of the same experiment using the ProtoNet baseline. Unfortunately,
both approaches suffer as the proportion of queries paraphrased increases, but we observe that like
the adversary, the detector may also avail of paraphrasing! To this end, we repeat the procedure
described in §4.5 with the following modification. For each LLM contributing to the evaluation
corpus and each episode generated by that model serving as the support sample, we paraphrase a
varying proportion of the remaining episodes generated by that model and report the minimum of
two scores: one reflecting the likelihood that the support sample matches a randomly selected query,
and another reflecting the likelihood that a paraphrase of the support sample matches a randomly
selected query. The results of this experiment are labeled by UAR Multi-target in Figure 3. Indeed,
including a paraphrase of the support sample mitigates the drop in performance.


5     C ONCLUSION

Summary of findings We propose a few-shot strategy to detect machine-generated text using style
representations estimated from content primarily composed by humans. Our main finding is that
style representations afford a remarkable ability to identify instances of text composed by LLM


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              pAUC

                                                        UAR Multi-target
                  0.9

                                                                      UAR Single-target
                                ProtoNet
                  0.8


                  0.7



                                0.2         0.4         0.6         Proportion

Figure 3: Mean of pAUC as the proportion of queries is paraphrased. Paraphrasing reduces the
detection rate across the low FPR range, but including the paraphrased LLM as a support sample
(UAR Multi-LLM) mitigates the drop in performance.



given only a handful of demonstration examples, even when those examples were generated with
prompts engineered to elicit diverse writing styles. In addition, we illustrate in §4.5 that further
improvements are possible for multiple-target LLM detection by fine-tuning style representations
using documents generated by AAC models. Finally, in §4.6 we illustrate that the multiple-target
variant of the proposed approach that incorporates paraphrasing is robust against paraphrasing attacks.
By focusing our evaluation on the portion of the ROC curve corresponding with a false-alarm rate of
less than 1%, we seek to emphasize that the proposed methodology represents a practically relevant
approach to mitigating certain LLM abuses.



Limitations The few-shot detection framework explored in this work assumes access to a handful
of documents generated by LLM that users may wish to detect in a particular domain. As of this
writing, there are only a small but growing number of such LLM, since only a handful of large
companies have the resources to train such models. This makes it possible to anticipate which LLMs
an adversary may abuse and proactively train detectors using any of the approaches considered in
this work. However, in the future it seems plausible that a much larger number of LLM will be
available, in which case a more reactive approach would be required, such as the approach proposed
in this paper, where examples of abuse by unknown LLM are assembled to form the required support
samples.
Our experiments focus on English since LLM of concern are primarily available in English. However,
since the training procedure for the style representations used in our few-shot detection experiments
relies only on the availability of author-labeled text, there are no barriers to developing such represen-
tations for arbitrary languages other than collecting sufficiently large corpora. We acknowledge that
this is easier accomplished for high-resource languages, particularly those that are well-represented
in online discourse. For these reasons, we believe that exploring style representations effective in
low-resource languages is an interesting avenue for future work.



Broader impact The rapid adoption and proliferation of LLM poses a risk of abuse unless methods
are developed to detect deceitful writing. The proposed few-shot detection method represents a novel
and practical approach to detecting machine-generated text in many settings, including plagiarism in
classrooms, social media moderation, and email spam and phishing. The approach may be deployed
immediately using readily available, pre-trained style representations and requires only a small
number of examples generated by LLM of concern. We will release code and checkpoints of our best
models to facilitate adoption of the proposed approach.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCING OUR RESULTS
The proposed few-shot detectors were trained using a open-source reference implementation of UAR
in PyTorch available at https://github.com/LLNL/LUAR using default hyperparameter choices.
For the CISR baseline, we used the open-source PyTorch implementation available at https://
github.com/nlpsoc/Style-Embeddings. For ProtoNet and MAML, we used the implementations
provided at https://github.com/learnables/learn2learn. The data used to fine-tune the UAR
style representations was sampled from a publicly available corpus of Reddit comments (Baumgartner
et al., 2020). We subsampled this dataset for comments published between January 2015 and October
2019 by authors publishing at least 100 comments during that period. Additionally, we used Amazon
reviews and StackExchange discussions in some model variations (Ni et al., 2019), both obtained
from existing datasets. The Amazon dataset may be downloaded from https://nijianmo.github.
io/amazon/index.html and the StackExchange dataset is available from https://pan.webis.
de/clef21/pan21-web/style-change-detection.html. We also created two new corpora of
machine-generated documents, referenced as AAC and LWD in the main text, which we used
respectively for training and evaluation. In the case of AAC, we used publicly-released checkpoints
for GPT-2 and OPT, available at the time of this writing from https://huggingface.co/models.
In the case of LWD, we used the OpenAI API to generate documents with ChatGPT and GPT-4.
We generated Llama2 examples using the llama2-7B chat model released July 2023, which can be
found at https://github.com/facebookresearch/llama. We trained the style representations
using one 8 x A100-80Gb GPU server, which took under 24 hours for each of the proposed model
variations. Fop both UAR and CISR, the resulting style feature extractors have only 82M and 125M
parameters respectively, and are therefore efficient to deploy on a single GPU.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Part of this work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DEAC52-07NA27344. This work was supported
by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA), via the HIATUS Program under contract D2022-2205150003. The
views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of ODNI, IARPA, or
the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation therein.


R EFERENCES
Nicholas Andrews and Marcus Bishop. 2019. Learning invariant representations of social media users.
  In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
  pages 1684–1695.

Jason Baumgartner, Savvas Zannettou, Brian Keegan, Megan Squire, and Jeremy Blackburn. 2020.
  The Pushshift Reddit Dataset. In Proceedings of the 14th International AAAI Conference on Web
  and Social Media (ICWSM), volume 14, pages 830–839.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
  Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li,
 Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun
  Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pellat, Kevin
  Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang,
 Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny
  Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. 2022. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mike Conover, Matt Hayes, Ankit Mathur, Jianwei Xie, Jun Wan, Sam Shah, Ali Ghodsi, Patrick
 Wendell, Matei Zaharia, and Reynold Xin. 2023. Free dolly: Introducing the world’s first truly
 open instruction-tuned llm.
Alexander D’Amour, Katherine Heller, Dan Moldovan, Ben Adlam, Babak Alipanahi, Alex Beutel,
  Christina Chen, Jonathan Deaton, Jacob Eisenstein, Matthew D Hoffman, et al. 2022. Underspeci-
  fication presents challenges for credibility in modern machine learning. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 23(1):10237–10297.
Liam Dugan, Daphne Ippolito, Arun Kirubarajan, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2020. RoFT: A tool for
  evaluating human detection of machine-generated text. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 189–196,
  Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. 2017. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast
  adaptation of deep networks.
Matthias Gallé, Jos Rozen, Germán Kruszewski, and Hady Elsahar. 2021. Unsupervised and
 distributional detection of machine-generated text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02878.
Sebastian Gehrmann, Hendrik Strobelt, and Alexander Rush. 2019. GLTR: Statistical detection and
  visualization of generated text. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 111–116, Florence, Italy. Association
  for Computational Linguistics.
Julian Hazell. 2023. Large language models can be used to effectively scale spear phishing campaigns.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06972.
Xuanli He, Qiongkai Xu, Yi Zeng, Lingjuan Lyu, Fangzhao Wu, Jiwei Li, and Ruoxi Jia. 2022. Cater:
  Intellectual property protection on text generation apis via conditional watermarks.
Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. 2017. spaCy 2: Natural language understanding with Bloom
 embeddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. To appear.
Daphne Ippolito, Daniel Duckworth, Chris Callison-Burch, and Douglas Eck. 2020. Automatic
  detection of generated text is easiest when humans are fooled. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
 Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1808–1822.
Ganesh Jawahar, Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, and Laks Lakshmanan, V.S. 2020. Automatic detection
  of machine generated text: A critical survey. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
  Computational Linguistics, pages 2296–2309, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee
  on Computational Linguistics.
John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. 2023.
  A watermark for large language models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 17061–17084.
  PMLR.
Kalpesh Krishna, Yixiao Song, Marzena Karpinska, John Frederick Wieting, and Mohit Iyyer.
  2023. Paraphrasing evades detectors of AI-generated text, but retrieval is an effective defense. In
 Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
Antonis Maronikolakis, Hinrich Schütze, and Mark Stevenson. 2021. Identifying automatically
  generated headlines using transformers. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on NLP for
 Internet Freedom: Censorship, Disinformation, and Propaganda, pages 1–6, Online. Association
  for Computational Linguistics.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, Nathaniel Saul, and Lukas Grossberger. 2018. Umap: Uniform manifold
  approximation and projection. The Journal of Open Source Software, 3(29):861.
Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn. 2023.
  Detectgpt: Zero-shot machine-generated text detection using probability curvature. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven Le
  Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, Xiangru Tang, Dragomir
  Radev, Alham Fikri Aji, Khalid Almubarak, Samuel Albanie, Zaid Alyafeai, Albert Webson,
  Edward Raff, and Colin Raffel. 2023. Crosslingual generalization through multitask finetuning.
Eric Nalisnick, Akihiro Matsukawa, Yee Whye Teh, Dilan Gorur, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan.
  2019. Do deep generative models know what they don’t know? In International Conference on
  Learning Representations.
Jianmo Ni, Jiacheng Li, and Julian McAuley. 2019. Justifying recommendations using distantly-
   labeled reviews and fine-grained aspects. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference on empirical
   methods in natural language processing and the 9th international joint conference on natural
   language processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 188–197.
OpenAI. 2023. ChatGPT API (gpt-3.5-turbo). Available at: https://api.openai.com/v1/
  chat/completions.
OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
Ajay Patel, Nicholas Andrews, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2023. Low-resource authorship style
  transfer: Can non-famous authors be imitated?
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot,
   and E. Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning
   Research, 12:2825–2830.
John Platt et al. 1999. Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and comparisons to regular-
  ized likelihood methods. Advances in large margin classifiers, 10(3):61–74.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019.
  Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9.
Emily Reif, Daphne Ippolito, Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Chris Callison-Burch, and Jason Wei. 2022.
 A recipe for arbitrary text style transfer with large language models. In Proceedings of the 60th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages
  837–848, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Rafael A. Rivera-Soto, Olivia Elizabeth Miano, Juanita Ordonez, Barry Y. Chen, Aleem Khan,
  Marcus Bishop, and Nicholas Andrews. 2021. Learning universal authorship representations.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  pages 913–919, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational
  Linguistics.
Vinu Sankar Sadasivan, Aounon Kumar, Sriram Balasubramanian, Wenxiao Wang, and Soheil Feizi.
  2023. Can ai-generated text be reliably detected?
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. 2017. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 30.
Irene Solaiman, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, Amanda Askell, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Jeff Wu, Alec
   Radford, Gretchen Krueger, Jong Wook Kim, Sarah Kreps, et al. 2019. Release strategies
   and the social impacts of language models (arxiv:1908.09203). https://huggingface.co/
   roberta-base-openai-detector.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cris-
  tian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu,
  Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
    Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
    Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
    Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan
    Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang,
    Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang,
    Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey
    Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.

Yuxia Wang, Jonibek Mansurov, Petar Ivanov, Jinyan Su, Artem Shelmanov, Akim Tsvigun, Chenxi
  Whitehouse, Osama Mohammed Afzal, Tarek Mahmoud, Alham Fikri Aji, and Preslav Nakov.
  2023. M4: Multi-generator, multi-domain, and multi-lingual black-box machine-generated text
  detection.

Anna Wegmann, Marijn Schraagen, and Dong Nguyen. 2022. Same author or just same topic?
 Towards content-independent style representations. In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on
 Representation Learning for NLP, pages 249–268. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Laura Weidinger, Jonathan Uesato, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Po-Sen Huang, John Mellor,
  Amelia Glaese, Myra Cheng, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. 2022. Taxonomy of risks posed
  by language models. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
  and Transparency, pages 214–229.

Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Hannah Rashkin, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, Franziska Roesner, and
  Yejin Choi. 2019. Defending against neural fake news. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32.

Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  2022. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models.


A     G ENERALIZATION OF SUPERVISED MACHINE - TEXT DETECTORS

The experiment reported in this section is intended to determine whether discriminative classifiers
built on top of pre-trained style representations are more robust to future changes in topic, domain,
and language model than those built on top of semantic representations. In order to simulate future
scenarios, we train these models with text dealing with certain topics, drawn from certain domains,
and with positive examples generated by older language models. Then we evaluate these models
with text that may deal with new topics, may have been drawn from new domains, and with positive
examples that may have been generated by newer language models. More information on these
datasets, including some example documents we generated, may be found in Appendix C.
First we construct a supervised detector by simply composing an MLP with the UAR model pretrained
on the Reddit comments of 5M users. We train this composition using equal amounts of human- and
AAC-generated documents, keeping the parameters of UAR frozen. Next, mirroring the approach
used by OpenAI’s AI Detector, we compose an MLP with RoBERta and train the composition using
the same approach as the composition above.
The results are shown in Table 2a. Both approaches perform strongly when evaluated on data drawn
from the same domain, dealing with the same topics, and generated by the same LLM as the training
data. In fact, the RoBERTa baseline outperforms UAR, particularly at the lowest false positive rates,
which is illustrated by the ROC curve shown in Figure 4a. However, when the same detectors are
evaluated with data dealing with new topics or drawn from new domains, performance drops sharply,
as shown in Figure 4b, Figure 4c, Figure 4d. In other words, the UAR+MLP combination is more
robust to topic and domain shifts than the baseline. However, the performance of both detectors
degrades to the point they would be unreliable as the FPR tends to zero. For example, at a FPR of 1%
both models reach a TPR of around 40% on LWD datasets. This confirms our expectation about the
limitations of using trained classifiers on unseen LWD data.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  TPR       RoBERTa                                     TPR
                                      UAR
   0.75                                                 0.75                    UAR

    0.5                                                  0.5

   0.25                                                 0.25
                                                                                    RoBERTa

                  10−2        10−1       FPR                           10−2        10−1       FPR
      (a) Evaluation on in-domain AAC data.             (b) Evaluation on LWD with in-domain topics.

  TPR                                                   TPR

  0.75                                                  0.75

   0.5                                                   0.5
                    UAR                                                 UAR
  0.25                                                  0.25
                                     RoBERTa                                            RoBERTa

                 10−2         10−1       FPR                           10−2        10−1       FPR
 (c) Evaluated on LWD with out-of-domain topics.         (d) Evaluated on LWD with unseen domains.

Figure 4: ROC curves assessing supervised machine-text detection performance. Both the RoBERTa-
and UAR-based detectors perform well in-distribution, but performance drops when evaluating on
data generated by new LLM, new topics, or new domains. The UAR-based detector is more robust to
changes in the testing distribution.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Evaluation Set      UAR       RoBERTa
                                                           Ablation                           pAUC
            AAC          0.8551       0.9671               Control Topic and Length        0.844 (0.009)
            LWD          0.5401       0.5363               Control Topic Only              0.769 (0.002)
  LWD, new topics        0.5262       0.5136               No Control                      0.765 (0.002)
 LWD, new domains        0.5411       0.5007
                                                           Random                                0.5
             Random        0.5          0.5
                                                          (b) Mean of pAUC across on Amazon. Each num-
(a) pAUC scores for UAR and RoBERTa baseline              ber is the mean of the distribution along with the
on AAC and LWD.                                           standard error, estimated via bootstrapping.

                                 Table 2: Further experimental results.

                 Origin              Number of Authors        Number of Documents
                 StackExchange            22,469                   2,758,657
                 Twitter                1,905,705                 370,277,856
                 Reddit                 5,199,959                3,578,220,305

Table 3: Statistics of the human-generated datasets used to train the multi-domain authorship model.


B    P ROTO N ET ABLATIONS
In order to understand the effect of controlling for topic and length in our AAC training data we per-
form the following ablation experiment. To control for length, we truncate each machine- and human-
authored document to the last sentence boundary before the 64th token. To control for topic, we ensure
that all human-authored documents are drawn from only r/politics or r/PoliticalDiscussion.
In the results shown in Table 2b we can see that when we control for topic only, the model is able to
learn document length as a shortcut by which to distinguish human from machine authors, resulting
in a relative decrease in pAUC of 8.8% at test time. Further ablating our control of topics has a less
significant effect. The best results are obtained by controlling for both topic and length, which is the
variation of ProtoNet we use in the main paper.

C    F URTHER DETAILS ABOUT DATASETS
Table 3 shows the numbers of authors and examples contributing to each of the human-generated
training datasets we used to estimate the style representations used in our proposed few-shot detection
method.
We now describe the process we used to create our AAC and LWD datasets. For both datasets, we
used a single set of prompts to create a variety of documents. We balanced each dataset with an equal
number of human-generated examples before splitting into training, validation and testing splits. We
generated the AAC datasets using all possible combinations of the parameters specified in Table 4a.
Some statistics of the resulting datasets are shown in Table 4b.
We used a similar approach to generate our LWD datasets. The models used were GPT-4, ChatGPT
and Llama-2. We prompted each LWD model with a post sampled from either Reddit, Amazon, or

      Parameter                 Values
       Models            GPT2-large, GPT2-xl,              Origin        Train         Valid       Test
                          OPT-6.7B, OPT-13B
                                                           Machine      440,721       62,935     125,987
 Decoding Strategies        top-p, typical-p
                                                           Human        440,721       62,935     125,987
  Decoding Values              0.7, 0.95
                                                            Total       881,442      125,870     251,974
 Temperature Values             0.7, 0.9
 Generation Length            512 tokens                  (b) Numbers of documents in datasets used to train
                                                          and evaluate authorship models.
 (a) Decoding parameters used to generate AAC datasets.

                            Table 4: Further details about AAC datasets.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Dataset                                   Prompt Sources
             AAC                           r/politics, r/PoliticalDiscussion
       LWD, same topic                     r/politics, r/PoliticalDiscussion
      LWD, different topic       r/anime, r/MMA, r/movies, r/personalfinance, r/soccer
     LWD, different domains            Amazon product reviews, StackExchange posts

                           Table 5: Prompt sources for LLM generation.

                    LWD LMs                 Same topic     New topic     New domain
              Machine Generated Texts         16,833        82,105         18,074
               Human Written Texts            16,833         82,105        18,643
                    Total Texts               33,666        164,210        36,717

                 Table 6: Numbers of documents comprising various LWD splits.


StackExchange containing at least 64 tokens. For documents prompted with Reddit posts, we varied
the prompts to elicit a diverse range of writing styles by specifying some personality traits of the
supposed author. Some examples are shown in Table 7. For the documents prompted with Amazon
and Stack Exchange posts, we prompted the language model to preserve the style of the post. Due to
cost, we used GPT-4 to generate only Reddit content, but not Amazon or StackExchange.
Finally, in addition to our LWD dataset, we also used the recently-released M4 dataset (Wang
et al., 2023) for evaluation. M4 consists of documents generated by multiple language models in
multiple domains, including ArXiv, PeerRead, Reddit, WikiHow, and Wikipedia. Because only
Reddit is used to prepare the style representations used in our experiments, we use a total of six
unseen domains for evaluation. M4 includes documents generated by a variety of models, including
ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Llama-2 (Touvron et al., 2023), Davinci(Brown
et al., 2020), FlanT5 (Chung et al., 2022), Dolly (Conover et al., 2023), Dolly2 (Conover et al.,
2023), BloomZ (Muennighoff et al., 2023), and Cohere. Table 9 shows the number of constituent
documents from each domain.


D    F URTHER VARIATIONS ON MAIN EXPERIMENTS

In Table 12 and Table 13 we break down the results of the experiments reported in §4.4 and §4.5
respectively by evaluation dataset. The relative performance of different approaches is largely
consistent across evaluation datasets. We note that M4 PeerRead stands out as the most difficult
corpora in both the single- and multiple-target scenarios. As noted by Wang et al. (2023), PeerRead
exhibits fewer unique unigrams and bigrams, making it more difficult to separate human- from
machine-authored texts on the basis of style alone.


E    C OMPARISON WITH WATERMARKING

Watermarking involves altering the token distribution of an LLM according to a fixed strat-
egy (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023). Because this takes place when documents are generated, the
approach assumes a benevolent adversary, a significant limitation relative to our proposed method. In
this section we compare our approach to watermarking and also consider a simple mitigation that
adversaries may deploy to circumvent watermarking.
We adapt the watermarking procedure outlined in the work cited above to apply watermarks to text
generated by Llama-2 (Touvron et al., 2023). For this, we follow the same prompting procedure
discussed in Appendix C to generate documents in the Amazon domain, which we aim to distinguish
from real Amazon reviews using both our proposed approach and the statistical approach outlined in
the reference above. The results in Figure 5 show that given a reasonable amount of text, our few-shot
approach outperforms the statistical test.
However, an adversary may apply automatic paraphrasing to watermarked documents to make them
less easy to detect. Recalling that we explored the robustness of the proposed few-shot approach to


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Persona          Example Document
   Human Prompt        And the politicians that needed relief in Sandy were opposed to relief
                       during Katrina. And the politicians that needed relief during Katrina
                       were opposed to relief for whatever disaster preceded it. Right now theres
                       someone in, like, North Carolina reading about lawmakers who were opposed
                       to Sandy relief but are now asking for relief in Louisiana, and theyre
                       thinking Sure, this backfired on *them*, but I can safely vote against
                       flood aid in Louisiana because theres no way this **exact** thing could
                       happen to me!
      Teenager         Ugh, it’s just so frustrating how politicians only care about their own
                       interests. It’s like they forget that they’re supposed to be serving the
                       people and not just looking out for themselves. I wish they would stop
                       playing politics with people’s lives and actually do their jobs.
 Concerned Citizen     As a concerned citizen, it’s disheartening to see political leaders being
                       hypocritical in times of need. We need to prioritize humanity over
                       political affiliations and offer aid to those who suffer from natural
                       disasters regardless of their location or political beliefs.
 Skeptical Optimist    I understand why you might feel skeptical about politicians who were once
                       opposed to disaster relief suddenly asking for it when their own state is
                       affected. However, as an optimist, I believe it’s important to focus on
                       the fact that these politicians are now recognizing the need for assistance
                       during times of crisis.
  Pragmatic Realist    As a pragmatic realist, I understand that politics often involves
                       inconsistent and hypocritical behavior from lawmakers. However, when
                       it comes to disaster relief, it’s important to separate politics from
                       practicality. Regardless of a politician’s stance on relief for previous
                       disasters, the immediate needs of the current disaster should be addressed.
 Passionate Activist   As an activist deeply committed to improving disaster relief policies,
                       I find it appalling that politicians would maintain such hypocritical
                       stances on disaster relief. We must recognize the need for and benefits of
                       supporting our fellow Americans in times of crisis, regardless of their
                       political affiliations or geographic location.

Table 7: Example documents dealing with politics, generated by ChatGPT and prompted according
to the desired personality of the author in order to elicit diverse writing styles.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Dataset       Human Example                                ChatGPT Example
    Amazon        The kids immediately wanted to put on        As     an     above-average     fixed
                  a puppet show with this (they received       location-fixed view security camera,
                  a box full of puppets separately), but       it provides SD quality images that
                  no doubt this will also be used for a        can be conveniently viewed from the
                  store and other things.                      screen of a smart phone.
 ArXiv Abstract   We introduce a density tensor                The motivation for this research
                  hierarchy for open system dynamics,          comes from the challenges encountered
                  that recovers information about              in simulating flows with strong
                  fluctuations lost in passing to the          nonequilibrium effects, such as flows
                  reduced density matrix.                      with high-speed micro-jets, turbulent
                                                               mixing, and multiphase flows.
  Reddit ELI5     For example, this is why there               Now, as you may know, the Wright
                  is a differentiation between being           brothers - Orville and Wilbur - are
                  depressed (aka a depressive episode)         widely credited with inventing the
                  and being diagnosed with major               airplane.
                  depressive disorder.
   Wikipedia      During the reign of the Shah                 Born in Howard County, Maryland, on
                  kings, the Mulkajis (Chief Kajis) or         December 10, 1832, Carroll was the son
                  Chautariyas served as prime ministers        of John Carroll, a prominent lawyer
                  in a council of 4 Chautariyas, 4             and politician from Maryland.
                  Kajis, and sundry officers.
    Wikihow       You will not always be the most              Whether you want to create a collage
                  intelligent person in the room, and          of memories for a special occasion or
                  the farther you get from school, the         display your favorite photos in an
                  less book smarts will matter in your         artistic way, Inkscape can make it
                  day-to-day life.                             happen.

Table 8: Examples of human text and ChatGPT generations from the Amazon and M4 datasets,
truncated to a maximum of 32 tokens.


          M4                  Peerread     ArXiv Abstract      Reddit ELI5      Wikihow     Wikipedia
 Machine Generated Texts       13,831         17,340             15,885          14,901      13,677
  Human Written Texts           5,203          2,997              2,999           2,999       2,975
       Total Texts             19,034         20,337             18,884          17,900      16,652

Table 9: M4 domains and statistics, noting that for evaluation we decline to use Reddit, which serves
as our primary training domain.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               UAR-5M (original)
                  pAUC

                                                 Watermarking (original)
                     0.9

                     0.8
                                          UAR-5M (paraphrased)
                     0.7

                     0.6
                                          Watermarking (paraphrased)


                              32    48    64   80      96 112 128 144 Tokens

Figure 5: pAUC of the proposed approach and the watermark detector as the number of tokens is
varied for the Amazon dataset. The proposed approach is more robust to paraphrase attacks, and
achieves equal or better results to the watermark detector when the number of tokens is ≥ 48.


paraphrasing in §4.6, we now compare the relative robustness of watermarking and our approach
to the same paraphrasing attacks. We simulate this setting by using DIPPER to paraphrase each
watermarked document, setting the lexical diversity parameter to 20%. We repeat the experiment
above using the paraphrased documents in place of the original watermarked documents. The
results shown in Figure 5 suggest that our approach is considerably more robust than the statistical
watermarking test.

F    E FFECT OF SHORTER TRUNCATION
In order to determine the effectiveness of the proposed approach when applied to smaller writing
samples, we repeat the experiment described in §4.4, this time truncating all support samples and
queries to the nearest sentence boundary before the 32nd token. This is in contrast with the approach
applied in the remainder of this work, where we truncated all samples and queries to the nearest
sentence boundary before the 128th token. We also report two additional metrics, namely the usual
area under the ROC curve (AUC) and the false positive rate corresponding with a 95% true positive
rate (FPR@95TPR). These results are reported in Table 10. Our proposed few-shot approaches
continue to outperform baseline methods in this setting.

G    D ETECTION OF UNKNOWN LLM
Our final experiment follows the procedure described in §4.4 with the following modification. To
create support samples, we randomly sample N documents generated by LLM from the evaluation
dataset. Thus, a support sample need not consist of documents by a single LLM, although the query
episodes do consist of documents generated by a single author, either LLM or human. This experiment
reflects the situation where a handful of documents are known to have originated from LLM, but the
specific LLM generating each document cannot be attributed. As in §4.4, the detector score reflects
the likelihood that a given query was generated by any LLM contributing to the evaluation corpus.
The results are reported in Table 11.
We continue to see high detection accuracies in this detection setting, with the methods based on style
representations outperforming other baselines. We now find that CISR performs better than other
approaches, although the UAR variants remain competitive. Note that this experiment introduces a
train-test mismatch for UAR, since each episode used to train UAR consists of documents by the
same author, in contrast with the support samples used in the experiment, which typically contain
documents by multiple LLMs.



                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Method                           Training Dataset              AUC        pAUC     FPR@95
 Few-Shot Methods
 UAR                                 Reddit(5M)                 0.9884     0.9094    0.0533
 UAR                     Reddit (5M), Twitter, StackExchange    0.9884     0.9118    0.0543
 UAR                            AAC, Reddit (politics)          0.8913     0.7308    0.3394
 CISR                     Reddit (hard negatives, positives)    0.9608     0.7973    0.1440
 ProtoNet                       AAC, Reddit (politics)          0.9791     0.9062    0.0934
 MAML                           AAC, Reddit (politics)          0.6686     0.5141    0.6555
 SBERT                                 Multiple                 0.9673     0.8087    0.1448
 Zero-Shot Methods
 AI Detector (custom)           AAC, Reddit (politics)          0.7238     0.5295    0.5369
 AI Detector                     WebText, GPT2-XL               0.6933     0.5559    0.7698
 Rank                           BookCorpus, WebText             0.7301     0.5423    0.6341
 LogRank                        BookCorpus, WebText             0.9107     0.6395    0.2209
 Entropy                        BookCorpus, WebText             0.2083     0.4977    0.9667
 Random                                                         0.5000     0.5000

Table 10: Mean values of AUC, pAUC and FPR@95 for various detection approaches with episodes
of N = 10 documents, each truncated to 32 tokens.


  Method                               Training                            pAUC
                                        Dataset                    N =1          N =2
  UAR                                 Reddit (5M)               0.682 (0.002) 0.759 (0.002)
  UAR                     Reddit (5M), Twitter, StackExchange   0.684 (0.002) 0.706 (0.002)
  UAR                            AAC, Reddit (politics)         0.640 (0.002) 0.633 (0.002)
  CISR                      Reddit (hard negative, positives)   0.707 (0.003) 0.779 (0.003)
  AI Detector (custom)           AAC, Reddit (politics)         0.660 (0.029) 0.668 (0.031)
  ProtoNet                       AAC, Reddit (politics)         0.536 (0.001) 0.524 (0.001)
  MAML                           AAC, Reddit (politics)         0.672 (0.007) 0.724 (0.010)
  SBERT                                 Multiple                0.552 (0.001) 0.546 (0.001)
  Random                                                             0.5            0.5

                         Table 11: Results on detection of unknown LLM.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                AI Detector (fine-tuned)
                                                   UAR Multi-domain
                                  UAR Multi-LLM


                                                                                                                                        ProtoNet


                                                                                                                                                              Random
                                                                                                                            MAML


                                                                                                                                                      SBERT
                                                                            CISR
 Dataset           N      UAR
 LWD Amazon         5    0.998   0.999            1.000                    0.986               0.581                       0.891       0.998       0.648      0.5
                   10    1.000   1.000            1.000                    1.000               0.582                       0.886       1.000       0.841      0.5
 M4 Arxiv           5    0.989   0.951            0.890                    0.996               0.659                       0.702       0.951       0.653      0.5
                   10    1.000   0.990            0.975                    1.000               0.641                       0.731       0.995       0.713      0.5
 M4 PeerRead        5    0.829   0.850            0.914                    0.819               0.737                       0.643       0.885       0.623      0.5
                   10    0.946   0.919            0.977                    0.946               0.788                       0.683       0.965       0.738      0.5
 M4 WikiHow         5    0.871   0.828            0.862                    0.659               0.499                       0.538       0.799       0.659      0.5
                   10    0.980   0.920            0.964                    0.814               0.499                       0.539       0.918       0.757      0.5
 M4 Wikipedia       5    0.845   0.777            0.801                    0.753               0.718                       0.670       0.747       0.519      0.5
                   10    0.979   0.878            0.930                    0.919               0.715                       0.700       0.866       0.566      0.5

Table 12: pAUC for single target detection experiment in §4.4, broken down by evaluation dataset.
                                                                            UAR Multi-domain
                                                   UAR Multi-LLM


                                                                                                                            ProtoNet


                                                                                                                                                   Random
                                                                                                                                        SBERT
                                                                                                 CISR
                                  UAR


          Dataset          N
          LWD Amazon        5    0.999            0.999                    1.000               0.999                       0.995       0.597       0.5
                           10    1.000            1.000                    1.000               1.000                       1.000       0.699       0.5
          M4 Arxiv          5    0.981            0.992                    0.982               0.961                       0.503       0.774       0.5
                           10    1.000            1.000                    1.000               0.999                       0.502       0.928       0.5
          M4 PeerRead       5    0.665            0.994                    0.733               0.500                       0.500       0.559       0.5
                           10    0.935            0.998                    0.974               0.517                       0.499       0.705       0.5
          M4 WikiHow        5    0.969            0.968                    0.991               0.505                       0.498       0.942       0.5
                           10    0.999            0.995                    0.998               0.522                       0.497       0.990       0.5
          M4 Wikipedia      5    0.907            0.956                    0.794               0.521                       0.502       0.498       0.5
                           10    0.988            0.999                    0.969               0.644                       0.503       0.500       0.5

Table 13: pAUC for multi-target detection experiment in §4.5, broken down by evaluation dataset.


                                                                      21
