Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROCEDURAL FAIRNESS T HROUGH D ECOUPLING
O BJECTIONABLE DATA G ENERATING C OMPONENTS
 Zeyu Tang1 , Jialu Wang2 , Yang Liu2,4 , Peter Spirtes1 , and Kun Zhang1,3
 1
   Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
 2
   Computer Science and Engineering Department, University of California, Santa Cruz
 3
   Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
 4
   ByteDance Research
    zeyutang@cmu.edu, {faldict, yangliu}@ucsc.edu, {ps7z@andrew., kunz1@}cmu.edu

                                              A BSTRACT
          We reveal and address the frequently overlooked yet important issue of disguised
         procedural unfairness, namely, the potentially inadvertent alterations on the behav-
         ior of neutral (i.e., not problematic) aspects of data generating process, and/or the
         lack of procedural assurance of the greatest benefit of the least advantaged individ-
         uals. Inspired by John Rawls’s advocacy for pure procedural justice (Rawls, 1971;
         2001), we view automated decision-making as a microcosm of social institutions,
         and consider how the data generating process itself can satisfy the requirements
         of procedural fairness. We propose a framework that decouples the objectionable
         data generating components from the neutral ones by utilizing reference points
         and the associated value instantiation rule. Our findings highlight the necessity
         of preventing disguised procedural unfairness, drawing attention not only to the
         objectionable data generating components that we aim to mitigate, but also more
         importantly, to the neutral components that we intend to keep unaffected.


1     I NTRODUCTION
The algorithmic fairness literature has presented various notions to capture fairness with respect
to the prediction or the prediction-based decision-making (Dwork et al., 2012; Hardt et al., 2016b;
Chouldechova, 2017; Zafar et al., 2017), and also notions that are based on causal modeling of the
data generating process (Kusner et al., 2017; Kilbertus et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Chiappa,
2019; Wu et al., 2019; Coston et al., 2020). Recent survey papers have presented overviews on
various (instantaneous) fairness notions (Loftus et al., 2018; Makhlouf et al., 2020; Mehrabi et al.,
2021), the fairness consideration in dynamic settings (Zhang & Liu, 2021), as well as the reflection
on the connection between algorithmic fairness and the literature from other disciplines, especially
moral and political philosophy (Tang et al., 2023b).
In this paper, we denote “procedural fairness” as the fairness considerations specifically pertaining to
the data generation process itself. The literature has presented proposals to utilize causal modeling to
infuse more procedural emphasis on algorithmic fairness, e.g., path-specific interventional causal
effect (Kilbertus et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Nabi et al., 2019; 2022), counterfactual causal
effect (Kusner et al., 2017), path-specific counterfactual causal effect (Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al., 2019),
and different types of predictive rates (Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018b; Coston et al., 2020; Nilforoshan
et al., 2022). Previous causal fairness notions focus on providing quantification tools to estimate or
bound discrimination in terms of causal effects from protected features on the outcome. In turn, the
intended procedural emphasis on process gravitates towards the substantive emphasis on outcome,
and the properties of the data generating process itself, according to which the prediction/decision
is derived, are under-characterized.1 The requirements of procedural fairness are violated without
noticing, and consequently, the issue of disguised procedural unfairness is often overlooked.
Given a causal graph that represents the underlying data generating process, one can follow the graph
and perform an inference task for prediction or decision-making. The discrimination within a data
   1
     Due to space limit, we present the detailed literature review in Appendix A, and discuss differences and
connections between our framework and previous works in Appendix B.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


generating process, however, can manifest in various forms and originate from different locations,
not all of which are closely connected to the protected feature or final outcome. For example, an
individual may encounter discriminations based on various aspects of the physical appearance, like a
shorter stature (Judge & Cable, 2004; Persico et al., 2004) or a larger build (Puhl & Heuer, 2010).
Individuals may also face discriminations due to the linguistic characteristics of their speech and
writing (Baugh, 2005) or their accent (Barrett et al., 2022). A household may endure discriminations
because of marital or family status (Bruin & Cook, 1997; Lauster & Easterbrook, 2011; Joslin, 2015).
Therefore, we use the term “objectionable component” to refer to any problematic aspects in the
data generating process, which may include an edge in the local causal module, or segments of a
path whose starting and ending nodes are not limited to protected features and final outcome. Data
generating components that are not objectionable are accordingly termed “neutral components.”
Our goal is to achieve procedural fairness by decoupling objectionable components from the data
generating process, and making predictions only based on the neutral components. We present a
framework consisting of reference points and the corresponding value instantiation rule to fulfill the
requirements of procedure fairness. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
       • We reveal the frequently overlooked issue of disguised procedural unfairness, highlighting
         the importance of imposing procedure fairness directly on the data generating process itself.
       • We present the value instantiation rule that utilizes reference points in local causal modules
         to decouple the negative influence of objectionable data generating components, while
         keeping their neutral counterparts intact.
       • Motivated by John Rawls’s advocacy for pure procedural justice (Rawls, 1971; 2001), we
         configure reference points to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged individuals, so that
         the data generating process itself satisfies the requirements of procedural fairness.


2     P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we present our notation conventions and the requirements for procedural fairness.

2.1   N OTATIONS

We use uppercase letters to refer to variables, lowercase letters to refer to specific values that are
taken by variables, bold-font letters to refer to list of variables, and calligraphic letters to refer to
domains of values. For example, we denote all features by Z, and denote a specific feature by Zi
whose domain of value is Zi .2 We denote the target variable by Y and its predictor by Yb .
For two random variables W and V , we say that W is a direct cause of V if there is a change in
distribution of V when we apply an intervention on W while holding all other variables fixed (Spirtes
et al., 1993; Pearl, 2009). We can capture causal relations among variables via a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) G, where nodes (vertices) represent variables, and edges represent causal relations between
variables and the corresponding direct causes. We use an ordered pair of nodes, e.g., ρ = (W, V ) to
represent a directed edge W → V . The atomic unit of objectionable and neutral components is an
edge that symbolizes the causal relation between a node and its direct parent connected via that edge.
One can apply the function Tail(·) to get the tail node of an edge ρ, and apply Parents(·) to list all
direct parent nodes of a node in the graph.

2.2   R EQUIREMENTS FOR P ROCEDURAL FAIRNESS

There are different perceptions on the procedural emphasis of justice or fairness. Perfect (imperfect)
procedural justice specifies a standalone criterion for the just outcome, and the existence (non-
existence) of a feasible procedure guaranteed to lead to such just outcome (Rawls, 1971; 2001; Luce
& Raiffa, 1989; Barry, 2010). The fair division is an example of perfect procedural justice (the
person who divide the cake gets the last piece), and a trial is an example of imperfect procedural
justice (the miscarriage of justice may occur not due to human faults, but as a result of an unforeseen
   2
     Our framework naturally handles and benefits from more precisely defined disadvantaged individuals. The
characterization of disadvantaged individuals may involve features including, but not limited to, the canonical
protected features. For notation consistency with the literature, we reserve the letter A for protected features.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


confluence of circumstances that undermines legal purposes). Pure procedural justice, on the other
hand, emphasizes that the procedure for determining the just result must actually be carried out, since
there is no standalone criterion by which an outcome can be known to be just (Rawls, 1971; 2001).
Inspired by John Rawls’s procedural conceptions of justice and the advocacy for pure procedural
justice (Rawls, 1971; 2001), we address procedural fairness by incorporating requirements on data
generating processes themselves. In order to avoid permitting too much in carrying out such procedure,
additional requirements on the data generating process are imposed (Rawls, 1971; 2001):
    Requirement I Fair Equality of Opportunity
         The opportunity should be open and attainable, with the same prospects of success, for those
         who are at the same level of talent and ability, and have the same willingness to use them.
         Such equality of opportunity should not be influenced by arbitrary contingencies.
    Requirement II The Difference Principle
         The (social and economic) inequalities are to be arranged so that they are to the greatest
         benefit to the least advantaged members of the society.
The algorithmic fairness literature has presented proposals that more or less resonate with Requirement
I and Requirement II. For example, Hardt et al. (2016b) propose Equal Opportunity to equalize true
positive rates across groups, which is a group-level evaluation of the predicted outcome that shares
the intuition behind Requirement I. Minimax Group Fairness (Martinez et al., 2020; Diana et al.,
2021) measures the worst-case outcomes across groups, which aligns with the attention on state
of affairs of disadvantaged individuals specified in Requirement II. Heidari et al. (2019a) propose
a moral framework to evaluate fairness notions; the welfare analyses related to decision-making
policies are conducted in both static and long-term settings (Heidari et al., 2018; 2019b).
Previous works articulate the intuition of procedural fairness primarily through emphases on outcomes
or outcome-related statistics, rather than focusing on the procedural intricacies inherent to the data
generating process itself. We would like to note that Requirement I and Requirement II are not
intended to express standalone fairness criteria for the predicted outcome, and they serve as mandates
for the data generating process to guarantee procedural fairness (Rawls, 1971; 2001). The violation
of these requirements results in disguised procedural unfairness, and to the illustration we now turn.

3    I LLUSTRATING D ISGUISED P ROCEDURAL U NFAIRNESS
It has been widely recognized in the algorithmic fairness literature that causal analysis enables us to
quantitatively audit and mitigate the discrimination in data generating process (Kusner et al., 2017;
Kilbertus et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Creager et al., 2020;
Nabi et al., 2022; von Kügelgen et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2023a). However, incorporating causal
analysis alone does not automatically provide the immunity against disguised procedural unfairness.
In this section, we reveal the commonly overlooked consequence of imposing fairness constraints
directly on outcomes while narrowly addressing only objectionable aspects in data generation process.
For illustration, let us consider a linear model drawn from previous literature (Nabi & Shpitser, 2018;
Chiappa, 2019), which involves variables (A, C, M, L, Y ) and is presented in Figure 1(a):
                                                  M       M
      A ∼ Bernoulli(pA ), C = ϵC , M = θA           A + θC  C + θ M + ϵM ,
              L        L       L
                                                                                                    (1)
      L = θA    A + θC   C + θM  M + θ L + ϵL , Y = θ A Y      Y
                                                          A + θC C + θM Y
                                                                          M + θL  Y
                                                                                    L + θ Y + ϵY ,
where ϵV ∼ N (0, σV2 ), V ∈ {C, M, L, Y } are independent zero-mean Gaussian noise terms, and θ’s
                                          V
are parameters in the linear model, with θW denoting the direct causal influence from W to V .
After specifying the problematic paths in the data generating process, one can derive the path-specific
effect (PSE) from the protected feature A to the prediction Yb according to causal fairness notions
(Kilbertus et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Nabi et al., 2019;
2022). Specifically, for objectionable components depicted by red edges in Figure 1(a), causal fairness
notions impose requirements on the following quantity calculated based on model parameters:3
   3
     In this linear example, the path-specific interventional causal effect and counterfactual causal effect share
a same form in terms of the (sub-)structure of model parameter combinations, under the odds ratio scale
(VanderWeele & Vansteelandt, 2010; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018) or the mean difference scale (Chiappa, 2019).
Therefore, following Chiappa (2019), we use PSE without denoting the type of causal effect.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A


  M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L
  <latexit sha1_base64="umzXvbJ7nv+1P1CF4VzY6Z1oLm0=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGMjJGAukIQwOzmbDJmdXWZmhbCktLISFMTWl0jlS1j5DL6Ek0uhiT8MfPz/Ocw5x485U9p1v6yl5ZXVtfXMhr25tb2zm93br6ookRQrNOKRrPtEIWcCK5ppjvVYIgl9jjW/fz3Oa/coFYvEnR7E2ApJV7CAUaKNVb5tZ3Nu3p3IWQRvBrmrj1H5++FoVGpnP5udiCYhCk05UarhubFupURqRjkO7WaiMCa0T7rYMChIiKqVTgYdOifG6ThBJM0T2pm4vztSEio1CH1TGRLdU/PZ2PwvayQ6KLRSJuJEo6DTj4KEOzpyxls7HSaRaj4wQKhkZlaH9ogkVJvb2La5gje/8yJUz/LeRf687OaKBZgqA4dwDKfgwSUU4QZKUAEKCI/wDC9W33qyXq23aemSNes5gD+y3n8A85aRKQ==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="M1leeWCMSGE9bDyxrKX8rGlddxI=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGNhkYC5QBLC7ORsMmR2dpmZFcKS0spKUBBbXyKVL2HlM/gSTi6FJv4w8PH/5zDnHD/mTGnX/bKWlldW19YzG/bm1vbObnZvv6qiRFKs0IhHsu4ThZwJrGimOdZjiST0Odb8/vU4r92jVCwSd3oQYyskXcECRok2Vvm2nc25eXciZxG8GeSuPkbl74ejUamd/Wx2IpqEKDTlRKmG58a6lRKpGeU4tJuJwpjQPuliw6AgIapWOhl06JwYp+MEkTRPaGfi/u5ISajUIPRNZUh0T81nY/O/rJHooNBKmYgTjYJOPwoS7ujIGW/tdJhEqvnAAKGSmVkd2iOSUG1uY9vmCt78zotQPct7F/nzspsrFmCqDBzCMZyCB5dQhBsoQQUoIDzCM7xYfevJerXepqVL1qznAP7Iev8B8hGRKA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Y        Y     Y     L                          Y        M
(a) Causal graph                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (b) Constraints: θ̂A = 0, θ̂M + θ̂L · θ̂M =0    (c) Constraints: θ̂A = 0, θ̂A =0

Figure 1: The linear example where causal fairness notions are applied. Panel (a) contains the causal
          graph for the data generating process. Panel (b) and panel (c) summarize the behavior of
          fitted parameters, where panel (b) corresponds to fairness constraints proposed by Kilbertus
          et al. (2017), and panel (c) corresponds to those proposed by Nabi & Shpitser (2018); Nabi
          et al. (2019; 2022). Orange solid-line boxes in the matrix are instantiations of the disguised
          procedural unfairness due to the violation of Requirement I.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y     M Y        Y L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSE = θ̂A + θ̂A (θ̂M + θ̂L θ̂M ).                                (2)
Different causal fairness notions may employ different constraints to enforce fairness on the causal ef-
fect calculated in Equation (2). For instance, Kilbertus et al. (2017) consider the direct discrimination
(the path A → Y ) and the proxy discrimination with respect to the unresolving variable M (the paths
                                                                      Y         Y     Y     L
A → M → Y and A → M → L → Y ), and impose constraints θ̂A                = 0, θ̂M + θ̂L · θ̂M = 0. Since
the constrained optimization does not yield a unique solution apart from minor variations attributable
to computational numerical errors, we present two sets of fitted parameters in Figure 1(b). Nabi
& Shpitser (2018) propose to consider PSE as a whole and perform constrained optimization with
PSE bounded by a small quantity (Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Nabi et al., 2019; 2022). One sufficient
               Y     M
condition is θ̂A = θ̂A  = 0, and the fitted parameters are presented in Figure 1(c).4
In the presented figures, the upper triangular entries (highlighted with a dotted contour) contain values
of fitted parameters θ̂’s. The lower triangular entries contain signed relative deviations of the fitted
parameter compared to the ground truth, i.e., (θ̂ − θ)/|θ|, and therefore, the closer to 0 the value is,
the more aligned with underlying process the fitted parameters are. The signed relative deviations in
lower triangular entries are color-coded in a heat map format: light-gray indicates 0, shades of red
indicate positive values, and shades of blue indicate negative values. The green dashed-line boxes
denote objectionable components on which fairness constraints are enforced, and the orange solid-line
boxes denote the unintentional deviations of θ̂’s from the ground truth θ’s for neutral components.
As we can see from Figure 1(b) and Figure 1(c), the lower triangular matrices contain orange solid-
line boxes, whose values significantly deviate from 0. It is tempting to think of such deviation as
just an unintentional but inevitable consequence of solving the constrained optimization problem.
However, if we identify certain components in the underlying data generating process as neutral, i.e.,
not objectionable, there is no guarantee that after introducing an arbitrary deviation (e.g., an increase
or decrease in the linear coefficient), such component is still not objectionable.
Furthermore, even if one is relieved from the burden of providing justification behind the introduced
deviation on neutral components, one would face yet another challenge of justifying the choice among
different deviations. For example, the edge C → Y in Figure 1(a) represents a neutral data generating
component. In each matrix in Figure 1(b) and Figure 1(c), if we refer to the second entry from left on
                                                                             Y
the bottom row, we can see that the corresponding estimated parameter θ̂C      gets various amount of
deviations. Among different values of the fitted parameter, there is no obvious reason why one should
prefer any particular option over the others, even though they are derived by enforcing causal fairness
notions that share the same underlying intuition, namely, to eliminate the discrimination along the
paths A → Y and A → M → · · · → Y in terms of PSE formulated in Equation (2) (Kilbertus et al.,
2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Nabi et al., 2019; 2022).
   4
     When applying Path-Specific Counterfactual Fairness or PC-Fairness, the derivation of Yb may involve
additional counterfactual analyses instead of constraining model parameters, e.g., utilizing latent inference-
projection (Chiappa, 2019) or deriving upper/lower bound for the counterfactual causal effect (Wu et al., 2019).
These technical treatments are beyond the scope of the illustrative linear example.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Such arbitrary deviations from neutral components in the underlying process violate Requirement
I, which prohibits the influence from arbitrary contingencies. As we shall see in Section 5.1, only
enforcing fairness on objectionable components also invites the violation of Requirement II, since the
inequality is not arranged to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged individuals.

4     D ECOUPLING O BJECTIONABLE C OMPONENTS FOR P ROCEDURAL FAIRNESS
In Section 3, we demonstrate that causal fairness notions, which are among the most explicit procedu-
ral emphases on algorithmic fairness in current literature, do not offer the protection against disguised
procedural unfairness. In this section, we present our framework of decoupling objectionable data
generating components, and deriving the predicted outcome only with neutral components. We
start in Section 4.1 by revisiting the linear example presented in Section 3. As an initial attempt to
address disguised procedural unfairness, we consider a simple solution to avoid arbitrary alterations
on neutral components. By reflecting on this simple approach, we aim to gain insights into the
enforcement of procedural fairness requirements. Then, we present our approach in Section 4.2.

4.1   R EFLECTING ON A S IMPLE A PPROACH : A N I NITIAL ATTEMPT

Let us revisit the linear example in Section 3. With a correct causal graph, a hypothesis class that is
general enough, and a consistent estimator of model parameters, one can expect the estimated linear
parameters to be as close as possible to the ground truth, if with an unlimited amount of data and
without any fairness constraint imposed during optimization. One can then proceed by dropping
estimated parameters that correspond to the objectionable components, i.e., setting to 0 the linear
coefficients along red edges in Figure 1(a), and deriving the predicted outcome only with remaining
parameters. Causal fairness notions are achieved by directly constraining PSE in Equation (2) to be
zero (Kilbertus et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Nabi et al., 2019; Chiappa, 2019). Different from
performing constrained optimization over model parameters (Section 3), this simple approach does
not introduce arbitrary alterations on neutral components, and therefore, does not violate Requirement
I. However, this approach should not be the general strategy to achieve procedural fairness, setting
aside the consideration of Requirement II.
To begin with, the procedural conception of eliminating the influence of an edge in the causal graph
does not always directly translate into constraining certain parameters in the model. If the model does
not have additive structures among objectionable and neutral components, the decomposition in the
format of dropping or modifying objectionable terms or parameters can not be easily carried out.5 For
complicated structures, e.g., a neural network, there is no principled way of pinpointing and separating
parameters into disjoint sets that exclusively constitute objectionable or neutral components.
Furthermore, even if the model has additive structures among objectionable and neutral components,
the fairness constraint may involve nonlinear relations among parameters, e.g., constraints proposed
by Kilbertus et al. (2017) as presented in Figure 1(b). While dropping the term or setting the parameter
to constants provides a sufficient condition to satisfy causal fairness notions, the solution may not
be optimal. One may face further challenges of justifying the choice among possible solutions.
Therefore, achieving procedural fairness calls for a more principled and scalable approach.

4.2   O UR F RAMEWORK

We consider the following question with respect to the causal mechanism: “What would have
been the case if the objectionable component in the data generating process were ineffective, given
that the model parameters (fitted without enforcing any fairness constraint) exhibit objectionable
aspects?”6 One way of tackling this problem is to isolate the parameter space that corresponds solely
to objectionable components, such that fairness constraints can be applied only on objectionable
components without affecting neutral ones. However, as we discussed in Section 4.1, this initial
attempt does not appear to be a promising approach to achieve procedural fairness in general settings.
   5
     Additive structures can take different forms, e.g., a linear combination of nonlinear but uncoupled terms
(Hoyer et al., 2008), or a linear combination followed by nonlinear transformations (Zhang & Hyvärinen, 2009).
Additive structures are not limited to models that only contain linear relationships.
   6
     We provide additional discussions on the contrast between the counter-factual question with respect to
causal mechanisms and that with respect to variables in Appendix B.1.


                                                      5
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Algorithm 1: The Value Instantiation Rule for Local Causal Modules

   Input :The din (V ; G)-ary function hV Parents(V ); θ̂V modeling the causal mechanism
             between the node V and its direct parents, where din (V ; G) is the the number of direct
             parents (in-degree) of V in the graph G. The configuration function ReferencePoint(·),
             which maps a directed edge corresponding to an objectionable component ρ ∈ EObj to
             a reference point (Definition 4.1) with the domain of value of the tail node of the edge.
   Output :The derivation of the predicted outcome Vb in the local causal module.
 1 If there is additional assumption on the functional form e hV (·) and/or parameters θeV Then
 2     θ̂V ← θeV , hV ← e    hV ; // direct correction of the causal mechanism
 3 Else
 4     ForEach parent node Wj in Parents(V ) = (W1 , W2 , . . . , Wdin (V ;G) ) Do
 5         If the edge ρj = (Wj , V ) ∈ EObj , i.e., Wj → V is an objectionable component Then
 6             wj gets the value ReferencePoint(ρj ), because Wj = Tail(ρj );
 7         Else If there is at least one ancestor nodes of Wj was set to a reference point Then
 8             wj gets the value that Wj would have taken as a downstream of its ancestor nodes, to
                 which reference points, if any, have been assigned;
 9         Else
10             wj gets the value of variable Wj for the record in the data set;
11 v
   b ← hV (w1 , w2 , . . . , wdin (V ;G) ; θ̂V ).



  Ideally, if there is additional knowledge or assumption about how an objectionable component can
  be corrected in terms of the functional form of the causal mechanism, one can directly replace
  that objectionable component in the model with its neutral version to derive the fair prediction. In
  practical scenarios, such information may not be readily available, which makes the direct correction
  of objectionable causal mechanisms not always a viable option. We need to find an alternative way to
  decouple objectionable components from the data generating process.
  Instead of focusing on model parameters and trying to isolate objectionable components during
  parameter fitting, we turn our attention to the inputs of objectionable components. We explore the
  possibility of finding appropriate input values for local causal modules, without enforcing any fairness
  constraint at the stage of learning model parameters. We recognize and remain aware that certain
  components of the data generating process are objectionable, and our framework consists of two parts:
  the specification of the value instantiation rule to properly propagate the value of upstream variables
  to the downstream (Section 4.2.1, fulfilling Requirement I), and the configuration of reference points
  for input nodes that correspond only to objectionable components, in accordance with the greatest
  benefits of the least advantaged individuals (Section 4.2.2, fulfilling Requirement II).

  4.2.1    T HE VALUE I NSTANTIATION RULE FOR L OCAL C AUSAL M ODULES
  Local causal modules, which depict the causal relation between a node and its direct parent nodes,
  are irrelevant to each other because of the causal modularity in static settings.7 More specifically,
  the manipulation in one local causal module, e.g., the modification of the functional form in the
  corresponding causal relation, will not affect the causal mechanism in other modules.
  Definition 4.1 (Reference Point). A reference point is a fixed value that a node propagates along an
  edge. A node is set to a reference point if and only if it is the tail node of an objectionable component.
  When the node is the tail for multiple objectionable components, it may be set to different reference
  points, each of which corresponds to one objectionable component within its local causal module.

  We regard each node as a placeholder and assign appropriate values to the input according to the value
  instantiation rule, which contains a sequence of options as summarized in Algorithm 1. Depending
  on the applicability of each option in the presented order (Steps 5 – 10 of Algorithm 1), each input
      7
        Causal modularity, also known as exogeneity (Engle et al., 1983) or independence of causal mechanism
  (Peters et al., 2017), is the direct outcome of the causal Markov condition for the corresponding DAG in static
  settings (Spirtes et al., 1993; Pearl, 2009). The cases involving dynamic settings or direct cyclic graphs (DCGs)
  are beyond the scope of the current work.


                                                         6
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Algorithm 2: Aggregating Local Causal Modules while Decoupling Objectionable Components
  Input :The data set D, the hypothesis class H and the parameter space Θ, the causal graph
            G = (V, E), the list of index I for all nodes V. The set of edges EObj where each edge
            corresponds to an objectionable component. The ReferencePoint(·) configuration.
  Output :The derivation of the predicted outcome Yb that decouples objectionable components
            from the data generating process, and only makes use of neutral components.
1 Sort the list of index I such that parent nodes, if any, appear before the node itself;
2 ForEach node index i ∈ I Do                                   // learn model parameters
3     If the number of direct parents of node Vi , i.e., the in-degree, din (Vi ; G) > 0 Then
4         Fit model parameters in the local causal module between Vi and its direct parent nodes
            Parents(Vi ), without any fairness constraint:
            hVi , θ̂Vi ← argmin LVi h(Parents(Vi ); θ), Vi ; D , LVi is the loss function for Vi ;
                              θ∈Θ,h∈H
5   According to the sorted list of node index I, apply the value instantiation rule (Algorithm 1) to
     each local causal module in sequence, and then derive prediction Yb according to Equation (3).


    node can be set to a reference point, or the value attained as the downstream of reference point(s), or
    by default the original value in the data set when none of the prior options apply.8
    The value instantiation rule can effectively and correctly decouple the influence of objectionable
    components. To begin with, a clear boundary exists between the input for an objectionable component
    and that for a neutral component. In a local causal module, the scope of consideration is limited
    to the causal relation between the output node and its direct parents. The causal relation is in turn
    represented by edges that share the output variable as the head node, and inputs as tail nodes. Because
    there is only one output node in the local causal module and there can be at most one edge between
    any pair of nodes in the graph, each input node can only be the tail of one edge, which represents
    either an objectionable component or a neutral one but not both. This distinction enables the value
    instantiation rule to address objectionable components while keeping neutral ones intact.
    Besides, the mapping from input to output for each local causal module is shaped not only by the
    fitted model parameters, but also by the applicable value instantiation option for each input node.
    Propagating value along certain edges has been characterized in the causal inference literature (Robins
    & Greenland, 1992; Pearl, 2001; Shpitser & Tchetgen, 2016; Peters et al., 2017). Particularly, Shpitser
    & Tchetgen (2016) present a graphical hierarchy of causal interventions and formally introduce terms
    “edge intervention” and “path intervention”, where the intervention is carried out along certain edges
    or paths, as natural refinements of the canonical definition of causal intervention, i.e., the “node
    intervention”. From a purely technical point of view, when there is no direct correction of the causal
    mechanism, the value instantiation rule is the edge-specific version of causal intervention. We set
    reference points for tail nodes of certain edges in order to change the overall input-output relation of
    local causal modules. Our utilization of value instantiation rule aims to decouple objectionable data
    generating components and satisfy procedural fairness requirements, and this is very different from
    performing causal inference to quantify causal effects among certain variables.

    4.2.2      T HE C ONFIGURATION OF R EFERENCE P OINT VALUES
    In this subsection, we first present how to utilize Algorithm 1 in each local causal module and derive
    the final prediction, when the mapping ReferencePoint(·) is available and the entire causal graph is
    taken into consideration. Then, we present how to obtain the mapping ReferencePoint(·), i.e., the
    configuration of reference point values in accordance with Requirement II for procedural fairness.
    Because of the modularity property, the value propagations in different local causal modules do not
    interfere with each other and are fully specified in Algorithm 1. Since there is no loop in DAGs, we
    sort the nodes in the graph such that parent nodes appear before the node itself. If we apply the value
    instantiation rule to each local causal module in this order, we can correctly keep track of reference
    points as well as their downstream effects across the entire data generating process. We summarize in
    Algorithm 2 the procedure of aggregating local causal modules while decoupling objectionable data
       8
           We present detailed illustrations of the application of value instantiation rule in Appendix C.


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Better than Baseline    Same as Baseline       Worse than Baseline     Female        Male
                            Accepted by All Policies


                                                         27.2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>


                            Mixed Decision Outcomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A


Ratio Breakdown
                  0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6                                                                                              0.9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Approval Rate (Y = 1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Approval Rate (Y = 0)
                            Rejected by All Policies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                  0.6


                                    37.5% 29.3%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4                                                                                              0.7


                                                         54.5%
                                                                                    M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="eLupxB2kW8Xo2Gsww0+IOF0aHCc=">AAAB6XicbZDJSgNBEIZrXOO4RT0K0hgET2FGUHMz4MVjImaBZAg9nUrSpGehu0cIQ46ePAkK4tWXyMmX8OQz+BJ2loMm/tDw8f9VdFX5seBKO86XtbS8srq2ntmwN7e2d3aze/tVFSWSYYVFIpJ1nyoUPMSK5lpgPZZIA19gze9fj/PaPUrFo/BOD2L0AtoNeYczqo1Vvm1lc07emYgsgjuD3NXHqPz9cDQqtbKfzXbEkgBDzQRVquE6sfZSKjVnAod2M1EYU9anXWwYDGmAyksngw7JiXHapBNJ80JNJu7vjpQGSg0C31QGVPfUfDY2/8saie4UvJSHcaIxZNOPOokgOiLjrUmbS2RaDAxQJrmZlbAelZRpcxvbNldw53dehOpZ3r3In5edXLEAU2XgEI7hFFy4hCLcQAkqwADhEZ7hxepbT9ar9TYtXbJmPQfwR9b7D/svkS4=</latexit>


                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="umzXvbJ7nv+1P1CF4VzY6Z1oLm0=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGMjJGAukIQwOzmbDJmdXWZmhbCktLISFMTWl0jlS1j5DL6Ek0uhiT8MfPz/Ocw5x485U9p1v6yl5ZXVtfXMhr25tb2zm93br6ookRQrNOKRrPtEIWcCK5ppjvVYIgl9jjW/fz3Oa/coFYvEnR7E2ApJV7CAUaKNVb5tZ3Nu3p3IWQRvBrmrj1H5++FoVGpnP5udiCYhCk05UarhubFupURqRjkO7WaiMCa0T7rYMChIiKqVTgYdOifG6ThBJM0T2pm4vztSEio1CH1TGRLdU/PZ2PwvayQ6KLRSJuJEo6DTj4KEOzpyxls7HSaRaj4wQKhkZlaH9ogkVJvb2La5gje/8yJUz/LeRf687OaKBZgqA4dwDKfgwSUU4QZKUAEKCI/wDC9W33qyXq23aemSNes5gD+y3n8A85aRKQ==</latexit>


                  0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="M1leeWCMSGE9bDyxrKX8rGlddxI=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGNhkYC5QBLC7ORsMmR2dpmZFcKS0spKUBBbXyKVL2HlM/gSTi6FJv4w8PH/5zDnHD/mTGnX/bKWlldW19YzG/bm1vbObnZvv6qiRFKs0IhHsu4ThZwJrGimOdZjiST0Odb8/vU4r92jVCwSd3oQYyskXcECRok2Vvm2nc25eXciZxG8GeSuPkbl74ejUamd/Wx2IpqEKDTlRKmG58a6lRKpGeU4tJuJwpjQPuliw6AgIapWOhl06JwYp+MEkTRPaGfi/u5ISajUIPRNZUh0T81nY/O/rJHooNBKmYgTjYJOPwoS7ujIGW/tdJhEqvnAAKGSmVkd2iOSUG1uY9vmCt78zotQPct7F/nzspsrFmCqDBzCMZyCB5dQhBsoQQUoIDzCM7xYfevJerXepqVL1qznAP7Iev8B8hGRKA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2                                                                                              0.5
                  0.2                                              Disadv.
                                                                   Adv.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1
                  0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>


                     1.0     0.8             0.6   0.4       0.2             0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chiappa, Ours, Ours, Ours, Ours, Chiappa, Ours, Ours, Ours, Ours,
                                   Threshold on Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2019 1 ref pt 2 ref pts 3 ref pts 4 ref pts 2019 1 ref pt 2 ref pts 3 ref pts 4 ref pts

                  (a) Revisit linear example                                       (b) UCI Adult                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (c) Summary of results on the UCI Adult data set

Figure 2: Experimental results on the simulated data and the real-world UCI Adult data set. Panel (a)
          demonstrates the disguised procedural unfairness due to the violation of Requirement II.
          Panel (b) presents the causal graph for UCI Adult data set. Panel (c) summarizes results on
          UCI Adult data set, where we present comparisons between group-wise approval rates for
          low-/high- income individuals, before and after fairness considerations are implemented.


components. One can derive the predicted outcome Yb for an individual with features Z = z:

                  yb = ◦ hVi ◦ ReferencePoint (z; EObj , θ̂V1 , . . . , θ̂V|I| ),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (3)
                                                                       i∈I
where hVi ◦ ReferencePoint is the composite function denoting the input-output relation of the local
causal module after applying the value instantiation rule (Algorithm 1), and the function composition
operation ◦(·) is performed over the sorted list of node indices i ∈ I.
Deriving predicted outcome while decoupling objectionable data generating components involves
a composite function of fitted local causal modules and the ReferencePoint(·) configurations. In
other words, the exact value of predicted outcome after introducing reference points cannot be prede-
termined before specifying individual’s features and actually carrying out the derivation procedure
outlined in Algorithm 2. To obtain the mapping ReferencePoint(·) in accordance with Requirement
II of procedural fairness, we focus on the specified least advantaged individuals. We configure the
value of reference points such that they can yield the most beneficial predicted outcome for least
advantaged individuals (assuming the larger the Yb , the more favorable the outcome):

             ReferencePoint = argmax                  E          Yb ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f :EObj →Ω least advantaged individuals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (4)
                            s.t.            Ω=           ×              (Ω ◦ Tail)(ρ) , and Yb = ◦ hVi ◦ f (Z; EObj , θ̂V1 , . . . , θ̂V|I| ),
                                                    ρ∈EObj                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i∈I

where Ω(·) denotes the domain of value of a node. Given an edge in the set of objectionable
components ρ ∈ EObj , ReferencePoint(ρ) ranges over (Ω ◦ Tail)(ρ), the domain of value of the tail
node of edge ρ. Since there is a finite number of edges in EObj , the codomain of ReferencePoint(·),
denoted as Ω, can be expressed as the Cartesian product of (Ω ◦ Tail)(ρ) for all edges ρ ∈ EObj .
Therefore, given f in the space of functions for ReferencePoint(·), the predicted outcome Yb is
obtained as specified in Equation (4), whose form is similar to Equation (3) but with the function
ReferencePoint(·) replaced by f (·) during optimization.

5                       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present experimental results on both simulated and real-world data. In Section 5.1,
we demonstrate how causal fairness notions can violate Requirement II of procedural fairness. In
Section 5.2, we present experimental results on UCI Adult data set (Becker & Kohavi, 1996).9

5.1                        I LLUSTRATING R EQUIREMENT II V IOLATION : R EVISITING L INEAR E XAMPLE

In Figure 2(a), we revisit the illustrative linear example presented in Section 3 and quantitatively
demonstrate the violation of Requirement II. We summarize the predicted outcomes by different
    9
      Due to space limit, we present in Appendix D implementation details, the discussion on scalability, further
experimental details and additional results on simulated and real-world data sets, including the UCI Adult
(Becker & Kohavi, 1996) and the Folktables (Ding et al., 2021) data sets. Our implementation can be found in
the Github code repository: https://github.com/zeyutang/DecoupleObjectionable.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


decision-making policies, where model parameters are optimized with or without fairness constraints.
We include constraints presented in Figure 1(b) and Figure 1(c), and consider whether there exist
individuals who are always rejected no matter which fairness notion is enforced. To derive a binary
decision, we vary the threshold from 1.0 to 0.0 to reflect the abundance of resource (from scarce
to plentiful). As we can see from Figure 2(a), although the overall approval rate increases as the
resource becomes more ample, the disadvantaged group proportionally suffers more among those
who are rejected by all decision policies, and at the same time, prospers less among those who are
accepted by all policies, barring marginal representation imbalance. This indicates the violation of
Requirement II in addition to Requirement I (presented in Section 3), since the inequality is not
arranged to the benefit of the least advantaged individuals.

5.2        R ESULTS ON UCI A DULT DATA S ET

In Figures 2(b) and 2(c), we present the causal modeling and the summary of results on UCI
Adult data set (Becker & Kohavi, 1996). Following Nabi & Shpitser (2018) and Chiappa (2019),
the paths A → Y (from sex to income) and A → M → · · · → Y (from sex, mediated by
marital status, to income) are problematic paths. We present experimental results when
applying different approaches. Specifically, Chiappa (2019) first fits model parameters without any
fairness constraints, and then incorporates additional latent variables and parameters in variational
reasoning, aiming to reconstruct descendant variables of A along problematic pathways with the
latent inference-projection approach. Our framework treats the red edges in Figure 2(b) as potential
locations for objectionable components, and consider reference point configurations of different
strengths, according to the number of decoupled objectionable components.
As we can see from Figure 2(c), compared to the unconstrained baseline, the state of affairs are
downgraded in terms of the approval rate when applying Path-Specific Counterfactual Fairness
(Chiappa, 2019), where sex is flipped to construct the counterfactual. In the left chart of Figure 2(c),
i.e., when Y = 0, the very low baseline approval rate of the least advantaged individuals (here, is the
female group) is further decreased. In contrast, our framework utilizes the neutral components in
the data generating process, and makes use of the reference points derived to the benefit of the least
advantaged individuals. Compared to the unconstrained optimized baseline, our results provide more
opportunities for the least advantaged individuals, offering boosts of approval rates by decoupling the
objectionable components in the data generating process.
Our results also indicate the potential limitation of only focusing on protected features as in previous
literature. We propose to consider all objectionable components, which include, but not limited
to, those that take the protected feature as input. For instance, we observe that when objectionable
components consist of edges A → Y (from sex to income) and M → Y (from marital
status to income), the reference points actually do not flip sex A from female to male, and only
specify marital status as “married”. This indicates that in the presence of objectionable data
generating components, the discrimination is not mitigated by treating female individuals as males,
but by perceiving (from decision-maker’s perspective) all individuals (male and female) as if they
were females along A → Y , and married along M → Y .

6        C ONCLUDING R EMARKS
In this paper, we focus on procedural fairness in terms of the requirements on the data generating
process of the prediction model. We reveal and address the frequently overlooked issue of disguised
procedural unfairness. In particular, previous approaches can introduce arbitrary alterations on
neutral components of data generating process (violating Requirement I); the predicted outcome can
exhibit inequalities that are not to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged individuals (violating
Requirement II). In accordance with the requirements of procedural fairness, we propose a framework
that utilizes reference points together with appropriate value instantiation rule.
We highlight the importance and necessity of decoupling objectionable data generating components
to achieve procedural fairness.10 Future works naturally include developing efficient and effective
strategies for decoupling objectionable components if additional knowledge or assumption about the
underlying data generating process can be utilized in various practical scenarios.
    10
         We provide further discussions on implications and potential limitations of our approach in Appendix E.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT

The motivation of our work is to pursue procedural fairness with respect to the data generating
process. The research is performed under full awareness of, and with adherence to, ICLR Code of
Ethics. We reveal and address the frequently overlooked issue of disguised procedural unfairness.
Our framework decouples objectionable components from the data generating process, aiming to
ensure the fulfillment of requirements for procedure fairness. We hope our work can draw attention
to the important issue of disguised procedural unfairness, and inspire further research to promote
procedural guarantees on fairness of the data generating process for prediction or decision-making.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We provide the implementation of our framework, along with the instruction on how to run it, in the
Github code repository (also provided in Section 5): https://github.com/zeyutang/De
coupleObjectionable.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This material is based upon work supported by the AI Research Institutes Program funded by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) under AI Institute for Societal Decision Making (AI-SDM),
Award No. 2229881. This project is also partially supported by an Amazon Research Award (Fall
2022 CFP), the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under Contract R01HL159805, and grants from
Apple Inc., KDDI Research Inc., Quris AI, and Infinite Brain Technology.

R EFERENCES
Elizabeth Anderson. What is the point of equality? Ethics, 109(2):287–337, 1999.

Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness and Machine Learning: Limitations and
  Opportunities. fairmlbook.org, 2019. http://www.fairmlbook.org.

Rusty Barrett, Jennifer Cramer, and Kevin B McGowan. English with an accent: Language, ideology, and
  discrimination in the United States. Taylor & Francis, 2022.

Brian Barry. Political Argument (Routledge Revivals). Routledge, 2010.

John Baugh. Linguistic profiling. In Black Linguistics, pp. 167–180. Routledge, 2005.

Barry Becker and Ronny Kohavi. Adult. UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1996.

Marilyn J Bruin and Christine C Cook. Understanding constraints and residential satisfaction among low-income
  single-parent families. Environment and Behavior, 29(4):532–553, 1997.

US Census Bureau. 2021 ACS 1-Year PUMS Data Dictionary. American Community Survey (ACS), 2021.

Toon Calders, Faisal Kamiran, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Building classifiers with independency constraints. In
  2009 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, pp. 13–18. IEEE, 2009.

Yatong Chen, Reilly Raab, Jialu Wang, and Yang Liu. Fairness transferability subject to bounded distribution
  shift. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Yatong Chen, Zeyu Tang, Kun Zhang, and Yang Liu. Model transferability with responsive decision subjects. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4921–4952. PMLR, 2023.

Silvia Chiappa. Path-specific counterfactual fairness. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
   Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 7801–7808, 2019.

Alexandra Chouldechova. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism prediction
  instruments. Big Data, 5(2):153–163, 2017.

Gerald A Cohen. On the currency of egalitarian justice. Ethics, 99(4):906–944, 1989.

Amanda Coston, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Dennis Wei, Kush R Varshney, Skyler Speakman, Zairah
 Mustahsan, and Supriyo Chakraborty. Fair transfer learning with missing protected attributes. In Proceedings
 of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 91–98, 2019.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amanda Coston, Alan Mishler, Edward H Kennedy, and Alexandra Chouldechova. Counterfactual risk assess-
 ments, evaluation, and fairness. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
 Transparency, pp. 582–593, 2020.

Elliot Creager, David Madras, Toniann Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. Causal modeling for fairness in dynamical
   systems. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2185–2195. PMLR, 2020.

Kimberle Crenshaw. Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics, and violence against women of
  color. Stan. L. Rev., 43, 1990.

Emily Diana, Wesley Gill, Michael Kearns, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, and Aaron Roth. Minimax group fairness:
  Algorithms and experiments. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society,
  pp. 66–76, 2021.

William Dieterich, Christina Mendoza, and Tim Brennan. Compas risk scales: Demonstrating accuracy equity
  and predictive parity. Northpointe Inc, 2016.

Frances Ding, Moritz Hardt, John Miller, and Ludwig Schmidt. Retiring adult: New datasets for fair machine
  learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 6478–6490, 2021.

Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness through awareness.
  In Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, pp. 214–226, 2012.

Robert F Engle, David F Hendry, and Jean-Francois Richard. Exogeneity. Econometrica: Journal of the
  Econometric Society, pp. 277–304, 1983.

Andrew Estornell, Sanmay Das, Yang Liu, and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik. Group-fair classification with strategic
  agents. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp.
  389–399, 2023.

James R Foulds, Rashidul Islam, Kamrun Naher Keya, and Shimei Pan. An intersectional definition of fairness.
  In 2020 IEEE 36th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), pp. 1918–1921. IEEE, 2020.

Vivek Gupta, Pegah Nokhiz, Chitradeep Dutta Roy, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. Equalizing recourse across
  groups. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03166, 2019.

Moritz Hardt, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters. Strategic classification. In
 Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, pp. 111–122,
 2016a.

Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, pp. 3315–3323, 2016b.

Hoda Heidari, Claudio Ferrari, Krishna Gummadi, and Andreas Krause. Fairness behind a veil of ignorance:
  A welfare analysis for automated decision making. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 31, 2018.

Hoda Heidari, Michele Loi, Krishna P Gummadi, and Andreas Krause. A moral framework for understanding
  fair ml through economic models of equality of opportunity. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 181–190, 2019a.

Hoda Heidari, Vedant Nanda, and Krishna Gummadi. On the long-term impact of algorithmic decision policies:
  Effort unfairness and feature segregation through social learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 2692–2701. PMLR, 2019b.

Patrik Hoyer, Dominik Janzing, Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Nonlinear causal
  discovery with additive noise models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 21,
  2008.

Lily Hu, Nicole Immorlica, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. The disparate effects of strategic manipulation. In
   Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 259–268, 2019.

Kosuke Imai and Zhichao Jiang. Principal fairness for human and algorithmic decision-making. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.10400, 2020.

Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
  internal covariate shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 448–456. PMLR, 2015.

Courtney G Joslin. Marital status discrimination 2.0. Boston University Law Review, 95(3):805, 2015.


                                                      11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Timothy A Judge and Daniel M Cable. The effect of physical height on workplace success and income:
  Preliminary test of a theoretical model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(3):428, 2004.

Faisal Kamiran, Indrė Žliobaitė, and Toon Calders. Quantifying explainable discrimination and removing illegal
   discrimination in automated decision making. Knowledge and Information Systems, 35(3):613–644, 2013.

Michael Kearns and Aaron Roth. The Ethical Algorithm: The Science of Socially Aware Algorithm Design.
  Oxford University Press, 2019.

Michael Kearns, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Preventing fairness gerrymandering: Auditing
  and learning for subgroup fairness. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2564–2572. PMLR,
  2018.

Niki Kilbertus, Mateo Rojas-Carulla, Giambattista Parascandolo, Moritz Hardt, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard
  Schölkopf. Avoiding discrimination through causal reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 30, pp. 656–666, 2017.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2014.

Scott Kirkpatrick, C Daniel Gelatt Jr, and Mario P Vecchi. Optimization by simulated annealing. Science, 220
  (4598):671–680, 1983.

Günter Klambauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Andreas Mayr, and Sepp Hochreiter. Self-normalizing neural networks.
   In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, pp. 971–980, 2017.

Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. Inherent trade-offs in the fair determination of risk
  scores. In Proceedings of the 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, 2017.

Youjin Kong. Are ”intersectionally fair” ai algorithms really fair to women of color? a philosophical analysis. In
  Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 485–494, 2022.

Matt Kusner, Joshua Loftus, Chris Russell, and Ricardo Silva. Counterfactual fairness. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, pp. 4066–4076, 2017.

Steffen L Lauritzen. Graphical Models, volume 17. Clarendon Press, 1996.

Nathanael Lauster and Adam Easterbrook. No room for new families? a field experiment measuring rental
  discrimination against same-sex couples and single parents. Social Problems, 58(3):389–409, 2011.

Francesco Locatello, Gabriele Abbati, Thomas Rainforth, Stefan Bauer, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Olivier
  Bachem. On the fairness of disentangled representations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 32, 2019.

Joshua Loftus, Chris Russell, Matt Kusner, and Ricardo Silva. Causal reasoning for algorithmic fairness. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1805.05859, 2018.

Christos Louizos, Kevin Swersky, Yujia Li, Max Welling, and Richard Zemel. The variational fair autoencoder.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.

R Duncan Luce and Howard Raiffa. Games and Decisions: Introduction and Critical Survey. Courier
  Corporation, 1989.

David Madras, Elliot Creager, Toniann Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. Learning adversarially fair and transferable
  representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06309, 2018.

Karima Makhlouf, Sami Zhioua, and Catuscia Palamidessi. Survey on causal-based machine learning fairness
  notions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09553, 2020.

Natalia Martinez, Martin Bertran, and Guillermo Sapiro. Minimax pareto fairness: A multi objective perspective.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6755–6764. PMLR, 2020.

Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey on bias and
  fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys, 54(6):1–35, 2021.

Smitha Milli, John Miller, Anca D Dragan, and Moritz Hardt. The social cost of strategic classification. In
  Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 230–239, 2019.


                                                       12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alan Mishler, Edward H Kennedy, and Alexandra Chouldechova. Fairness in risk assessment instruments:
  Post-processing to achieve counterfactual equalized odds. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on
  Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 386–400, 2021.

Razieh Nabi and Ilya Shpitser. Fair inference on outcomes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 32, pp. 1931–1940, 2018.

Razieh Nabi, Daniel Malinsky, and Ilya Shpitser. Learning optimal fair policies. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 4674–4682. PMLR, 2019.

Razieh Nabi, Daniel Malinsky, and Ilya Shpitser. Optimal training of fair predictive models. In Conference on
  Causal Learning and Reasoning, pp. 594–617. PMLR, 2022.

Hamed Nilforoshan, Johann D Gaebler, Ravi Shroff, and Sharad Goel. Causal conceptions of fairness and their
  consequences. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 16848–16887. PMLR, 2022.

Cathy O’neil. Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy.
  Crown, 2017.

Judea Pearl. Direct and indirect effects. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Uncertainty and
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 411–420, 2001.

Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge University Press, 2009.

Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Performative prediction. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7599–7609. PMLR, 2020.

Nicola Persico, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman. The effect of adolescent experience on labor market
  outcomes: The case of height. Journal of Political Economy, 112(5):1019–1053, 2004.

Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of Causal Inference: Foundations and
  Learning Algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.

Rebecca M Puhl and Chelsea A Heuer. Obesity stigma: Important considerations for public health. American
  Journal of Public Health, 100(6):1019–1028, 2010.

John Rawls. A Theory of Justice. Harvard University Press, 1971.

John Rawls. Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. Harvard University Press, 2001.

Ashkan Rezaei, Anqi Liu, Omid Memarrast, and Brian D Ziebart. Robust fairness under covariate shift. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 9419–9427, 2021.

Thomas Richardson. Markov properties for acyclic directed mixed graphs. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics,
  30:145–157, 2003.

James M Robins and Sander Greenland. Identifiability and exchangeability for direct and indirect effects.
  Epidemiology, 3:143–155, 1992.

Donald B Rubin. Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies. Journal of
  Educational Psychology, 66(5):688, 1974.

Donald B Rubin. Causal inference using potential outcomes: Design, modeling, decisions. Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 100(469):322–331, 2005.

Babak Salimi, Luke Rodriguez, Bill Howe, and Dan Suciu. Interventional fairness: Causal database repair
  for algorithmic fairness. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data, pp.
  793–810, 2019.

Nripsuta Ani Saxena, Karen Huang, Evan DeFilippis, Goran Radanovic, David C Parkes, and Yang Liu. How
  do fairness definitions fare? examining public attitudes towards algorithmic definitions of fairness. In
  Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 99–106, 2019.

Ilya Shpitser and Eric Tchetgen Tchetgen. Causal inference with a graphical hierarchy of interventions. The
   Annals of Statistics, pp. 2433–2466, 2016.

Changjian Shui, Qi Chen, Jiaqi Li, Boyu Wang, and Christian Gagné. Fair representation learning through
  implicit path alignment. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 20156–20175. PMLR, 2022.


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Harvineet Singh, Rina Singh, Vishwali Mhasawade, and Rumi Chunara. Fairness violations and mitigation under
  covariate shift. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
  pp. 3–13, 2021.
Jiaming Song, Pratyusha Kalluri, Aditya Grover, Shengjia Zhao, and Stefano Ermon. Learning controllable fair
   representations. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2164–2173,
   2019.
Peter Spirtes. Directed cyclic graphical representations of feedback models. In Proceedings of the Eleventh
  Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 491–498, 1995.

Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search. Springer New York,
  1993.
Zeyu Tang, Yatong Chen, Yang Liu, and Kun Zhang. Tier balancing: Towards dynamic fairness over underlying
  causal factors. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a.

Zeyu Tang, Jiji Zhang, and Kun Zhang. What-is and how-to for fairness in machine learning: A survey, reflection,
  and perspective. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(13s):1–37, 2023b.

Berk Ustun, Alexander Spangher, and Yang Liu. Actionable recourse in linear classification. In Proceedings of
  the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 10–19, 2019.
Tyler J VanderWeele and Stijn Vansteelandt. Odds ratios for mediation analysis for a dichotomous outcome.
  American Journal of Epidemiology, 172(12):1339–1348, 2010.

Julius von Kügelgen, Amir-Hossein Karimi, Umang Bhatt, Isabel Valera, Adrian Weller, and Bernhard Schölkopf.
   On the fairness of causal algorithmic recourse. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
   gence, volume 36, pp. 9584–9594, 2022.

Yongkai Wu, Lu Zhang, Xintao Wu, and Hanghang Tong. Pc-fairness: A unified framework for measuring
  causality-based fairness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, pp. 3399–3409,
  2019.

Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, and Krishna P Gummadi. Fairness beyond
 disparate treatment & disparate impact: Learning classification without disparate mistreatment. In Proceedings
 of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web, pp. 1171–1180, 2017.

Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair representations. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 325–333. PMLR, 2013.
Junzhe Zhang and Elias Bareinboim. Equality of opportunity in classification: A causal approach. In Advances
  in neural information processing systems, volume 31, 2018a.

Junzhe Zhang and Elias Bareinboim. Fairness in decision-making – the causal explanation formula. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018b.

Kun Zhang and Aapo Hyvärinen. On the identifiability of the post-nonlinear causal model. In 25th Conference
  on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 647–655. AUAI Press, 2009.
Lu Zhang, Yongkai Wu, and Xintao Wu. A causal framework for discovering and removing direct and indirect
  discrimination. In Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  3929–3935, 2017.

Xueru Zhang and Mingyan Liu. Fairness in learning-based sequential decision algorithms: A survey. In
  Handbook of Reinforcement Learning and Control, pp. 525–555. Springer, 2021.

Han Zhao and Geoffrey J Gordon. Inherent tradeoffs in learning fair representations. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 23(1):2527–2552, 2022.
Han Zhao, Amanda Coston, Tameem Adel, and Geoffrey J Gordon. Conditional learning of fair representations.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UPPLEMENT TO
“P ROCEDURAL FAIRNESS T HROUGH D ECOUPLING
O BJECTIONABLE DATA G ENERATING C OMPONENTS ”
 Zeyu Tang1 , Jialu Wang2 , Yang Liu2,4 , Peter Spirtes1 , and Kun Zhang1,3
 1
   Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
 2
   Computer Science and Engineering Department, University of California, Santa Cruz
 3
   Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
 4
   ByteDance Research
 zeyutang@cmu.edu, {faldict, yangliu}@ucsc.edu, {ps7z@andrew., kunz1@}cmu.edu


TABLE OF C ONTENTS : A PPENDIX

A Previous Works on Algorithmic Fairness Related to Data Generating Process                         16
     A.1 Causal Fairness Notions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
     A.2 Scenarios with Responsive Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
     A.3 Fair Representation Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17

B Our Approach: Differences and Connections to Previous Works                                       18
     B.1 Subject of Counter-Factual Analysis: Variable vs. Local Causal Mechanism . . . .           18
     B.2 Agent’s Response vs. Assigned Reference Point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
     B.3 Holistic Fair Representation Learning vs. Modular Objectionable Components De-
         coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19

C Detailed Illustrations of Our Framework                                                           20
     C.1 A Worked-Out Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         20
     C.2 Remarks on Derivation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21

D Experiment Details and Additional Results                                                         22
     D.1 Implementation Details and Scalability of Our Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22
     D.2 The Experiment on Simulated Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
     D.3 The Experiment on UCI Adult Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         25
     D.4 The Experiment on Folktables Data Set (PUBCOV Prediction Task) . . . . . . . . .           27

E Further Discussions                                                                               28
     E.1 Algorithmic Fairness: Outcome Emphasis vs. Procedural Emphasis . . . . . . . .             28
     E.2 Implication of Our Results on Procedural Fairness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      29
     E.3 Potential Limitations and Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Table 1: Summary of comparisons between our approach and closely related previous works.

                                        Address
                                                   Not depend on       Individualized         Individual-     Precisely defined
                                       disguised
 Fairness considerations              procedural
                                                    causal effect       mitigation or      level evaluation    disadvantaged
                                                   identifiability   actionable recourse     and auditing        individuals
                                      unfairness

 (Conditional) independence
 relationships (Dwork et al.,
 2012; Hardt et al., 2016b; Zafar                  depending on
                                          ✘                                  ✘                    ✘                  ✘
 et al., 2017; Coston et al., 2020;                the definition
 Imai & Jiang, 2020; Mishler
 et al., 2021)
 Path-specific (interventional)
 causal effect (Kilbertus et al.,
 2017; Zhang et al., 2017; Nabi           ✘              ✘                   ✘                   ✓                   ✘
 & Shpitser, 2018; Nabi et al.,
 2019; 2022; Salimi et al., 2019)
 (Path-specific) counterfactual
 causal effect (Kusner et al.,
 2017; Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al.,
                                          ✘              ✘                   ✘                   ✓                   ✘
 2019)
 Cost/effort incurred on users to
 perform recourse (Ustun et al.,
 2019; Gupta et al., 2019; von
                                          ✘              ✘                   ✓                   ✓                   ✘
 Kügelgen et al., 2022)
 Intersectional definition of
 subgroups (Kearns et al., 2018;          ✘              ✓                   ✘                    ✘                  ✓
 Foulds et al., 2020)
 Our approach                            ✓               ✓                   ✓                   ✓                   ✓


A      P REVIOUS W ORKS ON A LGORITHMIC FAIRNESS R ELATED TO DATA
       G ENERATING P ROCESS
In this section, we review related works in the previous literature that draw connections between
algorithmic fairness and data generating process, including causal fairness notions (Section A.1),
responsive agents (Section A.2), and representation learning with fairness considerations (Section
A.3). We summarize the comparisons between our approach and the previous literature in Table 1.
Detailed discussions of the differences and connections are presented in Section B.

A.1     C AUSAL FAIRNESS N OTIONS

The algorithmic fairness literature has recognized that causal analysis provides a principled way to
quantify the discrimination in data generating process. There are different proposals with respect to
the object of interest when evaluating causal fairness.

Path-Specific Interventional Causal Effects Motivated by the idea of quantifying the causal
influence from the protected feature A to final outcome Y according to the type of mediating
variables (if any), Kilbertus et al. (2017) propose to consider disjoint sets of descendant variables of
A. Particularly, there are descendant variables that are influenced by the protected feature A in an
unproblematic way, and these variables are called “resolving variables”; there are also descendant
variables that pass on influence from A to Y in an unjustifiable manner, and these variables are called
“proxies”. Kilbertus et al. (2017) capture fairness through the nonexistence of paths from A to Y that
are not blocked by a “resolving” mediator (No Unresolved Discrimination). Nabi & Shpitser (2018)
and follow-up works (Nabi et al., 2019; 2022) propose to directly quantify path-specific interventional
causal effect from the protected feature A to the final outcome Y along problematic paths, and define
causal fairness in terms of the nonexistence or bounded value of such path-specific causal effect.

(Path-Specific) Counterfactual Causal Effects Apart from the interventional causal effect, there
are proposals that consider the contrast between current world and hypothetical world, and define
causal fairness accordingly. Kusner et al. (2017) consider the counterfactual value that the protected
feature A can take, and reason about the difference between the prediction/decision made in the


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


current world and that made in the counterfactual world. The data generating process for the predicted
value or the decision outcome satisfies Counterfactual Fairness if the aforementioned difference is
eliminated, taking into consideration all paths in the causal graph that start from the protected feature
A and end with the final outcome Y (Kusner et al., 2017). Chiappa (2019) and Wu et al. (2019)
concurrently present the more fine-grained version of Counterfactual Fairness, namely, Path-Specific
Counterfactual Fairness or PC-Fairness, and propose that the evaluation of counterfactual causal
effect from A and Y can be carried out in a path-specific way.

Causal Quantities and Observed Disparities Different from evaluating causal fairness violation in
terms of the causal effect from attributes (e.g., the protected feature A) to the final outcome Y , there
are also proposals that put more emphasis on disparities in error rates related to potential outcomes
(Rubin, 1974; 2005). Zhang & Bareinboim (2018b) present a decomposition of the observed disparity
in terms of counterfactual quantities, and show that one can utilize the causal explanation formula
to decompose the total variation between the protected feature A and the final outcome Y in terms
of counterfactual direct effect, counterfactual indirect effect, and counterfactual spurious effect
(Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018b). Zhang & Bareinboim (2018a) focus on the group-level fairness
notion Equalized Odds (Hardt et al., 2016b) and present the decomposition of group-level true/false
positive rate disparities in terms of counterfactual direct error rates, counterfactual indirect error
rates, and counterfactual spurious error rates (Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018a). Previous literature also
contains causal analogues of group-level observational disparity measures, which capture conditional
independence relationships among the protected feature, the final outcome, and the potential outcome,
for instance, Counterfactual Predictive Parity (Coston et al., 2020), Counterfactual Equalized Odds
(Mishler et al., 2021), and Conditional Principal Fairness (Imai & Jiang, 2020).

A.2    S CENARIOS WITH R ESPONSIVE AGENTS

When deploying a decision-making policy, the subject of the decision might respond to the predicted
outcome or decision. Previous literature has formulated such responsive behavior of agents as well
as the potential fairness implications from the perspective of distribution shifts (Coston et al., 2019;
Singh et al., 2021; Rezaei et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; 2023), the strategic behavior of individuals
(Hardt et al., 2016a; Hu et al., 2019; Milli et al., 2019; Perdomo et al., 2020; Estornell et al., 2023),
and the actionable recourse or personal efforts of individuals (Ustun et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2019;
Heidari et al., 2019b; von Kügelgen et al., 2022). Compared to causal fairness notions where the goal
is to quantify the causal influence from attributes to the final outcome, the analysis with respect to
responsive agents or population have different emphases when considering the role of data generating
process. For instance, one can explicitly model the underlying data generating process and compare
costs of actions an individual can possibly take, and then evaluate fairness in terms of the disparity of
efforts incurred on the individual in order to obtain favorable decisions (von Kügelgen et al., 2022).
This is different from constructing counterfactuals and reason about the causal effect of interest from
certain attributes to the final outcome (Section A.1).

A.3    FAIR R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

The algorithmic fairness literature also includes fairness considerations in the context of representation
learning. Zemel et al. (2013) aim at deriving the fair representation that encodes the data as good as
possible, and at the same time obfuscates the group membership of the agents. Louizos et al. (2016)
focus on the variational autoencoding (VAE) architecture (Kingma & Welling, 2014) and propose
to utilize VAEs with priors that encourage independence between the protected feature and latent
factors of variation, so that downstream tasks can be performed on “purged” latent representations.
Madras et al. (2018) consider the setting where the learned representation is utilized by downstream
tasks with unknown objectives, and explore the connection between observational group fairness
notions and adversarial representation learning. Locatello et al. (2019) consider the setting where
the prediction is based on the learned representation of (potentially high-dimensional) observations
and the protected feature is unobserved. Locatello et al. (2019) investigate the effectiveness of
different proposals of disentanglement on various state-of-the-art models, and suggest the potential of
encouraging certain fairness notions through disentangled representation learning when the protected
feature in not observed. Various technical treatments of the fairness violation are also proposed, for
instance, the information-theoretically motivated objective for learning controllable (in the sense


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of expressiveness-fairness tradeoff) fair representations (Song et al., 2019), the lower bounds on
group-wise or joint errors of any (approximately) fair classifier (Zhao & Gordon, 2022), the balanced
error rates and conditional alignment of representations (Zhao et al., 2020), the bi-level optimization
with implicit path alignment (Shui et al., 2022).

B     O UR A PPROACH : D IFFERENCES AND C ONNECTIONS TO P REVIOUS W ORKS

In this section, we present differences and connections of our approach compared to previous
works. In particular, we discuss the contrast between counter-factual analysis with respect to the
variable and that with respect to the causal mechanism (Section B.1), the difference between the role
played by reference points in our framework and that played by agent’s responses in previous works
(Section B.2), the comparison between the holistic approach of fair representation learning with
outcome emphasis on fairness, and the modular approach of decoupling objectionable data generating
components with procedural emphasis on fairness (Section B.3).

B.1   S UBJECT OF C OUNTER -FACTUAL A NALYSIS : VARIABLE VS . L OCAL C AUSAL
      M ECHANISM

Sharing the procedural emphasis on algorithmic fairness, our approach is most closely related to
causal fairness notions proposed in the previous literature (Section A.1). To differentiate from the
technical term “counterfactual” in the causal inference literature (Spirtes et al., 1993; Pearl, 2009;
Peters et al., 2017), we use the term “counter-factual” with a hyphen, as the opposite to “factual”, to
express in a general sense that something has not in fact happened in the current world. The technical
treatment may involve interventional (Kilbertus et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Nabi et al., 2019;
2022) and/or counterfactual (Kusner et al., 2017; Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al., 2019) causal effects.
Question B.1 (Counter-Factual Analysis w.r.t. Variables Only). Under certain conditions and
assumptions, what would happen to the predicted outcome in the factual world and the counter-factual
world, had certain variables taken different values?

At a high level, the primary question asked by previous causal fairness proposals is Question B.1.
As we have seen in Section A.1, causal fairness notions are based on estimating or bounding certain
causal effects among variables. Typically, the variables involved in the causal effect of interest
include the protected feature A, the final outcome Y or its predicted counterpart Yb , and certain
specific variables closely related to A but not the protected feature itself, e.g., explanatory features
(Kamiran et al., 2013), proxy variables (Kilbertus et al., 2017), redlining attributes (Zhang et al.,
2017), admissible variables (Salimi et al., 2019), and so on. Apart from technical details of the
quantification, causal fairness notions propose that the (combination of) causal effects from the
protected feature or proxy variables to the outcome should be bounded around a certain constant.
Although the quantification of the causal effect relies on certain assumption or knowledge of the
underlying data generating process (e.g., the causal modeling in terms of a DAG), the fairness
violation is directly quantified in terms of causal effects on the outcome Y or Yb . Such quantification
involves introducing counter-factual values for the variables, specified in an ex ante way. For instance,
it is a common starting point for causal fairness notions to consider the domain of values for the
protected feature A (Kilbertus et al., 2017; Kusner et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Nabi et al.,
2019; 2022; Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al., 2019), and then define the causal effect on outcome accordingly.
While previous causal fairness notions are proposed with procedural emphasis on algorithmic fairness,
they are carried out through counter-factual analyses with respect to variables instead of the data
generating process itself, and therefore, resonate more with the outcome emphasis on fairness. We
argue that procedural fairness necessitate counter-factual analyses with respect to causal mechanisms
instead of only variables. We consider the following question:
Question B.2 (Counter-Factual Analysis w.r.t. Local Causal Mechanisms). Under certain con-
ditions and assumptions, what would happen to the predicted outcome in the factual world and the
counter-factual world, had certain local causal mechanisms behaved differently?

Te begin with, our work is not to propose a causal fairness notion defined directly on the outcome
(counter-factual analysis with respect to variables), but a framework to decouple objectionable


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


data generating components for procedural fairness (counter-factual analysis with respect to causal
mechanisms). Although the causal modeling of the data generating process is explicitly considered
by causal fairness notions, previous works focus on Question B.1 and have not adequately addressed
the procedural guarantee of fairness. As a consequence, the issue of disguised procedural unfairness
is often overlooked (illustrated in Section 3), undermining the intention to achieve procedural fairness.
In contrast, our framework does not directly enforce fairness on the outcome. We consider Question
B.2 and utilize the value instantiation rule for local causal modules (Algorithm 1) together with
appropriate reference points in the overall pipeline (Algorithm 2), to ensure that the requirements of
procedural fairness are satisfied.
Furthermore, our framework is not a special case nor an extension to previous causal fairness notions.
We reflect on the goal of achieving procedural fairness and propose to decouple objectionable
data generating components from their neutral counterparts when performing prediction. We first
specify the value instantiation rule for local causal modules, and then find appropriate values for
reference points in an ex post way, for the purpose of decoupling the corresponding objectionable
data generating components. This is very different from intervening on the input variable and setting
values in an ex ante way, for the purpose of deriving interventional or counterfactual causal effect on
downstream variables.
Moreover, our framework can handle more precise definitions of the disadvantaged individuals. In
practical scenarios, the least advantaged individuals are not always precisely and fully characterized
by the value of the protected features (Crenshaw, 1990; Kearns et al., 2018; Foulds et al., 2020).
Because previous causal fairness notions focus on Question B.1, more precise definitions of the
disadvantaged individuals introduce additional technical difficulties, especially the identifiability of
causal effects. In contrast, we consider Question B.2, and our framework naturally handles, and in
fact, benefits from the more precise specifications of the least advantaged individuals. As we shall see
in Section D, we can focus on the state of affairs of the least advantaged individuals and further derive
the reference points to their greatest benefit by solving the optimization problem in Equation (4).


B.2   AGENT ’ S R ESPONSE VS . A SSIGNED R EFERENCE P OINT

In terms of the possible discrepancy between the actual value and the perceived value (e.g., as seen
by a decision-making policy) of individual’s attributes, the reference points in our framework share
a similar flavor with the updated attribute values discussed in previous works on responsive agents
(Section A.2). Different from the consideration of the fairness implication of strategic behaviors
on the decision-making policy (Hu et al., 2019; Milli et al., 2019; Estornell et al., 2023) or the
impartiality of the effort for an actionable recourse (Ustun et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2019; Heidari
et al., 2019b; von Kügelgen et al., 2022), we do not consider potential responses (based on benevolent
or malicious intentions) to the deployed or to-be-deployed decision-making policy. Instead, we focus
on the data generating process itself, and investigate how objectionable components can be decoupled
from the process to achieve procedural fairness.
For objectionable data generating components, when there is no additional assumption on the func-
tional form of the fair local causal module, reference points are introduced to counteract and decouple
the objectionable components. From the decision-maker’s perspective, when it is acknowledged that
objectionable data generating components exist, reference points instruct how the decision-making
policy should use as inputs for these components (instead of the actual data). Such perception of
attribute values is for the purpose of changing the behavior of the local causal module that contains
problematic aspects, so that objectionable data generating components can be decoupled.


B.3   H OLISTIC FAIR R EPRESENTATION L EARNING VS . M ODULAR O BJECTIONABLE
      C OMPONENTS D ECOUPLING

The high-level goal of fair representation learning is to derive an encoding to express the data, as a
replacement for directly making use of the observational features (Section A.3). The formulation of
the problem aims to provide readily available representations that can be utilized by third-parties for
downstream tasks. The representation is derived with a holistic approach, treating the entire feature
map as a whole when enforcing certain fairness notions.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Because of the intended obliviousness, or robustness to a certain extent, of knowledge or assumption
about downstream tasks that utilize the learned representations, the criterion of interest for fair
representation learning is largely limited to associative (i.e., not causal) fairness notions. Specifically,
Demographic Parity (Calders et al., 2009; Dwork et al., 2012) in introduced to limit the marginal
dependence between the (potentially unobserved) protected feature and the final outcome (Zemel
et al., 2013; Louizos et al., 2016; Madras et al., 2018; Locatello et al., 2019; Song et al., 2019; Zhao
& Gordon, 2022). Equalized Odds (Hardt et al., 2016b) is considered to enforce the (approximate)
conditional independence between the protected feature and the predicted outcome given the ground
truth (Zhao et al., 2020). Predictive Parity (Dieterich et al., 2016; Chouldechova, 2017; Zafar et al.,
2017) is utilized to promote the sufficiency condition, i.e., the (approximate) conditional independence
between the protected feature and the ground truth given the predicted outcome (Shui et al., 2022).
The similarity between our approach and previous works on fair representation learning lies in the fact
that there is no fairness-related constraint on the predictor itself. The reasons behind this similarity
are multifaceted. Fair representation learning aims to provide downstream-task-ready feature maps,
often without an explicit reference to properties of the predictor or decision-making policy. In
contrast, our framework specifically addresses the disguised procedural unfairness. The requirements
of procedural fairness prohibit arbitrary alterations on neutral data generating components, and
necessitate decoupling objectionable components with appropriate reference points. Furthermore,
different from the holistic approach of deriving representation with outcome emphasis on fairness,
we aim to provide the procedural fairness guarantee. We take a modular approach and investigate
objectionable aspects of the data generating process in each local causal mechanism.


C     D ETAILED I LLUSTRATIONS OF O UR F RAMEWORK

In this section, we present detailed illustrations of the value instantiation rule (Algorithm 1) and
the overall pipeline of decoupling objectionable components (Algorithm 2). We first present the
step-by-step application of our framework in Section C.1. Then, in Section C.2, we provide remarks
on derivation details.

C.1    A W ORKED -O UT E XAMPLE

Let us consider the following data generating process involving variables (A, X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 , Y ):
                                   A = EA ,
                                   C = EC ,
                                  X1 = fX1 (A, C, E1 ),
                                  X2 = fX2 (A, C, X1 , E2 ),                                            (5)
                                  X3 = fX3 (C, X2 , E3 ),
                                  X4 = fX4 (X1 , X2 , E4 ),
                                   Y = fY (A, X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 , EY ),
where E· ’s are independent noise terms, and f· ’s specify the functional form of causal relations. Let
us use h(·) to denote the corresponding predictor, and θ̂’s to denote the learned parameters without
introducing any fairness constraint.
We summarize in Figure 3 the causal graph for the data generating process and the local causal
modules that involve objectionable data generating components (denoted by red edges). Step 1
of Algorithm 2 sorts the sequence of nodes into (A, C, X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 , Y ). Then, we proceed by
following this sequence and investigating each local causal module. When there is no additional
knowledge or assumption on how one can directly modify the functional forms in Equation (5) to get
a fair process, we illustrate step-by-step the application of the value instantiation rule (Algorithm 1)
to decouple objectionable components by introducing reference points.
Consider an individual with original feature values (a, x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ). In Figure 3(b), for the local
causal module that has X2 as the output, the direct parent nodes of X2 include (A, C, X1 ), among
which A is the tail node of the red edge A → X2 . We denote the reference point for A with respect
to the objectionable component A → X2 as a|refA→X2 . Because of the existence of such objectionable


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A

 X1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                X2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    X3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         X1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               X2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    X3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             X1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             X2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    X3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        X1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             X2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    X3
 <latexit sha1_base64="asftAxZ1xlgPNgRlRuU+TngCkQY=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOyNr7gajXr0MhgCnsKuoOYYEMRjRPOAZAmzk9lkyMzsMjMrhCWf4ElQEK/6If6CJ//GyeOgiQUNRVU33V1hwpk2nvft5NbWNza38tvuzm5hb794cNjUcaoIbZCYx6odYk05k7RhmOG0nSiKRchpKxxdTf3WA1WaxfLejBMaCDyQLGIEGyvdtXt+r1jyKt4MaJX4C1KqFT7T8rX7Ue8Vv7r9mKSCSkM41rrje4kJMqwMI5xO3G6qaYLJCA9ox1KJBdVBNjt1gspW6aMoVrakQTP190SGhdZjEdpOgc1QL3tT8T+vk5qoGmRMJqmhkswXRSlHJkbTv1GfKUoMH1uCiWL2VkSGWGFibDqua1Pwl39eJc2zin9ROb+1cVRhjjwcwwmcgg+XUIMbqEMDCAzgEZ7hxRHOk/PqvM1bc85i5gj+wHn/AeaKkCs=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="HTf4VmiCvdrRfYRy1cOAyZC8ilg=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9gNqDkGBPEY0TwgWcLsZDYZMjO7zMwKYckneBIUxKt+iL/gyb9x8jhoYkFDUdVNd1eYcKaN5307a+sbm1vbuR13dy+/f1A4PGrqOFWENkjMY9UOsaacSdowzHDaThTFIuS0FY6upn7rgSrNYnlvxgkNBB5IFjGCjZXu2r1Kr1D0yt4MaJX4C1Ks5T/T0rX7Ue8Vvrr9mKSCSkM41rrje4kJMqwMI5xO3G6qaYLJCA9ox1KJBdVBNjt1gkpW6aMoVrakQTP190SGhdZjEdpOgc1QL3tT8T+vk5qoGmRMJqmhkswXRSlHJkbTv1GfKUoMH1uCiWL2VkSGWGFibDqua1Pwl39eJc1K2b8on9/aOKowRw5O4BTOwIdLqMEN1KEBBAbwCM/w4gjnyXl13uata85i5hj+wHn/AegPkCw=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="ma2aJuljZbYIVfXY3YdRwo28VJY=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9hV1BwDgniMaB6QLGF2MpsMmZldZmaFsOQTPAkK4lU/xF/w5N84eRw0saChqOqmuytMONPG876dldW19Y3N3Ja7vZPf3SvsHzR0nCpC6yTmsWqFWFPOJK0bZjhtJYpiEXLaDIdXE7/5QJVmsbw3o4QGAvclixjBxkp3re5Zt1D0yt4UaJn4c1Ks5j/T0rX7UesWvjq9mKSCSkM41rrte4kJMqwMI5yO3U6qaYLJEPdp21KJBdVBNj11jEpW6aEoVrakQVP190SGhdYjEdpOgc1AL3oT8T+vnZqoEmRMJqmhkswWRSlHJkaTv1GPKUoMH1mCiWL2VkQGWGFibDqua1PwF39eJo3Tsn9RPr+1cVRghhwcwTGcgA+XUIUbqEEdCPThEZ7hxRHOk/PqvM1aV5z5zCH8gfP+A+mUkC0=</latexit>     <latexit sha1_base64="asftAxZ1xlgPNgRlRuU+TngCkQY=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOyNr7gajXr0MhgCnsKuoOYYEMRjRPOAZAmzk9lkyMzsMjMrhCWf4ElQEK/6If6CJ//GyeOgiQUNRVU33V1hwpk2nvft5NbWNza38tvuzm5hb794cNjUcaoIbZCYx6odYk05k7RhmOG0nSiKRchpKxxdTf3WA1WaxfLejBMaCDyQLGIEGyvdtXt+r1jyKt4MaJX4C1KqFT7T8rX7Ue8Vv7r9mKSCSkM41rrje4kJMqwMI5xO3G6qaYLJCA9ox1KJBdVBNjt1gspW6aMoVrakQTP190SGhdZjEdpOgc1QL3tT8T+vk5qoGmRMJqmhkswXRSlHJkbTv1GfKUoMH1uCiWL2VkSGWGFibDqua1Pwl39eJc2zin9ROb+1cVRhjjwcwwmcgg+XUIMbqEMDCAzgEZ7hxRHOk/PqvM1bc85i5gj+wHn/AeaKkCs=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="HTf4VmiCvdrRfYRy1cOAyZC8ilg=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9gNqDkGBPEY0TwgWcLsZDYZMjO7zMwKYckneBIUxKt+iL/gyb9x8jhoYkFDUdVNd1eYcKaN5307a+sbm1vbuR13dy+/f1A4PGrqOFWENkjMY9UOsaacSdowzHDaThTFIuS0FY6upn7rgSrNYnlvxgkNBB5IFjGCjZXu2r1Kr1D0yt4MaJX4C1Ks5T/T0rX7Ue8Vvrr9mKSCSkM41rrje4kJMqwMI5xO3G6qaYLJCA9ox1KJBdVBNjt1gkpW6aMoVrakQTP190SGhdZjEdpOgc1QL3tT8T+vk5qoGmRMJqmhkswXRSlHJkbTv1GfKUoMH1uCiWL2VkSGWGFibDqua1Pwl39eJc1K2b8on9/aOKowRw5O4BTOwIdLqMEN1KEBBAbwCM/w4gjnyXl13uata85i5hj+wHn/AegPkCw=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="ma2aJuljZbYIVfXY3YdRwo28VJY=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9hV1BwDgniMaB6QLGF2MpsMmZldZmaFsOQTPAkK4lU/xF/w5N84eRw0saChqOqmuytMONPG876dldW19Y3N3Ja7vZPf3SvsHzR0nCpC6yTmsWqFWFPOJK0bZjhtJYpiEXLaDIdXE7/5QJVmsbw3o4QGAvclixjBxkp3re5Zt1D0yt4UaJn4c1Ks5j/T0rX7UesWvjq9mKSCSkM41rrte4kJMqwMI5yO3U6qaYLJEPdp21KJBdVBNj11jEpW6aEoVrakQVP190SGhdYjEdpOgc1AL3oT8T+vnZqoEmRMJqmhkswWRSlHJkaTv1GPKUoMH1mCiWL2VkQGWGFibDqua1PwF39eJo3Tsn9RPr+1cVRghhwcwTGcgA+XUIUbqEEdCPThEZ7hxRHOk/PqvM1aV5z5zCH8gfP+A+mUkC0=</latexit>         <latexit sha1_base64="asftAxZ1xlgPNgRlRuU+TngCkQY=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOyNr7gajXr0MhgCnsKuoOYYEMRjRPOAZAmzk9lkyMzsMjMrhCWf4ElQEK/6If6CJ//GyeOgiQUNRVU33V1hwpk2nvft5NbWNza38tvuzm5hb794cNjUcaoIbZCYx6odYk05k7RhmOG0nSiKRchpKxxdTf3WA1WaxfLejBMaCDyQLGIEGyvdtXt+r1jyKt4MaJX4C1KqFT7T8rX7Ue8Vv7r9mKSCSkM41rrje4kJMqwMI5xO3G6qaYLJCA9ox1KJBdVBNjt1gspW6aMoVrakQTP190SGhdZjEdpOgc1QL3tT8T+vk5qoGmRMJqmhkswXRSlHJkbTv1GfKUoMH1uCiWL2VkSGWGFibDqua1Pwl39eJc2zin9ROb+1cVRhjjwcwwmcgg+XUIMbqEMDCAzgEZ7hxRHOk/PqvM1bc85i5gj+wHn/AeaKkCs=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="HTf4VmiCvdrRfYRy1cOAyZC8ilg=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9gNqDkGBPEY0TwgWcLsZDYZMjO7zMwKYckneBIUxKt+iL/gyb9x8jhoYkFDUdVNd1eYcKaN5307a+sbm1vbuR13dy+/f1A4PGrqOFWENkjMY9UOsaacSdowzHDaThTFIuS0FY6upn7rgSrNYnlvxgkNBB5IFjGCjZXu2r1Kr1D0yt4MaJX4C1Ks5T/T0rX7Ue8Vvrr9mKSCSkM41rrje4kJMqwMI5xO3G6qaYLJCA9ox1KJBdVBNjt1gkpW6aMoVrakQTP190SGhdZjEdpOgc1QL3tT8T+vk5qoGmRMJqmhkswXRSlHJkbTv1GfKUoMH1uCiWL2VkSGWGFibDqua1Pwl39eJc1K2b8on9/aOKowRw5O4BTOwIdLqMEN1KEBBAbwCM/w4gjnyXl13uata85i5hj+wHn/AegPkCw=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="ma2aJuljZbYIVfXY3YdRwo28VJY=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9hV1BwDgniMaB6QLGF2MpsMmZldZmaFsOQTPAkK4lU/xF/w5N84eRw0saChqOqmuytMONPG876dldW19Y3N3Ja7vZPf3SvsHzR0nCpC6yTmsWqFWFPOJK0bZjhtJYpiEXLaDIdXE7/5QJVmsbw3o4QGAvclixjBxkp3re5Zt1D0yt4UaJn4c1Ks5j/T0rX7UesWvjq9mKSCSkM41rrte4kJMqwMI5yO3U6qaYLJEPdp21KJBdVBNj11jEpW6aEoVrakQVP190SGhdYjEdpOgc1AL3oT8T+vnZqoEmRMJqmhkswWRSlHJkaTv1GPKUoMH1mCiWL2VkQGWGFibDqua1PwF39eJo3Tsn9RPr+1cVRghhwcwTGcgA+XUIUbqEEdCPThEZ7hxRHOk/PqvM1aV5z5zCH8gfP+A+mUkC0=</latexit>    <latexit sha1_base64="asftAxZ1xlgPNgRlRuU+TngCkQY=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOyNr7gajXr0MhgCnsKuoOYYEMRjRPOAZAmzk9lkyMzsMjMrhCWf4ElQEK/6If6CJ//GyeOgiQUNRVU33V1hwpk2nvft5NbWNza38tvuzm5hb794cNjUcaoIbZCYx6odYk05k7RhmOG0nSiKRchpKxxdTf3WA1WaxfLejBMaCDyQLGIEGyvdtXt+r1jyKt4MaJX4C1KqFT7T8rX7Ue8Vv7r9mKSCSkM41rrje4kJMqwMI5xO3G6qaYLJCA9ox1KJBdVBNjt1gspW6aMoVrakQTP190SGhdZjEdpOgc1QL3tT8T+vk5qoGmRMJqmhkswXRSlHJkbTv1GfKUoMH1uCiWL2VkSGWGFibDqua1Pwl39eJc2zin9ROb+1cVRhjjwcwwmcgg+XUIMbqEMDCAzgEZ7hxRHOk/PqvM1bc85i5gj+wHn/AeaKkCs=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="HTf4VmiCvdrRfYRy1cOAyZC8ilg=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9gNqDkGBPEY0TwgWcLsZDYZMjO7zMwKYckneBIUxKt+iL/gyb9x8jhoYkFDUdVNd1eYcKaN5307a+sbm1vbuR13dy+/f1A4PGrqOFWENkjMY9UOsaacSdowzHDaThTFIuS0FY6upn7rgSrNYnlvxgkNBB5IFjGCjZXu2r1Kr1D0yt4MaJX4C1Ks5T/T0rX7Ue8Vvrr9mKSCSkM41rrje4kJMqwMI5xO3G6qaYLJCA9ox1KJBdVBNjt1gkpW6aMoVrakQTP190SGhdZjEdpOgc1QL3tT8T+vk5qoGmRMJqmhkswXRSlHJkbTv1GfKUoMH1uCiWL2VkSGWGFibDqua1Pwl39eJc1K2b8on9/aOKowRw5O4BTOwIdLqMEN1KEBBAbwCM/w4gjnyXl13uata85i5hj+wHn/AegPkCw=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="ma2aJuljZbYIVfXY3YdRwo28VJY=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9hV1BwDgniMaB6QLGF2MpsMmZldZmaFsOQTPAkK4lU/xF/w5N84eRw0saChqOqmuytMONPG876dldW19Y3N3Ja7vZPf3SvsHzR0nCpC6yTmsWqFWFPOJK0bZjhtJYpiEXLaDIdXE7/5QJVmsbw3o4QGAvclixjBxkp3re5Zt1D0yt4UaJn4c1Ks5j/T0rX7UesWvjq9mKSCSkM41rrte4kJMqwMI5yO3U6qaYLJEPdp21KJBdVBNj11jEpW6aEoVrakQVP190SGhdYjEdpOgc1AL3oT8T+vnZqoEmRMJqmhkswWRSlHJkaTv1GPKUoMH1mCiWL2VkQGWGFibDqua1PwF39eJo3Tsn9RPr+1cVRghhwcwTGcgA+XUIUbqEEdCPThEZ7hxRHOk/PqvM1aV5z5zCH8gfP+A+mUkC0=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          X4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 X4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    X4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             X4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="hOYdc/bWXVzojMsnMO+30hD6sVg=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9gVHzkGBPEY0TwgWcLsZDYZMjO7zMwKYckneBIUxKt+iL/gyb9x8jhoYkFDUdVNd1eYcKaN5307K6tr6xubuS13eye/u1fYP2joOFWE1knMY9UKsaacSVo3zHDaShTFIuS0GQ6vJn7zgSrNYnlvRgkNBO5LFjGCjZXuWt2zbqHolb0p0DLx56RYzX+mpWv3o9YtfHV6MUkFlYZwrHXb9xITZFgZRjgdu51U0wSTIe7TtqUSC6qDbHrqGJWs0kNRrGxJg6bq74kMC61HIrSdApuBXvQm4n9eOzVRJciYTFJDJZktilKOTIwmf6MeU5QYPrIEE8XsrYgMsMLE2HRc16bgL/68TBqnZf+ifH5r46jADDk4gmM4AR8uoQo3UIM6EOjDIzzDiyOcJ+fVeZu1rjjzmUP4A+f9B+sZkC4=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="hOYdc/bWXVzojMsnMO+30hD6sVg=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9gVHzkGBPEY0TwgWcLsZDYZMjO7zMwKYckneBIUxKt+iL/gyb9x8jhoYkFDUdVNd1eYcKaN5307K6tr6xubuS13eye/u1fYP2joOFWE1knMY9UKsaacSVo3zHDaShTFIuS0GQ6vJn7zgSrNYnlvRgkNBO5LFjGCjZXuWt2zbqHolb0p0DLx56RYzX+mpWv3o9YtfHV6MUkFlYZwrHXb9xITZFgZRjgdu51U0wSTIe7TtqUSC6qDbHrqGJWs0kNRrGxJg6bq74kMC61HIrSdApuBXvQm4n9eOzVRJciYTFJDJZktilKOTIwmf6MeU5QYPrIEE8XsrYgMsMLE2HRc16bgL/68TBqnZf+ifH5r46jADDk4gmM4AR8uoQo3UIM6EOjDIzzDiyOcJ+fVeZu1rjjzmUP4A+f9B+sZkC4=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="hOYdc/bWXVzojMsnMO+30hD6sVg=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9gVHzkGBPEY0TwgWcLsZDYZMjO7zMwKYckneBIUxKt+iL/gyb9x8jhoYkFDUdVNd1eYcKaN5307K6tr6xubuS13eye/u1fYP2joOFWE1knMY9UKsaacSVo3zHDaShTFIuS0GQ6vJn7zgSrNYnlvRgkNBO5LFjGCjZXuWt2zbqHolb0p0DLx56RYzX+mpWv3o9YtfHV6MUkFlYZwrHXb9xITZFgZRjgdu51U0wSTIe7TtqUSC6qDbHrqGJWs0kNRrGxJg6bq74kMC61HIrSdApuBXvQm4n9eOzVRJciYTFJDJZktilKOTIwmf6MeU5QYPrIEE8XsrYgMsMLE2HRc16bgL/68TBqnZf+ifH5r46jADDk4gmM4AR8uoQo3UIM6EOjDIzzDiyOcJ+fVeZu1rjjzmUP4A+f9B+sZkC4=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="hOYdc/bWXVzojMsnMO+30hD6sVg=">AAAB63icbVDLSgNBEOz1GVejUY9eBkPAU9gVHzkGBPEY0TwgWcLsZDYZMjO7zMwKYckneBIUxKt+iL/gyb9x8jhoYkFDUdVNd1eYcKaN5307K6tr6xubuS13eye/u1fYP2joOFWE1knMY9UKsaacSVo3zHDaShTFIuS0GQ6vJn7zgSrNYnlvRgkNBO5LFjGCjZXuWt2zbqHolb0p0DLx56RYzX+mpWv3o9YtfHV6MUkFlYZwrHXb9xITZFgZRjgdu51U0wSTIe7TtqUSC6qDbHrqGJWs0kNRrGxJg6bq74kMC61HIrSdApuBXvQm4n9eOzVRJciYTFJDJZktilKOTIwmf6MeU5QYPrIEE8XsrYgMsMLE2HRc16bgL/68TBqnZf+ifH5r46jADDk4gmM4AR8uoQo3UIM6EOjDIzzDiyOcJ+fVeZu1rjjzmUP4A+f9B+sZkC4=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>


(a) Causal graph for data                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (b) Local causal module                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (c) Local causal module                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (d) Local causal module
    generating process                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 with X2 as output                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     with X4 as output                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              with Y as output

Figure 3: Detailed illustrations of the application of value instantiation rule. Panel (a) presents the
          causal graph, with red edges denoting objectionable components. Panels (b) to (d) present
          local causal modules that involve objectionable component(s).


component, we use the reference point a|ref    A→X2 as the input for A since A = Tail(A → X2 ),
following Step 6 of Algorithm 1. We would like to note that a|ref  A→X2 can be the same as or different
from a, the original value of the variable A, as long as it is to the greatest benefit of the least benefit
of the least advantaged individuals. For downstream causal modules that take X2 as part of the inputs
(Step 8 of Algorithm 1), the value to fill in the placeholder for X2 should be:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b2 = hX2 (a|ref
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x           A→X2 , c, x1 ; θ̂X2 ).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (6)
For instance, although there is no objectionable component in the local causal module that has X3 as
the output, one should use x
                           b2 as the input value of X2 (since X2 has ancestor node A which was set
to a reference point):
                                        x
                                        b3 = hX3 (c, x
                                                     b2 ; θ̂X3 ).                                (7)

Similarly in Figure 3(c), for the local causal module that has X4 as the output, there is an objectionable
component X1 → X4 . We can denote the reference point for X1 with respect to the edge X1 → X4
as x1 |ref
       X1 →X4 , and derive the predicted value for X4 that decouples the objectionable component:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b4 = hX4 (x1 |ref
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x             X1 →X4 , x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          b2 ; θ̂X4 ),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (8)

where x1 |ref
          X1 →X4 can equal to or differ from x1 , and x
                                                      b2 is derived from Equation (6).
In Figure 3(d), for the local causal module that has Y as the output, there are several objectionable
components. We denote the reference point for A with respect to the objectionable component
A → Y as a|ref                                                                       ref
               A→Y , the reference point for X1 with respect to X1 → Y as x1 |X1 →Y , and the
                                                       ref
reference point for X1 with respect to X2 → Y as x2 |X2 →Y . One can derive the prediction for Y :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  yb = hY (a|ref       ref         ref
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A→Y , x1 |X1 →Y , x2 |X2 →Y , x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b3 , x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                b4 ; θ̂Y ),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (9)
where x
      b3 and x
             b4 are derived from Equation (7) and Equation (8), respectively.

C.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R EMARKS ON D ERIVATION D ETAILS

Firstly, if we compare the input values for A in Equation (6) and Equation (9), we can see that the
reference point values a|ref               ref
                            A→X2 and a|A→Y correspond to specific objectionable components instead
of the variable A. We can also see that the input values for X1 in Equation (8) and Equation (9) can
be different, since x1 |ref               ref
                         X1 →X4 and x1 |X1 →Y correspond to objectionable components X1 → X4 and
X1 → Y , respectively. The potentially different reference point values taken by the same node, when
it serves as the tail node for different objectionable components, quantitatively embody the discussion
on the counter-factual analysis with respect to local causal mechanisms, instead of that with respect
to variables only (Section B.1).
Remark C.1. The value of the reference point corresponds to the objectionable component, instead of
the variable on which the reference point is assigned.
Secondly, the objectionable component, such as an edge in the causal graph, does not necessarily
start from the protected feature or proxy variables, end at the final output, or represent a segment of
a path starting from the protected feature and ending at the final output. In practical scenarios, the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


discrimination can manifest itself at various locations in the data generating process. For example,
the average height of a male is larger than that for a female. This is a neutral fact that does not
involve discrimination based on the protected feature sex. However, if the data generating process
mistreats individuals of a modest height and prefers taller individuals without any justifiable reason,
the objectionable aspect in such process only starts from the variable height instead of the protected
feature sex. In the worked-out example presented in Section C.1, we can see that the objectionable
component X1 → X4 starts from X1 (not the protected feature A), ends at X4 (not the final outcome
Y ), and is not a segment of any red path between A and Y .
Remark C.2. The objectionable component is not limited to a segment of the causal path from
the protected feature to the final outcome. Instead, it can represent any local causal mechanism
responsible for problematic aspects in the data generation process.
Thirdly, in the data generating process, a single node can play different roles depending on the
local causal module we focus on. For example, the protected feature A receives reference point
assignments in the local causal module that outputs X2 , as in Equation (6), or that outputs Y , as in
Equation (9). However, in the local causal module that outputs X1 , since A is not a tail node of any
objectionable component, A is not assigned a reference point. As another example, when X1 serves
as inputs for local causal modules, X1 takes the original feature value x1 when deriving X2 , as in
Equation (6), but is assigned reference points x1 |ref             ref
                                                   X1 →X4 and x1 |X1 →Y when deriving x b4 and yb, as in
Equation (8) and Equation (9), respectively.
Remark C.3. The same node may have different roles in different local causal modules that take it as
part of the inputs. The instantiated value should reflect the corresponding purpose of the node in the
local causal module.
Lastly, if the objectionable component in the upstream causal modules were to behave in a neutral
way, their outputs, which are inputs for the causal module of interest, would have been different from
the observed feature values. For example, the local causal module that takes X3 as the output involves
X3 and its direct parents (C, X2 ), i.e., C → X3 ← X2 . There is no objectionable component in this
local causal module. However, in the upstream local causal module that takes X2 as the output, as
presented in Figure 3(b), A → X2 is an objectionable component and is counteracted by assigning
the reference point a|ref
                        A→X2 to A, as in Equation (6). Then, when deriving the value of X3 , had the
objectionable component(s) in its own local causal module (in this example, none) as well as its
upstream ones (in this example, it is A → X2 ) behaved in a neutral way, we obtain x     b3 by utilizing x
                                                                                                         b2
instead of x2 as in Equation (7). As another example, in Figure 3(d), for the local causal module that
takes Y as the output, x2 |ref
                            X2 →Y is utilized to fill in the placeholder for X2 as an input in Equation (9),
instead of xb2 or x2 . This is because the reference point x2 |ref
                                                                 X2 →Y for X2 is introduced to counteract
the objectionable component X2 → Y , and it supersedes the derived value x      b2 and the original feature
value x2 .
Remark C.4. It is essential to keep track of the upstream of the inputs where reference points are
assigned to their ancestor nodes, regardless of whether the local causal module of interest contains an
objectionable component.


D     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS AND A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In this section, we provide our experimental details and present additional results. In Section D.1,
we present implementation details of our framework and discuss the scalability of our approach.
In Section D.2, we present the data generating process of the simulated data and summarize the
derivation of prediction/decision of previous approaches that enforce causal fairness notions. In
Section D.3, we provide experimental details and results on the real-world UCI Adult data set (Becker
& Kohavi, 1996). In Section D.4, we present additional experimental results on the real-world
Folktables data set (Ding et al., 2021).

D.1    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND S CALABILITY OF O UR A PPROACH

We first present in Section D.1.1 implementation details of our framework that decouples objectionable
data generating components to achieve procedural fairness. Then in Section D.1.2, we discuss the
scalability of our approach.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: An illustrative comparison of computational costs to demonstrate the scalability of our
         approach. The causal model consists of 1,024 variables, and the average degree of the graph
         is 102, roughly 10% of the number of variables.

 Computational costs             Our approach (forward pass)        Vanilla regressor (forward pass)
                                                       6
 Number of parameters               (7.56 ± 0.04) × 10                        7.66 × 106
 Multiplier-accumulator
                                    (7.67 ± 0.04) × 106                       7.67 × 106
 operations (MACs)



D.1.1    T HE I MPLEMENTAION D ETAILS OF O UR F RAMEWORK
For the purpose of satisfying the requirements of procedural fairness (Section 2.2), our framework
consists of two parts: the value instantiation rule in each local causal module (Section 4.2.1), and the
configuration of reference point values (Section 4.2.2).
Given the causal model (in terms of a causal graph), we construct a neural network predictor for
each local causal module between the node Vi and its din (Vi ; G) direct parent nodes Parents(Vi ),
such that: (i) the neural network predictor can be a classification or regression model, depending
on the support of Vi ; (ii) the neural network contains two hidden layers with a hidden dimension
max{5, din (Vi ; G)}. We incorporate batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) for each hidden
layer and utilize the scaled exponential linear unit (SELU) activation function (Klambauer et al.,
2017). The neural networks for local causal modules are optimized without any fairness constraint
(Step 4 of Algorithm 2).
Within each local causal module, given the specification of objectionable data generating components,
we decouple the objectionable components by keeping track of the appropriate value instantiation
option for each input variable in Parents(Vi ) (Steps 5 – 10 of Algorithm 1). The exact value of
reference points cannot be pre-determined before specifying the least advantaged individuals and
actually carrying out the overall pipeline (Algorithm 2). Therefore, we use simulated annealing
(Kirkpatrick et al., 1983) to derive the reference point configuration function ReferencePoint(·)
when focusing on the least advantaged individuals, as summarized in Equation (4).

D.1.2    T HE S CALABILITY OF O UR A PPROACH
Our framework can handle linear and nonlinear data generating processes, and scales well with the
number of variables. We do not assume linearity of the data generating process when constructing
predictive models for local causal modules, and the modeling of local causal modules is optimized
without introducing any fairness constraint (Section D.1.1). To demonstrate the scalability of our
approach, in addition to experimental details and results on simulated and real-world data sets (as we
shall see in Sections D.2 – D.4), we provide a quantitative example of the computational cost of our
approach for illustrative purposes.
Let us consider a scenario where there are 1,024 nodes in the causal graph DAG, with an average
degree of 102 (10% of the number of nodes). In other words, the sum of in-degree (the number of
direct parent nodes) and out-degree (the number of direct child nodes) of each node in the causal
graph is on average 102. We randomly generate causal graphs that satisfy this configuration, and
summarize in Table 2 the number of parameters and the number of multiplier-accumulator operations
(MACs) during the inference phase, in comparison with a vanilla regression model. Our approach
contains modeling of each local causal module in the causal graph (Section D.1.1), and the vanilla
regressor is a neural network regression model that has two hidden layers with a hidden dimension of
2,300 (roughly twice the input dimension).
The decoupling of objectionable data generating components, which consists of propagating appro-
priate values according to the value instantiation rule and finding the reference point configuration
ReferencePoint(·) that benefits the least advantaged individuals to the greatest extent possible, does
not require retraining the classification or regression models for local causal modules. Therefore, the
computational overhead in our approach only comes from the inference phase of the model during
the simulated annealing process. No retraining is needed when the practitioner considers various
reference point configurations, e.g., for different specifications of objectionable components and least


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A


             M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="eLupxB2kW8Xo2Gsww0+IOF0aHCc=">AAAB6XicbZDJSgNBEIZrXOO4RT0K0hgET2FGUHMz4MVjImaBZAg9nUrSpGehu0cIQ46ePAkK4tWXyMmX8OQz+BJ2loMm/tDw8f9VdFX5seBKO86XtbS8srq2ntmwN7e2d3aze/tVFSWSYYVFIpJ1nyoUPMSK5lpgPZZIA19gze9fj/PaPUrFo/BOD2L0AtoNeYczqo1Vvm1lc07emYgsgjuD3NXHqPz9cDQqtbKfzXbEkgBDzQRVquE6sfZSKjVnAod2M1EYU9anXWwYDGmAyksngw7JiXHapBNJ80JNJu7vjpQGSg0C31QGVPfUfDY2/8saie4UvJSHcaIxZNOPOokgOiLjrUmbS2RaDAxQJrmZlbAelZRpcxvbNldw53dehOpZ3r3In5edXLEAU2XgEI7hFFy4hCLcQAkqwADhEZ7hxepbT9ar9TYtXbJmPQfwR9b7D/svkS4=</latexit>


             <latexit sha1_base64="umzXvbJ7nv+1P1CF4VzY6Z1oLm0=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGMjJGAukIQwOzmbDJmdXWZmhbCktLISFMTWl0jlS1j5DL6Ek0uhiT8MfPz/Ocw5x485U9p1v6yl5ZXVtfXMhr25tb2zm93br6ookRQrNOKRrPtEIWcCK5ppjvVYIgl9jjW/fz3Oa/coFYvEnR7E2ApJV7CAUaKNVb5tZ3Nu3p3IWQRvBrmrj1H5++FoVGpnP5udiCYhCk05UarhubFupURqRjkO7WaiMCa0T7rYMChIiKqVTgYdOifG6ThBJM0T2pm4vztSEio1CH1TGRLdU/PZ2PwvayQ6KLRSJuJEo6DTj4KEOzpyxls7HSaRaj4wQKhkZlaH9ogkVJvb2La5gje/8yJUz/LeRf687OaKBZgqA4dwDKfgwSUU4QZKUAEKCI/wDC9W33qyXq23aemSNes5gD+y3n8A85aRKQ==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="M1leeWCMSGE9bDyxrKX8rGlddxI=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGNhkYC5QBLC7ORsMmR2dpmZFcKS0spKUBBbXyKVL2HlM/gSTi6FJv4w8PH/5zDnHD/mTGnX/bKWlldW19YzG/bm1vbObnZvv6qiRFKs0IhHsu4ThZwJrGimOdZjiST0Odb8/vU4r92jVCwSd3oQYyskXcECRok2Vvm2nc25eXciZxG8GeSuPkbl74ejUamd/Wx2IpqEKDTlRKmG58a6lRKpGeU4tJuJwpjQPuliw6AgIapWOhl06JwYp+MEkTRPaGfi/u5ISajUIPRNZUh0T81nY/O/rJHooNBKmYgTjYJOPwoS7ujIGW/tdJhEqvnAAKGSmVkd2iOSUG1uY9vmCt78zotQPct7F/nzspsrFmCqDBzCMZyCB5dQhBsoQQUoIDzCM7xYfevJerXepqVL1qznAP7Iev8B8hGRKA==</latexit>                        <latexit sha1_base64="umzXvbJ7nv+1P1CF4VzY6Z1oLm0=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGMjJGAukIQwOzmbDJmdXWZmhbCktLISFMTWl0jlS1j5DL6Ek0uhiT8MfPz/Ocw5x485U9p1v6yl5ZXVtfXMhr25tb2zm93br6ookRQrNOKRrPtEIWcCK5ppjvVYIgl9jjW/fz3Oa/coFYvEnR7E2ApJV7CAUaKNVb5tZ3Nu3p3IWQRvBrmrj1H5++FoVGpnP5udiCYhCk05UarhubFupURqRjkO7WaiMCa0T7rYMChIiKqVTgYdOifG6ThBJM0T2pm4vztSEio1CH1TGRLdU/PZ2PwvayQ6KLRSJuJEo6DTj4KEOzpyxls7HSaRaj4wQKhkZlaH9ogkVJvb2La5gje/8yJUz/LeRf687OaKBZgqA4dwDKfgwSUU4QZKUAEKCI/wDC9W33qyXq23aemSNes5gD+y3n8A85aRKQ==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="M1leeWCMSGE9bDyxrKX8rGlddxI=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGNhkYC5QBLC7ORsMmR2dpmZFcKS0spKUBBbXyKVL2HlM/gSTi6FJv4w8PH/5zDnHD/mTGnX/bKWlldW19YzG/bm1vbObnZvv6qiRFKs0IhHsu4ThZwJrGimOdZjiST0Odb8/vU4r92jVCwSd3oQYyskXcECRok2Vvm2nc25eXciZxG8GeSuPkbl74ejUamd/Wx2IpqEKDTlRKmG58a6lRKpGeU4tJuJwpjQPuliw6AgIapWOhl06JwYp+MEkTRPaGfi/u5ISajUIPRNZUh0T81nY/O/rJHooNBKmYgTjYJOPwoS7ujIGW/tdJhEqvnAAKGSmVkd2iOSUG1uY9vmCt78zotQPct7F/nzspsrFmCqDBzCMZyCB5dQhBsoQQUoIDzCM7xYfevJerXepqVL1qznAP7Iev8B8hGRKA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>


       (a) Causal graph for the simulated data                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b) Causal graph for UCI Adult data set
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CIT                     DIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ANC                NATIVITY                  DEYE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (citizenship             (disability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AGEP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (ancestry status)      (nativity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RAC1P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             recode) (vision          DEAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (Age)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              recode)                                      difficulty)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (race and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (hearing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hispanic origin)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             difficulty)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DREM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SEX                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (cognitive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (Sex)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         difficulty)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SCHL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ESR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MAR
                MIL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (educational                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (employment status
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (marital status)
             (military                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      attainment)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      recode)
              service)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MIG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (mobility                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (employment status
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     status)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of parents)
                   PINCP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PUBCOV
           (total annual income)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (public health coverage)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (c) Causal graph for Folktables data set (PUBCOV prediction task)

          Figure 4: Causal graph for experiments with simulated and real-world data sets.


advantaged individuals. As we can see from Table 2, the computational cost of the forward pass of
our model is comparable to the vanilla regression model, indicating that our approach scales well
with the number of variables in different practical scenarios.

D.2   T HE E XPERIMENT ON S IMULATED DATA

In Section 3, we present a linear model to illustrate disguised procedural unfairness resulting from
the violation of Requirement I. In Section 5.1, we revisit the linear model to further illustrate the
violation of Requirement II of procedural fairness. For the convenience of readers, we recap the
linear data generating process and highlight the objectionable components in Figure 4(a).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A ∼ Bernoulli(pA ),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C = ϵC ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M      M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M = θA A + θC C + θ M + ϵM ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (10)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L      L      L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L = θA A + θC C + θM M + θ L + ϵL ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y      Y      Y      Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Y = θA A + θC C + θM M + θL L + θ Y + ϵY .

Equation (10) describes the linear data generating process, with the objectionable components
highlighted by parameters in red. We would like to note that the correspondence between the
objectionable components, i.e., red edges in Figure 4(a), and the red parameters in Equation (10)
results from the linear model, and that such component-parameter correspondence is not available in
general scenarios, as we discussed in Section 4.1.
Various causal fairness notions have been proposed in the previous literature (Section A.1). In
our experiment on the simulated data, we consider different constraints on parameter optimization,
including No Unresolved Discrimination proposed by Kilbertus et al. (2017), and Fair Inference on
Outcome considered in Nabi & Shpitser (2018) and follow-up works (Nabi et al., 2019; 2022). We


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


utilize the linear regression model without fairness constraints as the baseline, and evaluate linear
                                                                                                  Y
models when different causal fairness constraints are enforced. Kilbertus et al. (2017) require θ̂A =0
      Y       Y   L
and θ̂M + θ̂L · θ̂M = 0, which do not yield a unique set of fitted parameters. Therefore, we consider
two different sets of fitted parameters in Figure 1(b), both of which satisfy the fairness constraints.
                                  Y            M
Nabi & Shpitser (2018) require θ̂A   = 0 and θ̂A  = 0 as the sufficient condition to satisfy the causal
fairness requirement, and we present the fitted parameters in Figure 1(c).
In Figure 2(a), we present the summary of decision-making results. We consider the baseline linear
regression model, two linear models that satisfy No Unresolved Discrimination (Kilbertus et al.,
2017), and an additional linear model that follows Fair Inference on Outcome (Nabi & Shpitser,
2018; Nabi et al., 2019; 2022). Specifically, to enforce No Unresolved Discrimination (Kilbertus
et al., 2017), we utilize the fitted parameters with fairness constraints in the linear regression model
to derive the continuous prediction Yb . To deploy Fair Inference on Outcome (Nabi & Shpitser, 2018;
Nabi et al., 2019; 2022), we follow the inference approach via box constraints (Nabi & Shpitser,
2018), draw Monte Carlo samples for intermediate variables (M, L) and integrate over intermediate
linear regression outputs to derive the prediction Yb .
To output a binary decision from the continuous predicted value Yb of linear models, we apply certain
thresholds. Any value exceeding the threshold is classified as the favorable decision, such as loan
approval or program acceptance. The threshold reflects the resource abundance: a higher threshold
indicates scarcer resources, resulting in fewer favorable decisions distributed. We are interested in the
potential situation improvement for the least advantaged individuals, and compare the decisions made
by different models, including the baseline model and the ones that enforce causal fairness notions.
In this illustrative example, among those that are rejected by all decision-making policies, the
disadvantaged individuals proportionally suffer more; among those that are accepted by all decision-
making policies, the disadvantaged individuals proportionally prosper less. For instance in Figure
2(a), let the threshold be 0.6, i.e., the favorable decision is assigned when the predicted value
satisfies Yb > 0.6. Among those that are rejected by all models, the disadvantaged group consists of
     29.3%
 29.3%+37.5% = 43.9%, which is larger than the marginal group representation 40.0%. However, if
we set the threshold to 0.3 and assign the favorable decision as long as the predicted value satisfies
                                                         27.2%
Yb > 0.3, the disadvantaged group only consists of 27.2%+54.5%     = 33.3% (< 40.0%) among those
that are accepted by all models. This indicates that even if causal fairness notions are imposed,
disadvantaged individuals disproportionately face adverse outcomes, demonstrating the violation of
requirements for procedural fairness.

D.3    T HE E XPERIMENT ON UCI A DULT DATA S ET

In this section, we provide experimental details and additional results on the real-world UCI
Adult data set (Becker & Kohavi, 1996). The data set contains 14 feature variables and 1 tar-
get variable. The features include individual’s personal record attributes, e.g, age, race, sex,
marital status, native country, individual’s social and educational record attributes,
e.g., education level, relationship to household, and individual’s occupation re-
lated attributes, e.g., class of work, occupation, work hours per week. The task is
to predict whether an individual has an annual income that exceeds USD 50,000.
Following Nabi & Shpitser (2018) and Chiappa (2019), we model the data generating process in
Figure 4(b), where following variables are included: A for sex, C for the tuple (age, native
country), M for marital status, L for education level, R for the tuple (class of
work, occupation, work hours per week), and Y for income. The variables race,
capital gain/loss are omitted. We utilize the default train-test data split, and use 32,561 and
16,281 records for training and testing purposes, respectively.
In Figure 4(b), we highlight in red the problematic aspects defined in the previous literature (Chiappa,
2019). Specifically, Chiappa (2019) would like to remove the direct effect A → Y , as well as the
effect of A on Y through M , namely, along paths A → M → · · · → Y . Different from previous
approaches that enforce fairness constraints on model parameters (Kilbertus et al., 2017; Nabi &
Shpitser, 2018; Nabi et al., 2019; 2022), Chiappa (2019) proposes to reconstruct the variables that
are descendants of the protected feature A along problematic pathways. Chiappa (2019) introduces


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="vxoY4nxPoE4J3A62qnYubOrEo4k=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYmOZgLlAEsLs5GwyZHZ2mZkVwpLSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOccP+ZMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/qqJEUqzQiEey7hOFnAmsaKY51mOJJPQ51vz+zTiv3aNULBJ3ehBjKyRdwQJGiTZW+bqdzbl5dyJnEbwZ5K4+RuXvh6NRqZ39bHYimoQoNOVEqYbnxrqVEqkZ5Ti0m4nCmNA+6WLDoCAhqlY6GXTonBin4wSRNE9oZ+L+7khJqNQg9E1lSHRPzWdj87+skeig0EqZiBONgk4/ChLu6MgZb+10mESq+cAAoZKZWR3aI5JQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEWyhBBSggPMIzvFh968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wHhWpEd</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="AWU+6jU0kLeNs2LRo/fJpf+Wk3w=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzkMYyAXOBZAmzk5NkyOzsMjMrhCWllZWgILa+RCpfwspn8CWcXApN/GHg4//PYc45QcyZ0q77Za2srq1vbGa27O2d3b397MFhTUWJpFilEY9kIyAKORNY1UxzbMQSSRhwrAeD0iSv36NULBJ3ehijH5KeYF1GiTZWpdTO5ty8O5WzDN4ccjcf48r3w8m43M5+tjoRTUIUmnKiVNNzY+2nRGpGOY7sVqIwJnRAetg0KEiIyk+ng46cM+N0nG4kzRPambq/O1ISKjUMA1MZEt1Xi9nE/C9rJrpb8FMm4kSjoLOPugl3dORMtnY6TCLVfGiAUMnMrA7tE0moNrexbXMFb3HnZahd5L2r/GXFzRULMFMGjuEUzsGDayjCLZShChQQHuEZXqyB9WS9Wm+z0hVr3nMEf2S9/wDkZJEf</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A


 M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="eLupxB2kW8Xo2Gsww0+IOF0aHCc=">AAAB6XicbZDJSgNBEIZrXOO4RT0K0hgET2FGUHMz4MVjImaBZAg9nUrSpGehu0cIQ46ePAkK4tWXyMmX8OQz+BJ2loMm/tDw8f9VdFX5seBKO86XtbS8srq2ntmwN7e2d3aze/tVFSWSYYVFIpJ1nyoUPMSK5lpgPZZIA19gze9fj/PaPUrFo/BOD2L0AtoNeYczqo1Vvm1lc07emYgsgjuD3NXHqPz9cDQqtbKfzXbEkgBDzQRVquE6sfZSKjVnAod2M1EYU9anXWwYDGmAyksngw7JiXHapBNJ80JNJu7vjpQGSg0C31QGVPfUfDY2/8saie4UvJSHcaIxZNOPOokgOiLjrUmbS2RaDAxQJrmZlbAelZRpcxvbNldw53dehOpZ3r3In5edXLEAU2XgEI7hFFy4hCLcQAkqwADhEZ7hxepbT9ar9TYtXbJmPQfwR9b7D/svkS4=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="eLupxB2kW8Xo2Gsww0+IOF0aHCc=">AAAB6XicbZDJSgNBEIZrXOO4RT0K0hgET2FGUHMz4MVjImaBZAg9nUrSpGehu0cIQ46ePAkK4tWXyMmX8OQz+BJ2loMm/tDw8f9VdFX5seBKO86XtbS8srq2ntmwN7e2d3aze/tVFSWSYYVFIpJ1nyoUPMSK5lpgPZZIA19gze9fj/PaPUrFo/BOD2L0AtoNeYczqo1Vvm1lc07emYgsgjuD3NXHqPz9cDQqtbKfzXbEkgBDzQRVquE6sfZSKjVnAod2M1EYU9anXWwYDGmAyksngw7JiXHapBNJ80JNJu7vjpQGSg0C31QGVPfUfDY2/8saie4UvJSHcaIxZNOPOokgOiLjrUmbS2RaDAxQJrmZlbAelZRpcxvbNldw53dehOpZ3r3In5edXLEAU2XgEI7hFFy4hCLcQAkqwADhEZ7hxepbT9ar9TYtXbJmPQfwR9b7D/svkS4=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="eLupxB2kW8Xo2Gsww0+IOF0aHCc=">AAAB6XicbZDJSgNBEIZrXOO4RT0K0hgET2FGUHMz4MVjImaBZAg9nUrSpGehu0cIQ46ePAkK4tWXyMmX8OQz+BJ2loMm/tDw8f9VdFX5seBKO86XtbS8srq2ntmwN7e2d3aze/tVFSWSYYVFIpJ1nyoUPMSK5lpgPZZIA19gze9fj/PaPUrFo/BOD2L0AtoNeYczqo1Vvm1lc07emYgsgjuD3NXHqPz9cDQqtbKfzXbEkgBDzQRVquE6sfZSKjVnAod2M1EYU9anXWwYDGmAyksngw7JiXHapBNJ80JNJu7vjpQGSg0C31QGVPfUfDY2/8saie4UvJSHcaIxZNOPOokgOiLjrUmbS2RaDAxQJrmZlbAelZRpcxvbNldw53dehOpZ3r3In5edXLEAU2XgEI7hFFy4hCLcQAkqwADhEZ7hxepbT9ar9TYtXbJmPQfwR9b7D/svkS4=</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="umzXvbJ7nv+1P1CF4VzY6Z1oLm0=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGMjJGAukIQwOzmbDJmdXWZmhbCktLISFMTWl0jlS1j5DL6Ek0uhiT8MfPz/Ocw5x485U9p1v6yl5ZXVtfXMhr25tb2zm93br6ookRQrNOKRrPtEIWcCK5ppjvVYIgl9jjW/fz3Oa/coFYvEnR7E2ApJV7CAUaKNVb5tZ3Nu3p3IWQRvBrmrj1H5++FoVGpnP5udiCYhCk05UarhubFupURqRjkO7WaiMCa0T7rYMChIiKqVTgYdOifG6ThBJM0T2pm4vztSEio1CH1TGRLdU/PZ2PwvayQ6KLRSJuJEo6DTj4KEOzpyxls7HSaRaj4wQKhkZlaH9ogkVJvb2La5gje/8yJUz/LeRf687OaKBZgqA4dwDKfgwSUU4QZKUAEKCI/wDC9W33qyXq23aemSNes5gD+y3n8A85aRKQ==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="M1leeWCMSGE9bDyxrKX8rGlddxI=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGNhkYC5QBLC7ORsMmR2dpmZFcKS0spKUBBbXyKVL2HlM/gSTi6FJv4w8PH/5zDnHD/mTGnX/bKWlldW19YzG/bm1vbObnZvv6qiRFKs0IhHsu4ThZwJrGimOdZjiST0Odb8/vU4r92jVCwSd3oQYyskXcECRok2Vvm2nc25eXciZxG8GeSuPkbl74ejUamd/Wx2IpqEKDTlRKmG58a6lRKpGeU4tJuJwpjQPuliw6AgIapWOhl06JwYp+MEkTRPaGfi/u5ISajUIPRNZUh0T81nY/O/rJHooNBKmYgTjYJOPwoS7ujIGW/tdJhEqvnAAKGSmVkd2iOSUG1uY9vmCt78zotQPct7F/nzspsrFmCqDBzCMZyCB5dQhBsoQQUoIDzCM7xYfevJerXepqVL1qznAP7Iev8B8hGRKA==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="umzXvbJ7nv+1P1CF4VzY6Z1oLm0=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGMjJGAukIQwOzmbDJmdXWZmhbCktLISFMTWl0jlS1j5DL6Ek0uhiT8MfPz/Ocw5x485U9p1v6yl5ZXVtfXMhr25tb2zm93br6ookRQrNOKRrPtEIWcCK5ppjvVYIgl9jjW/fz3Oa/coFYvEnR7E2ApJV7CAUaKNVb5tZ3Nu3p3IWQRvBrmrj1H5++FoVGpnP5udiCYhCk05UarhubFupURqRjkO7WaiMCa0T7rYMChIiKqVTgYdOifG6ThBJM0T2pm4vztSEio1CH1TGRLdU/PZ2PwvayQ6KLRSJuJEo6DTj4KEOzpyxls7HSaRaj4wQKhkZlaH9ogkVJvb2La5gje/8yJUz/LeRf687OaKBZgqA4dwDKfgwSUU4QZKUAEKCI/wDC9W33qyXq23aemSNes5gD+y3n8A85aRKQ==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="M1leeWCMSGE9bDyxrKX8rGlddxI=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGNhkYC5QBLC7ORsMmR2dpmZFcKS0spKUBBbXyKVL2HlM/gSTi6FJv4w8PH/5zDnHD/mTGnX/bKWlldW19YzG/bm1vbObnZvv6qiRFKs0IhHsu4ThZwJrGimOdZjiST0Odb8/vU4r92jVCwSd3oQYyskXcECRok2Vvm2nc25eXciZxG8GeSuPkbl74ejUamd/Wx2IpqEKDTlRKmG58a6lRKpGeU4tJuJwpjQPuliw6AgIapWOhl06JwYp+MEkTRPaGfi/u5ISajUIPRNZUh0T81nY/O/rJHooNBKmYgTjYJOPwoS7ujIGW/tdJhEqvnAAKGSmVkd2iOSUG1uY9vmCt78zotQPct7F/nzspsrFmCqDBzCMZyCB5dQhBsoQQUoIDzCM7xYfevJerXepqVL1qznAP7Iev8B8hGRKA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="eLupxB2kW8Xo2Gsww0+IOF0aHCc=">AAAB6XicbZDJSgNBEIZrXOO4RT0K0hgET2FGUHMz4MVjImaBZAg9nUrSpGehu0cIQ46ePAkK4tWXyMmX8OQz+BJ2loMm/tDw8f9VdFX5seBKO86XtbS8srq2ntmwN7e2d3aze/tVFSWSYYVFIpJ1nyoUPMSK5lpgPZZIA19gze9fj/PaPUrFo/BOD2L0AtoNeYczqo1Vvm1lc07emYgsgjuD3NXHqPz9cDQqtbKfzXbEkgBDzQRVquE6sfZSKjVnAod2M1EYU9anXWwYDGmAyksngw7JiXHapBNJ80JNJu7vjpQGSg0C31QGVPfUfDY2/8saie4UvJSHcaIxZNOPOokgOiLjrUmbS2RaDAxQJrmZlbAelZRpcxvbNldw53dehOpZ3r3In5edXLEAU2XgEI7hFFy4hCLcQAkqwADhEZ7hxepbT9ar9TYtXbJmPQfwR9b7D/svkS4=</latexit>


 <latexit sha1_base64="umzXvbJ7nv+1P1CF4VzY6Z1oLm0=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGMjJGAukIQwOzmbDJmdXWZmhbCktLISFMTWl0jlS1j5DL6Ek0uhiT8MfPz/Ocw5x485U9p1v6yl5ZXVtfXMhr25tb2zm93br6ookRQrNOKRrPtEIWcCK5ppjvVYIgl9jjW/fz3Oa/coFYvEnR7E2ApJV7CAUaKNVb5tZ3Nu3p3IWQRvBrmrj1H5++FoVGpnP5udiCYhCk05UarhubFupURqRjkO7WaiMCa0T7rYMChIiKqVTgYdOifG6ThBJM0T2pm4vztSEio1CH1TGRLdU/PZ2PwvayQ6KLRSJuJEo6DTj4KEOzpyxls7HSaRaj4wQKhkZlaH9ogkVJvb2La5gje/8yJUz/LeRf687OaKBZgqA4dwDKfgwSUU4QZKUAEKCI/wDC9W33qyXq23aemSNes5gD+y3n8A85aRKQ==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="M1leeWCMSGE9bDyxrKX8rGlddxI=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGNhkYC5QBLC7ORsMmR2dpmZFcKS0spKUBBbXyKVL2HlM/gSTi6FJv4w8PH/5zDnHD/mTGnX/bKWlldW19YzG/bm1vbObnZvv6qiRFKs0IhHsu4ThZwJrGimOdZjiST0Odb8/vU4r92jVCwSd3oQYyskXcECRok2Vvm2nc25eXciZxG8GeSuPkbl74ejUamd/Wx2IpqEKDTlRKmG58a6lRKpGeU4tJuJwpjQPuliw6AgIapWOhl06JwYp+MEkTRPaGfi/u5ISajUIPRNZUh0T81nY/O/rJHooNBKmYgTjYJOPwoS7ujIGW/tdJhEqvnAAKGSmVkd2iOSUG1uY9vmCt78zotQPct7F/nzspsrFmCqDBzCMZyCB5dQhBsoQQUoIDzCM7xYfevJerXepqVL1qznAP7Iev8B8hGRKA==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="umzXvbJ7nv+1P1CF4VzY6Z1oLm0=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGMjJGAukIQwOzmbDJmdXWZmhbCktLISFMTWl0jlS1j5DL6Ek0uhiT8MfPz/Ocw5x485U9p1v6yl5ZXVtfXMhr25tb2zm93br6ookRQrNOKRrPtEIWcCK5ppjvVYIgl9jjW/fz3Oa/coFYvEnR7E2ApJV7CAUaKNVb5tZ3Nu3p3IWQRvBrmrj1H5++FoVGpnP5udiCYhCk05UarhubFupURqRjkO7WaiMCa0T7rYMChIiKqVTgYdOifG6ThBJM0T2pm4vztSEio1CH1TGRLdU/PZ2PwvayQ6KLRSJuJEo6DTj4KEOzpyxls7HSaRaj4wQKhkZlaH9ogkVJvb2La5gje/8yJUz/LeRf687OaKBZgqA4dwDKfgwSUU4QZKUAEKCI/wDC9W33qyXq23aemSNes5gD+y3n8A85aRKQ==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="M1leeWCMSGE9bDyxrKX8rGlddxI=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGNhkYC5QBLC7ORsMmR2dpmZFcKS0spKUBBbXyKVL2HlM/gSTi6FJv4w8PH/5zDnHD/mTGnX/bKWlldW19YzG/bm1vbObnZvv6qiRFKs0IhHsu4ThZwJrGimOdZjiST0Odb8/vU4r92jVCwSd3oQYyskXcECRok2Vvm2nc25eXciZxG8GeSuPkbl74ejUamd/Wx2IpqEKDTlRKmG58a6lRKpGeU4tJuJwpjQPuliw6AgIapWOhl06JwYp+MEkTRPaGfi/u5ISajUIPRNZUh0T81nY/O/rJHooNBKmYgTjYJOPwoS7ujIGW/tdJhEqvnAAKGSmVkd2iOSUG1uY9vmCt78zotQPct7F/nzspsrFmCqDBzCMZyCB5dQhBsoQQUoIDzCM7xYfevJerXepqVL1qznAP7Iev8B8hGRKA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="2F9Vqncg2YERdyoy9C3TmZxKXPU=">AAAB6XicbZC7SgNBFIbPeo3rLWopyGIQrMKuoKYzYGOZgLlIsoTZydlkyOzsMjMrhJDSykpQEFtfIpUvYeUz+BJOLoUm/jDw8f/nMOecIOFMadf9spaWV1bX1jMb9ubW9s5udm+/quJUUqzQmMeyHhCFnAmsaKY51hOJJAo41oLe9Tiv3aNULBa3up+gH5GOYCGjRBurfNfK5ty8O5GzCN4Mclcfo/L3w9Go1Mp+NtsxTSMUmnKiVMNzE+0PiNSMchzazVRhQmiPdLBhUJAIlT+YDDp0TozTdsJYmie0M3F/dwxIpFQ/CkxlRHRXzWdj87+skeqw4A+YSFKNgk4/ClPu6NgZb+20mUSqed8AoZKZWR3aJZJQbW5j2+YK3vzOi1A9y3sX+fOymysWYKoMHMIxnIIHl1CEGyhBBSggPMIzvFg968l6td6mpUvWrOcA/sh6/wEF4ZE1</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a) 1 reference point                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (b) 2 reference points                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (c) 3 reference points                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (d) 4 reference points

Figure 5: Different objectionable component configurations in experiments on the UCI Adult data
          set. Red edges denote potential locations of objectionable components, among which
          solid-line edges (highlighted with contours) represent objectionable components that we
          decouple through reference points, and dashed-line edges represent potentially neutral (not
          objectionable) components.


additional latent variables (HM , HL , HR ) for intermediate variables (M, L, R), and utilizes the latent
inference-projection approach to “correct” descendants of A. The predicted outcome Yb is derived by
sampling from the fitted model likelihood, which encapsules Monte Carlo samples from Gaussian
approximations of latents’ posterior distributions given observed features (Chiappa, 2019). The
comparison between baseline prediction and fair (in terms of Path-Specific Counterfactual Fairness,
Chiappa 2019) prediction is summarized in the first column of each subplot in Figure 2(c).
Our framework utilizes reference points to decouple objectionable components in the data generating
process of the predicted outcome. We view red edges specified by previous literature in Figure 4(b)
as potential locations to assign reference points, and consider different configurations of reference
points. The number of all possible combinations of objectionable components increases exponen-
tially with     potential locations. For example, for k0 potentially objectionable edges, there are
          their
Pk0       k0
   k1 =0 k     = 2k0 different configurations of actually objectionable components. Therefore, for
            1
the purpose of presenting a meaningful comparison with the previous approach (Chiappa, 2019), we
did not present the exhaustive list of all reference point configurations, and specifically pay attention
to objectionable components that involve variables (A, M, Y ).
Our framework differs from previous causal fairness notions (including Path-Specific Counterfactual
Fairness proposed by Chiappa 2019) and conducts counter-factual analysis with respect to local
causal mechanisms (Section B.1). The value of reference point is not a pre-specified quantity
readily available in an ex ante way. By “ex ante”, we are referring to the common starting point for
counterfactual causal inference, for example, reasoning about the situation were a female individual
male, i.e., flipping sex from female to male, while keeping other observed features unchanged
(Chiappa, 2019). In contrast, the reference points are derived in an ex post way by solving an
optimization problem characterized in Equation (4).
For Figure 2(c) presented in Section 5.2, we utilize simulated annealing to determine reference point
values that maximize benefit for the least advantaged individuals, who, in this context, are the female
group. Specifically, we present causal graphs when the set of objectionable components contains
1 reference point {A → Y } as in Figure 5(a), 2 reference points {A → Y, M → Y } as in Figure
5(b), 3 reference points {A → Y, M → Y, M → R} as in Figure 5(c), and 4 reference points
{A → Y, M → Y, M → R, M → L} as in Figure 5(d). We provide in Table 3 detailed reference
point values as well as improvements in approval rates (i.e., favorable decision for predicted income
higher than USD 50,000) for different groups, compared to the unconstrained baseline, where Cases
(i) – (iv) correspond to Figures 5(a) – 5(d).
If we compare Case (i) with Case (ii) and Case (iii) in Table 3, we can see that the reference point
configuration that maximizes the benefit of the least advantaged individuals does not necessarily
involve treating disadvantaged individuals (female) as if they were advantaged (male). For example,
in Case (ii), when both A → Y (from sex directly to income) and M → Y (from marital
status directly to income) are objectionable components, as presented in Figure 5(b), we should
set “female” and “married” as reference points for inputs to corresponding objectionable components,
and carry out the same prediction derivation procedure (Algorithm 2) for everyone. In other words,
procedural fairness requires us to decouple objectionable components by treating all individuals as


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Compare the effectiveness of different reference point configurations for the purpose of
         decoupling objectionable components presented in Figure 5.

              Objectionable      Reference point         Ground-truth    Approval rate    Approval rate
  Case
              component(s)       configuration(s)         income         for female        for male

                                                              low          + 0.0059         + 0.0008
   (i)          A→Y              a|ref
                                   A→Y = male
                                                             high          + 0.0286        no change


                A→Y             a|ref
                                  A→Y = female                low          + 0.3870         + 0.3233
   (ii)
                M →Y          m|ref
                                M →Y   = married             high          + 0.4494         + 0.2693



                A→Y             a|ref
                                  A→Y = female
                                                              low          + 0.3911         + 0.3277
   (iii)        M →Y          m|ref
                                M →Y = married
                                                             high          + 0.4416         + 0.2714
                M →R          m|ref
                                M →R = married


                A→Y              a|ref
                                   A→Y = male

                M →Y          m|ref
                                M →Y = married                low          + 0.4828         + 0.4627
   (iv)
                M →R          m|ref
                                M →R = married               high          + 0.4260         + 0.2978
                M →L           m|ref
                                 M →L = single


if they were females along edges A → Y , and married along M → Y . This is different from the
common starting point in previous causal fairness notions, where the focus is on the certain causal
effect on outcome Y if sex variable A were to be flipped from female to male (Kilbertus et al., 2017;
Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Nabi et al., 2019; 2022).

D.4        T HE E XPERIMENT ON F OLKTABLES DATA S ET (PUBCOV P REDICTION TASK )

In this section, we present experimental results on the real-world Folktables data set (Ding et al.,
2021). In particular, we consider the prediction task for public health coverage, where there are 17
features and the target variable is PUBCOV. We retrieve ACS PUMS data for the year 2021, and
consider the following states: CA, FL, and NY.
We assume that the causal model for the data generating process among variables of interest can be
presented as in Figure 4(c). The detailed information about the possible values of variables can be
found in the document on data dictionary from the US Census Bureau (Bureau, 2021). Following
Ding et al. (2021), we preprocess the data and consider individuals with the age less than 65, and the
annual income no more than USD 30,000. The focus of this prediction task is on the public health
coverage for low-income individuals. After preprocessing, we perform data splits and get training
and testing sets for CA (99,840 for training, 33,281 for testing), FL (50,134 for training, 16,712 for
testing), and NY (48,212 for training, 16,071 for testing), respectively.
In Figure 4(c), we use red edges to denote objectionable data generating components and light-gray
edges to denote neutral components. We consider the group of the least advantaged individuals among
low-income individuals, and focus specifically on those having a disability and/or experiencing vision,
hearing, or cognitive difficulties.
We summarize in Table 4 the derived reference point configurations for each state among CA, FL, and
NY. With the same causal graph and specifications of objectionable data generating components, and
the shared criterion for the least advantaged group characteristics, we can observe that different states
may require different sets of reference point configurations to satisfy requirements of procedural
fairness. For instance, for the objectionable component SEX → PINCP (the edge from sex to
total annual income), the reference point value yields male in CA and NY, but female
in state FL. We can also observe shared patterns of reference point configurations among different


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: The summary of reference point configurations for the public health coverage prediction
         task in Folktables data set (Ding et al., 2021), among states CA, FL, and NY. The reference
         point values of variables are recorded according to the data dictionary document from the
         US Census Bureau (Bureau, 2021).

 Objectionable component                            CA                   FL                 NY

 ReferencePoint(SEX → PINCP)
                                                   male               female              male
 Tail node: SEX (sex)

 ReferencePoint(RAC1P → PINCP)                 some other
                                                                       white              white
 Tail node: RAC1P (race & hispanic origin)     race alone

 ReferencePoint(MAR → PINCP)
                                                 married            separated           divorced
 Tail node: MAR (marital status)

 ReferencePoint(MAR → SCHL)                  never married
                                                                    separated           married
 Tail node: MAR (marital status)              or under 15

 ReferencePoint(SCHL → PUBCOV)
                                                 Grade 5             Grade 7            Grade 5
 Tail node: SCHL (educational attainment)

 ReferencePoint(DIS → ESR)
                                                   with                with               w/out
 Tail node: DIS (disability status)

 ReferencePoint(DEYE → ESR)
                                                  w/out                with               with
 Tail node: DEYE (vision difficulty)

 ReferencePoint(DEAR → ESR)
                                                  w/out                w/out              w/out
 Tail node: DEAR (hearing difficulty)

 ReferencePoint(DREM → ESR)
                                                   with                with               with
 Tail node: DREM (cognitive difficulty)



states. For instance, let us compare the objectionable components DREM → ESR (the edge from
cognitive difficulty to employment status) and DEAR → ESR (the edge from
hearing difficulty to employment status). The reference point configuration specifies
that in order to receive a favorable prediction/decision, the individual characteristics need to be
with cognitive difficulty but without hearing difficulty. This indicates that in the data generating
process for determining public health coverage across considered states, the objectionable aspects
are more lenient (in terms of the level of discrimination) towards cognitive difficulties (DREM), yet
demonstrate more severity in the discrimination against individuals with hearing difficulty (DEAR).


E     F URTHER D ISCUSSIONS

In this section, we present further discussions on the comparison between outcome and procedural
emphases of algorithmic fairness (Section E.1), implications of our results on procedural fairness
(Section E.2), and potential limitations and future works (Section E.3).

E.1   A LGORITHMIC FAIRNESS : O UTCOME E MPHASIS VS . P ROCEDURAL E MPHASIS

In this work, motivated by the procedural conceptions of justice (Rawls, 1971; 2001), we focus on
procedural fairness of the data generating process itself for prediction or decision-making. Rawls’s
full statement involves lexically ordered principles of justice, as well as accompanying priority rules
(Rawls, 1971; 2001). The primary object of interest in Rawls’s theory of justice is the construction of
the structure of social institutions, and the scope of consideration goes beyond algorithmic fairness
with respect to a data generating process. That being said, we view the automated decision-making
as a microcosm of social institutions, and believe it is valuable to borrow the wisdom from the


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


rich literature of political philosophy and moral theories, in particular, Rawls’s advocacy for pure
procedural justice, to carefully consider the requirements and implications of procedural fairness.
The difficulty of specifying a standalone criterion for the just or fair outcome in general scenarios is
not surprising. Previous literature has proposed various fairness notions defined on predicted outcome
or decision, but not all of them are compatible with each other (Chouldechova, 2017; Kleinberg
et al., 2017). One can observe different public opinions regarding which notion we should use to
define the “fair” predicted outcome or decision (Saxena et al., 2019). There are also debates in moral
and political philosophy literature over how one should define the proper space in which equality
is desirable (Cohen, 1989; Anderson, 1999). Therefore, motivated by pure procedural justice, by
characterizing the property of data generating process and further making sure that such procedure is
actually carried out in an impartial way, we propose the framework to decouple the objectionable
data generating components, in order to achieve procedural fairness.


E.2     I MPLICATION OF O UR R ESULTS ON P ROCEDURAL FAIRNESS

In Section B, we discussed the differences and connections of our framework compared to previous
works. In Section C, we illustrated in detail the overall pipeline as well as the derivation detail of our
framework. In Section D, we presented experimental details and additional results to demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach. To provide a more complete picture of the implication of our
results on procedural fairness, we extend our discussion in Section B.1 on the distinction between the
counter-factual analysis on variables and that on local causal mechanisms, and further reflect on the
goal of procedural fairness.


E.2.1    T HE V ERSATILE NATURE OF O UR F RAMEWORK

Our framework of procedural fairness through decoupling objectionable data generating components
is versatile, capable of accommodating various configurations while still remaining principled.
To begin with, our framework is versatile with respect to the configuration of objectionable com-
ponents. If additional knowledge or assumption is available in terms of how one should modify or
correct the behavior of local causal modules, our framework can immediately make use of them
on corresponding objectionable data generating components (Step 2 of Algorithm 1). When there
are multiple configurations of objectionable components over potential locations, our framework
can readily accommodate different options and provide reference points that satisfy requirements
of procedural fairness, as we have seen in our implementation details (Sections D.1.1 – D.1.2) and
experimental results (Section 5.2 and Sections D.2 – D.4).
In addition, our framework is also versatile with respect to the specification of least advantaged
individuals. In our framework, we do not make specific distinctions between “protected features” and
“regular features” when decoupling objectionable components for procedural fairness. In practical
scenarios, objectionable components can manifest itself in various forms and locations in the data
generating process. This necessitates counter-factual analyses with respect to local causal mechanisms
instead of variables (Section B.1). Our framework also adapts to more precise definitions of the
“least advantaged individuals”, which are more fine-grained than group categorizations only by
reference to values of the protected feature. Previous literature has recognized the shortcomings
of defining disadvantaged individuals only in terms of certain protected features, considering one
protected feature at a time (Crenshaw, 1990; Kearns et al., 2018; Foulds et al., 2020; Kong, 2022).
Our framework can readily adapt to more precise definitions of the “least advantaged individuals” or
a specific individual, and find reference points that satisfy the requirements of procedural fairness
(Sections D.3 – D.4).
Furthermore, our framework is extendable and readily adapts to scenarios where new variables and
causal mechanisms are incorporated into the system. We consider objectionable components in
each local causal module (Algorithm 1), and then incorporate reference points and aggregate local
causal modules to derive the final prediction (Algorithm 2). When additional variables and/or causal
mechanisms are introduced, our framework can be naturally extended to address procedural fairness
in the new system.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2.2    T OWARDS A T RANSPARENT F RAMEWORK FOR P ROCEDURAL FAIRNESS
In our framework, the decoupling of objectionable components is operated in a localized manner. In
particular, we address procedural fairness at the level of the causal influence between a variable and
its direct causes. This is more straightforward than attempting to decipher causal effects from the
protected feature A to the outcome Y , especially when there are multiple paths between them and
other variables are encompassed on the paths. The utilization of reference points in our framework
provides a transparent view of the bias mitigation strategy, making it easier to understand how
procedural fairness is enforced.
It has been recognized in algorithmic fairness literature that the fairness pursuit is not a purely
technical problem (O’neil, 2017; Kearns & Roth, 2019; Barocas et al., 2019). The collaboration
between algorithm designers and domain experts, such as ethical committees and social scientists,
is of vital importance. We believe a transparent framework for procedural fairness is crucial for
incorporating feedback and continuously improving the prediction or decision-making system.

E.2.3    N OT IN C ONFLICT WITH C AUSAL FAIRNESS N OTIONS
Causal fairness notions provide quantification tools to evaluate the influence from the protected
feature A (or related proxy variables) to the final output Y or its prediction Yb along certain paths.
Constraining causal effects along objectionable paths alone does not give us a clear guidance on what
to expect for causal effects along other neutral paths.
Although enforcing causal fairness notions with existing proposals can result in disguised procedural
unfairness, our framework does not necessarily conflict with previous causal fairness notions. We
share the intuition with previous literature that causal reasoning is essential when addressing algorith-
mic fairness with procedural emphasis (Kilbertus et al., 2017; Kusner et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser,
2018; Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Nabi et al., 2019; 2022).
Incorporating the focus on procedural fairness requirements in our framework, a potential option to
address disguised procedural unfairness with previous causal fairness notions could be: in addition to
imposing causal fairness constraints exclusively on objectionable paths, consider also causal effects
along all other neutral paths, and ensure their proximity to causal effects in the scenario without the
aforementioned causal fairness constraints enforced in the first place. Additional technical challenges
may arise for previous causal fairness approaches, such as exhaustively listing all paths for causal
effect estimation or bounding, evaluating causal effect identification conditions, and determining the
proper causal estimands.

E.3     P OTENTIAL L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORKS

In this work, we explore how procedural guarantees can be implemented on data generating process
itself to achieve procedural fairness. Our framework rests upon causal modularity (Spirtes et al., 1993;
Pearl, 2009), also known as exogeneity (Engle et al., 1983) and independence of causal mechanism
(Peters et al., 2017), utilizing reference points together with appropriate value instantiation rule to
decouple objectionable data generating components from neutral ones. In certain systems, when
there is a limited number of observed variables, or there is a lack of guidance on what constitutes
objectionable components, our framework may not be effective. However, the versatile and transparent
nature of our approach (Section E.2.1, Section E.2.2) enables the potential for adaptive and extendable
improvements, when further information about the system is available.
Going beyond static settings, the Markov condition and its variants (Lauritzen, 1996; Spirtes et al.,
1993; Richardson, 2003) may not hold true in dynamic settings or in causal systems that involve
feedback loops represented with a directed cyclic graph (DCG) (Spirtes, 1995). As a result, causal
modularity may not hold true, and our framework cannot be directly applied to decouple objectionable
data generating components. Incorporating the interplay among various data generating processes
and ensuring procedural fairness in long-term and dynamic settings remains an important question,
and we leave them for future research.


                                                   30
