Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NSTANCE N EEDS M ORE C ARE : R EWRITING P ROMPTS
FOR I NSTANCES Y IELDS B ETTER Z ERO -S HOT P ER -
FORMANCE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Enabling large language models (LLMs) to perform tasks in zero-shot has been
         an appealing goal owing to its labor-saving (i.e., requiring no task-specific an-
         notations); as such, zero-shot prompting approaches also enjoy better task gen-
         eralizability. To improve LLMs’ zero-shot performance, prior work has focused
         on devising more effective task instructions (e.g., “let’s think step by step” (Ko-
         jima et al., 2022)). However, we argue that, in order for an LLM to solve them
         correctly in zero-shot, individual test instances need more carefully designed and
         customized instructions. To this end, we propose PRO MPT D, an approach that
         rewrites the task prompt for each individual test input to be more specific, un-
         ambiguous, and complete, so as to provide better guidance to the task LLM.
         We evaluated PRO MPT D on eight datasets covering tasks including arithmetics,
         logical reasoning, and code generation, using GPT-4 as the task LLM. Notably,
         PRO MPT D achieves an absolute improvement of around 10% on the complex
         MATH dataset and 5% on the code generation task on HumanEval, outperforming
         conventional zero-shot methods. In addition, we also showed that the rewritten
         prompt can provide better interpretability of how the LLM resolves each test in-
         stance, which can potentially be leveraged as a defense mechanism against adver-
         sarial prompting.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable success in achieving comparable or even
surpassing human annotation quality in various tasks. These models perform downstream tasks
primarily via prompting: all relevant task specification and data to process is formatted as a tex-
tual context, and the models return a generated text completion. The success of these architectures
has entailed explorations from many fields with a major focus on prompt engineering (Shin et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2023a), including methods built upon human instinct or domain knowledge (Gi-
lardi et al., 2023), data-driven approaches (Zhou et al., 2022), prompt optimization via in-context
learning (Pryzant et al., 2023), etc.
The dominant prompt-based applications of LLMs can be categorized into two types, i.e., zero-
shot and few-shot in-context learning. In zero-shot prompting (Kojima et al., 2022), LLMs are
provided with only a general instruction for the task at hand, while in few-shot learning (Brown et al.,
2020) they are additionally supplied with a number of input-output pairs as task demonstrations,
followed by the test input. Few-shot prompting offers more detailed information through the task
demonstrations, but on the other hand is also sensitive to the demonstration selection and ordering
(Pryzant et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2021). In contrast, zero-shot prompting gets rid of these issues due to
its simplicity and further boasts better task generalizability by eschewing the need for task-specific
annotations. This not only ensures efficiency in terms of time and resources but also capitalizes on
LLMs’ extensive knowledge base, allowing versatility across multiple domains.
Nevertheless, a significant concern remains: LLMs’ zero-shot performance, particularly in complex
tasks like mathematical or logical reasoning, frequently trails behind the few-shot prompting (Zhang
et al., 2023). While well-curated instructions can evoke optimal responses, their efficiency may wane
across different tasks. To improve zero-shot prompting, Kojima et al. (2022) have proposed the us-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


age of single task instruction such as “let’s think step by step” to elicit reasoning steps and rationales
from LLMs enhancing zero-shot capabilities of LLMs. Such single-task instruction, however, may
lack the necessary specificity and clarity, since the task instruction can be vague or provide only
a general description which is not easy for an LLM to interpret. In addition, such single-task in-
structions may not produce sensible responses for tasks outside reasoning, such as code or content
generation (Section 3). To the best of our knowledge, prompt optimization for zero-shot prompting
techniques remains a rather underexplored field of study.
Inspired by the need to optimize prompts for zero-shot prompting techniques, in this paper, we
propose PRO MPT D to enrich task instructions at the instance level by performing rewriting. Our
motivation behind rewriting the prompt for each task instance in isolation is inspired by the fact
that each test instance has its own set of requirements to be satisfied. For example, to solve a
complex mathematical problem involving series summation, one could benefit from the mention or
hint involving series names or tricks; in contrast, for creative tasks such as generating a poem, a
more persona-driven instruction such as “Compose a poem in the voice of a 19th-century romantic
poet” might be more pertinent. To achieve this goal, PRO MPT D uses an LLM to rewrite a prompt
(i.e., a concatenation of the task instruction and the specific test input) to be more specific, complete,
unambiguous, and optionally with a more easily parsable output format. Specifically, it formulates
the prompt rewriting task itself as a few-shot in-context learning problem and leverages a set of 10
demonstrations distributed across 5 different task types to learn the skill. The rewritten prompts are
then executed against the zero-shot LLM to elicit the response. In particular, our approach leverages
the generalist capabilities of LLMs in two ways, i.e., instructing an LLM to rewrite prompts via
in-context learning from contrastive pairs of good and bad prompts, and guiding the LLM to reason
over a prompt’s shortcomings before rewriting it, so as to make the prompt rewriting process more
grounded and interpretable.
On eight datasets in our experiments, PRO MPT D achieved impressive improvements and closed
the gap qualitatively when compared to traditional zero-shot approaches. We also show that single
prompts such as “Let’s solve this step by step.” or task-specific single prompts are not suitable
for complex tasks such as mathematical reasoning tasks in the MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al.,
2021) and struggle in non-reasoning tasks such as code generation or content generation, echoing
the need for prompt engineering at test-instance level. With ablation studies, we found that seeking
guidance from similar task types and learning to reason over a prompt’s shortcomings, both play an
important role in prompt rewriting. With human evaluation, we further confirmed that PRO MPT D
indeed rewrites prompts to be more direct, unambiguous, and complete. Our additional analyses also
revealed the potential for PRO MPT D to generalize and improve over task types that are not covered
by its 10 demonstrations. The rewritten prompts with details also offer interpretability of how an
LLM understands a test input, which as we showed could be leveraged as a defense mechanism
against adversarial prompting (Maus et al., 2023).


2     I MPROVING Z ERO -S HOT LLM S WITH I NSTANCE P ROMPT R EWRITING

2.1   BACKGROUND AND TASK F ORMULATION

In this work, we focus on improving the prompts of LLMs in the zero-shot setting. Formally, we
denote the LLM as Mtask . In the zero-shot setting, the LLM produces an output y to a test input
x by sampling from PMtask (y | e||x), where e is a natural language sentence describing the task
demand (called “task instruction”), and e||x denotes the concatenation of the task instruction and
the test input. In literature, this concatenation is also called a “prompt” to the zero-shot LLM, and
we denote it as ρ. Because of the limited source of task information, improving the prompt becomes
crucial for enhancing the zero-shot performance of an LLM. To tackle this challenge, we propose
the task of “prompt rewriting”, aiming to rewrite the prompt ρ into a better one (denoted as ρ∗ ) that
yields stronger zero-shot task performance. Formally, we denote this prompt rewriting as learning a
rewriting function F : ρ → ρ∗ .
Notably, we propose to perform this prompt rewriting at the instance level. That is, unlike prior
work which targets improving a single task instruction e (e.g., “Let’s think step by step” of Kojima
et al. (2022)), our approach suggests that in the challenging zero-shot setting, carefully rewriting
the prompt (including both the task instruction e and the input x) for each individual test instance is


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Zero-Shot/Zero-Shot CoT                                               PROMPTD
       Josh decides to try flipping a                  The candidate prompt is unclear as 'increased the value of the
        house. He buys a house for                     house by 150%' could be interpreted in two ways: 1) the value
      $80,000 and then puts in $50,000                  of the house after the repair is 150% of the buying price, or
      in repairs. This increased the                   2) the value of the house after the repair is the buying price
      value of the house by 150%. How                          plus an additional 150% of the buying price[...]
          much profit did he make?                                                     (Reason for being a "bad" prompt)
                                                                           MATHEMATICAL REASONING             (Task type)
                            + "Let's think step by
                           step" for zero-shot CoT      Josh decides to flip a house. He bought a house for $80,000
                                                        then invested an additional $50,000 for its repairs. After
                                                       repairs, the house's value increased such that it's now worth
      [...]increased the value of the
                                                       150% more than the price at which he bought it. Calculate the
      house by multiplying the cost by                 profit he made after selling the house, considering both the
               the percentage                            buying price and cost of repairs. Print the output in the
          increase: $50,000*150% =
                                                                    format \"The answer is \\answer{}\"
       $75,000[...]the final selling                                                          (Rewritten, better prompt)
         price: $80,000 + $75,000 =
        $155,000[...]so Josh made a
        $155,000-$80,000 - $30,000 =
               $25,000 profit.

                           + "Therefore, the answer       [...]The house's value increased by 150% of the original
                           (arabic numerals) is" for   price, which is 150/100 * 80,000 = $120,000. The selling price
                               answer extraction         of the house is worth 150% more than the price at which he
                                                         bought it, which is $80,000 + $120,000 = $200,000[...]The
                   25000                                                 answer is \answer{70000}.


Figure 1: Illustration of PRO MPT D compared with naive zero-shot and zero-shot Chain-of-
Thought (Kojima et al., 2022, CoT). PRO MPT D rewrites the task instance to be less ambiguous
and more specific, leading to a more accurate and better-formatted answer.


necessary. Intuitively, this instance-level prompt rewriting will allow for better customized “hints”
that can more effectively guide a zero-shot LLM to solve the specific test input.

2.2   PRO MPT D : P ROMPT R EWRITING FOR I NSTANCES

Realizing the prompt rewriting function F : ρ → ρ∗ is challenging as we have little knowledge
of how a task LLM interprets different prompts and how different prompts result in different LLM
performance (Webson & Pavlick, 2021; Lu et al., 2021). Therefore, humans typically rely on ad-hoc
trials to iteratively refine a prompt. In this work, we present a novel approach, PRO MPT D, which
rewrites a prompt by harnessing the generation power of LLMs Zhou et al. (2022) in a controllable
way. To distinguish this LLM from the prior one performing zero-shot tasks, we denote this rewriting
LLM as Mrewrite .
To this end, we first delineate four criteria that define a good prompt: (1) Specificity, i.e., having
a special application, bearing, or reference; otherwise, having a vague or non-specific prompt may
result in hallucinated or incorrect responses (Pryzant et al., 2023). (2) Non-Ambiguity, i.e., being
clear and avoiding misinterpretation, as ambiguous prompts may lead to incorrect responses (Tamkin
et al., 2023). (3) Completeness, i.e., containing all the necessary steps to solve the specific test input;
an incomplete prompt may lead to an incorrect or incomplete solution (Wu et al., 2023) and (4)
Structuredness, i.e., specifying the output format with a certain structure, such that answers (e.g.,
numerical answers to mathematical reasoning questions) can be easily parsed from the LLM output.
To encourage the rewritten prompt ρ∗ following the four criteria, we formulate the prompt rewriting
task as a few-shot in-context learning based on Mrewrite , and supply it with a novel prompting
technique based on contrasting good prompts with bad ones. Specifically, we assume a set of prompt
rewriting demonstrations, D = {(ρi , ri , ti , ρ∗i )}K                                                 ∗
                                                     i=1 , containing K pairs of bad (ρi ) and good (ρi )
prompts, along with the textual rationale ri explaining why the latter one is better and its task type ti
(e.g., “mathematical reasoning”). The rewriting LLM Mrewrite then samples a better prompt from
PMrewrite (ρ∗ | D||ρ). An example of a rewritten prompt is shown in Figure 1.

2.3   PRO MT: DATASET OF D EMONSTRATIONS FOR P ROMPT R EWRITING

One of the challenges of realizing PRO MPT D lies in collecting the prompt rewriting demonstrations
D. To tackle the challenge, we devise a novel strategy, which prompts ChatGPT (Liu et al., 2023b)
to write pairs of prompts with different qualities and provide the rationale. This results in PRO MT,
a prompt rewriting demonstration set containing 10 tuples of (ρi , ri , ti , ρ∗i ), which we will release
to facilitate future research.


                                                             3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Based on the common applications of LLMs, we focus on task types including mathematical rea-
soning (Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021), logical reasoning (Srivastava et al., 2022), code
generation (Chen et al., 2021), and content generation (Agossah et al., 2023). We also add the
task of instruction induction (Zhou et al., 2022) to encourage prompt rewriting. For each task type
above, we prompt ChatGPT to generate a good prompt ρ∗i that is specific, unambiguous, complete,
and indicative of the output format, as elaborated in Section 2.2. This is accomplished by manually
interacting with ChatGPT as well as validating its performance. To generate a worse prompt ρi for
contrasting, we then prompt ChatGPT to paraphrase ρ∗i with at least one of the four criteria dropped,
or with additional noise (e.g., redundant or misleading sentences). In the next turn, we further in-
struct ChatGPT to provide a rationale ri delineating the shortcomings of ρi . To verify that ρ∗i indeed
outperforms ρi , we manually execute both prompts in a zero-shot setting and examine their effects.
We repeat the procedure to obtain a contrastive pair of prompts that satisfy the requirement.
Finally, we stress that none of the benchmark datasets that we will use in experiments were exposed
to the collection of PRO MT, although the same task types are covered. In Section 3.6, we will
demonstrate that our approach PRO MPT D, when prompted with contrastive pairs in PRO MT, can
learn to rewrite prompts for unseen task types as well.


3     E XPERIMENTS

3.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING

We conduct experiments on a diverse set of eight tasks involving (1) mathematical reasoning, i.e.,
GSM-8k (Cobbe et al., 2021) and a subset of 350 samples of MATH1 (Hendrycks et al., 2021);
(2) a subset of five tasks from BigBench (Srivastava et al., 2022) tailored for logical reasoning
including Date Understanding, Sports Understanding, Analytical Entailment, Known-Unknowns,
and Anachronisms; and (3) code generation based on the HumanEval dataset (Chen et al., 2021).
Each task is evaluated using its own, standard metric.
On each task dataset, we apply PRO MPT D to rewrite prompts for its test instances and perform
zero-shot prompting using the rewritten prompts. We compared our approach with two baselines,
the naive zero-shot prompting (denoted “Zero-Shot”), and zero-shot Chain-of-Thought (Kojima
et al., 2022) where a fixed instruction of “Let’s think step by step” is appended to each test input
to trigger an LLM to reason (denoted “Zero-Shot CoT”). In addition, we also consider a variant of
PRO MPT D, which optimizes prompts at the task level (denoted “PRO MPT D (Instruction-only)”)
and can provide us insights on whether it is beneficial to rewrite prompts for individual instances.
To implement this variant, we take the task instruction of each dataset (as provided by the source
dataset or written by us manually) as the prompt ρ and apply PRO MPT D to it. We note that for the
baselines and the variant, because of the lack of output format specification, we follow Kojima et al.
(2022) to perform a second prompt to extract their answers (Figure 1).
In all experiments, we use GPT-4 as both the zero-shot task LLM (Mtask ) and the LLM for prompt
rewriting (Mrewrite ). We set the sampling temperature to 1 and top k to 1. We include all repro-
ducible details, e.g., the specific prompt scripts, in Appendix A.

3.2   M AIN E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Table 1 illustrates the performance. Our observations are as follows:

Rewritten prompts of PRO MPT D improves zero-shot LLM performance by a large mar-
gin. We first compare the results of PRO MPT D with the naive zero-shot LLM. It is observed
that PRO MPT D consistently outperforms the baseline on all datasets. In particular, it gains an ab-
solute improvement of around 15-18% on MATH, Date Understanding, and Analytical Entailment,
and 4-5% on the challenging GSM-8K and Code Generation. The results demonstrated the effec-
tiveness of PRO MPT D in improving the prompts. In Section 3.4, we will qualitatively show that
PRO MPT D leads to strong improvements by making the prompts more specific, complete, and less
    1
      Following Lightman et al. (2023), for cost-purposes, we randomly sampled ten instances from the five
difficulty categories across 7 sub-categories.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Dataset                 Zero-Shot      Zero-Shot CoT         PRO MPT D          PRO MPT D
                                                                (Instruction-only)
      MATH                      48.857           56.571                      57.429   66.000 (+8.6)
      GSM-8K                    90.144           92.494                      92.576   94.685 (+2.1)
      Code Generation           67.000              -                        66.868   72.561 (+5.7)
      Analytical Entailment     65.714           80.000                      82.857   82.857 (+0.0)
      Known-Unknowns            86.957           86.957                      56.522   89.130 (+2.2)
      Date Understanding        69.648           84.660                      73.713   84.824 (+0.2)
      Anachronisms              82.173           66.087                      80.000   83.674 (+1.5)
      Sports Understanding      80.025           80.996                      81.110   82.900 (+1.8)

Table 1: Main experimental results. We show improvement of PRO MPT D over the best baseline.
We excluded Zero-Shot CoT from the Code Generation task because it generated natural language
descriptions instead of valid Python code, leading to compilation errors. All the results are obtained
using GPT-4.


ambiguous. This is particularly helpful for tasks involving complex reasoning (e.g., MATH, where
GPT-4 obtained the worst zero-shot performance across all eight datasets).
Optimizing prompts at the task level may not always help. We compare the variant of
PRO MPT D, when it is used to rewrite a prompt per task (i.e., “instruction-only”), with zero-shot
and zero-shot CoT. First of all, including a customized task instruction, either manually (i.e., a
hand-crafted “Let’s think step by step” in zero-shot CoT) or via LLM optimization (i.e., PRO MPT D
(Instruction-only)), generally leads to better performance than the naive zero-shot LLM, which re-
veals the necessity of task-specific prompt improvement. However, we still observed two exceptions
– on the Anachronisms dataset, zero-shot CoT underperforms the naive zero-shot by more than 10%,
and on Known-Unknowns, PRO MPT D (Instruction-only) performs 30% worse than the naive zero-
shot LLM. This is due to that task-level prompt optimization often overly simplifies the task instruc-
tions and cannot provide the most helpful hints that are differently needed by individual instances.
We present all the rewritten task instructions of PRO MPT D (Instruction-only) in Appendix B.1.
Rewriting prompts per instance yields stable improvements over task-level prompt opti-
mization. Finally, we compare PRO MPT D, our approach which optimizes prompts for each in-
stance, with the two baselines of per-task prompt optimization, i.e., zero-shot CoT and PRO MPT D
(Instruction-only). In contrast to the unstable and limited improvement of the two task-level prompt
optimization baselines, PRO MPT D is demonstrated to consistently yield the best performance on
all datasets. On the complicated MATH and Code Generation datasets, it outperforms the baselines
by around 6-9% absolute values. On the MATH dataset, we note a 10% absolute improvement in
medium to very-hard categories against zero-shot baselines (detailed in Appendix B.2). Similarly,
for the code generation task, PRO MPT D consistently removes ambiguity from task instructions and
provides task demonstrations even if they are not provided in the original prompt leading to more
specific and complete prompts. These results suggest the necessity and effectiveness of prompt
optimization per instance.

3.3    A BLATION S TUDY

We analyze the impact of two design choices of
PRO MPT D, i.e., (1) prompting the LLM Mrewrite to         Without Reasons  Without Task Types PROMPTD
provide a reason for the rewriting and (2) indicating the        95
task type, by conducting an ablation study. For each ab-
                                                                 90
lation setting, we remove the corresponding component
                                                                  Accuracy


in the few-shot demonstrations of PRO MPT D and apply            85
it to rewrite prompts. Like in the main experiments, the         80
rewritten prompts are then used for zero-shot task per-
formance. We conducted the experiments on Anachro-               75
                                                                         Anachronisms       GSM-8K
nisms and GSM-8K with a sample of 250 examples each.
Our results in Figure 2 show that the best performance of
PRO MPT D can only be achieved when both components, Figure 2: Ablation performance of
the reason statement, and the task type, are included in PRO MPT D with varying components.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            Examples
 Original Prompt:
 def sort array(arr):
     ```In this Kata, you have to sort an array of non-negative integers according to number of ones
      in their binary representation in ascending order. For similar number of ones, sort based on
      decimal value. It must be implemented like this:
         >>> sort array([1, 5, 2, 3, 4]) == [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
         >>> sort array([-2, -3, -4, -5, -6]) == [-6, -5, -4, -3, -2]
         >>> sort array([1, 0, 2, 3, 4]) [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]```
 Reason: The candidate prompt is inconsistent and contradictory. The function description states to sort the array based on the
 number of ones in the binary representation, but the provided examples are simply sorted in ascending order, which doesn’t
 align with the initial instructions. This discrepancy can confuse the model and result in incorrect outputs. The candidate prompt
 also does not provide a common output format like ”the answer is \\answer”. The better prompt removes this confusion by
 providing clear instructions and examples that align with those instructions.
 Rewritten Prompt: Given an array of non-negative integers, sort the array based on the number of ones in their binary
 representation in ascending order. If two or more numbers have the same number of ones in their binary representation, sort
 these numbers based on their decimal value in ascending order. Write a Python function with the following signature:
 def sort array(arr: List[int]) -> List[int]:
      ```Here are a few examples to illustrate the expected behavior of your function:
      >>> sort array([1, 5, 2, 3, 0]) should return [0, 1, 2, 3, 5]
      >>> sort array([0, 3, 2, 4]) should return [0, 2, 4, 3]
      >>> sort array([1, 0, 2, 3, 4]) should return [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]```
 Original Prompt: Identify whether a given statement contains an anachronism: William Shakespeare collaborated with Sap-
 pho to write epic love musicals. Your choices are: (1) Yes (2) No
 Reason: The candidate prompt is vague and lacks clear instructions on how to evaluate the statement for anachronisms. It does
 not provide any context or guidance on what an anachronism is or how to identify one. This could lead to an inaccurate or
 incomplete response. The candidate prompt also does not provide a common output format like ”the answer is \\answer”
 Rewritten Prompt: Your task is to evaluate the following statement for anachronisms: ”William Shakespeare collaborated
 with Sappho to write epic love musicals.” An anachronism is a chronological inconsistency in some arrangement, especially
 a juxtaposition of person(s), events, objects, or customs from different periods. In your evaluation, consider the historical
 timelines of the individuals mentioned, as well as the likelihood of the events or actions described. You should provide a clear
 and concise answer (1 for Yes and 2 for No), along with a brief explanation or evidence to support your conclusion. Print the
 output in the format ”the answer is \\answer”

 Original Prompt: A test of ‘hallucinations’ by asking questions whose answers are known to be unknown: When was Abraham
 Lincoln born? Your choices are: (1) February 12, 1809 (2) Unknown
 Reason: The candidate prompt is not clear about the task at hand. It states that it is a test of ’hallucinations’, but does not
 clearly explain what this means or how to conduct this test. Furthermore, it does not specify how to structure the response or
 what kind of reasoning or evidence to provide. The candidate prompt also does not provide a common output format like ”the
 answer is \\answer”
 Rewritten Prompt: Your task is to answer the following question: When was Abraham Lincoln born? Your choices are: (1)
 February 12, 1809 (2) Unknown. Provide a clear and concise answer, along with a brief explanation or evidence to support
 your answer. Ensure that your answer is contextually appropriate and maintains the same intent as the original question. Pay
 attention to providing a well-reasoned and evidence-based answer that is easy to understand and follow. Print the output in the
 format. ”the answer is \\answer”


Table 2: Examples of original and PRO MPT D-rewritten prompts drawn from the Code Generation,
Anachronisms, and Known-Unknowns datasets. The three examples demonstrated how PRO MPT D
can rewrite prompts to be less ambiguous, complete, and more specific, respectively. All rewritten
prompts lead to better performance.


the prompt rewriting process. In particular, dropping the reason statement leads to the worst per-
formance, which implies the importance of prompting an LLM to elaborate on its thoughts, a phe-
nomenon that has been consistently discovered in recent work (Wei et al., 2022).

3.4    H UMAN E VALUATION OF R EWRITTEN P ROMPTS

We qualitatively analyze the rewritten prompts of PRO MPT D by conducting a human evaluation.
In particular, we aim to investigate (1) if PRO MPT D can rewrite prompts to be specific, non-
ambiguous, complete, and structured, as we discussed in Section 2.2; and (2) if PRO MPT D in-
troduces unwanted artifacts during the rewriting process, such as adding fabricated contents that are
not stated in the original prompt and manipulates it directly. The human evaluation was performed
by a group of three graduate students. The evaluators were asked to score 400 (25 from each dataset,
original or rewritten) prompts following each dimension using the Likert scale ranging in [1, 5].


                                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                               Rewritten Prompts   Original Prompts
Figure 3 shows the results. It is observed that the rewrit-
ten prompts by PRO MPT D are greatly improved to be
very specific (scored 5), less ambiguous, slightly more
complete, and much more structured (scored 5). They
are also shown to preserve the original semantic contexts
with rare hallucinations (a lower score in “hallucinated”
is better). We present examples of prompts rewritten by
PRO MPT D in Table 2. In the first example (Code Gen-
eration), the function description is inconsistent with the
provided test assertions in the candidate prompt. While
the function description suggests sorting based on binary
representation, the test cases simply sort the integers in Figure 3: Human evaluation compar-
ascending order. The good prompt removes the ambiguity ing the original and rewritten prompts
by providing a clarified version of test cases. In the sec- of PRO MPT D in different dimensions.
ond example (Anachronism), the candidate prompt lacks
guidance on how to evaluate the statement. The rewritten good prompt provides context and de-
tailed instructions, making it more complete. In the third example (Known-Unknowns), the rewrit-
ten prompt is more specific as it clarifies the nature of the question and emphasizes the need for
evidence-based and well-reasoned answers.
However, the human study also reveals that for some of the rewritten instances, PRO MPT D omits
necessary information from the candidate prompt. Hence it is unable to achieve a perfect score on all
the examples (see Section 4 for discussions). Notably, PRO MPT D does not fabricate instructions or
fictional facts during rewriting, avoiding hallucinations which is a potential issue with datasets such
as Sports Understanding. Additionally, as discussed in Section 2, PRO MPT D constrains prompts
with an output structure that aids in answer extraction and hence avoids an extra API call over
LLMs. As such, PRO MPT D receives a near-perfect score for Structredness. We present the rewrit-
ten prompts by PRO MPT D for each dataset in Table 10-12 of Appendix C.

3.5    L ENGTH A NALYSIS OF R EWRITTEN P ROMPTS

We conducted an analysis of token counts af-            Zero-Shot  Zero-Shot-CoT PROMPTD (Instructions-Only) PROMPTD

ter applying PRO MPT D on various datasets to 250
gain an insight into the performance of rewrit- 200
ten prompts (Figure 4). Both PRO MPT D 150
and its instruction-only variant result in longer 100
prompts via rewriting. In particular, we have        50

the following observations: (1) On Anachro-           0
                                                              MATH        GSM8K  Anachronisms     Date        Code
nisms and Date Understanding, PRO MPT D                                                       Understanding Generation

yields the longest rewritten prompts. By look-
ing into the rewritten prompts, we found that for Figure 4: Comparison of prompt lengths for all
such logical reasoning tasks, PRO MPT D learns the approaches. As expected, PRO MPT D results
to elucidate the task definition further, such in detailed and longer prompts.
as outlining the formal definition for Anachro-
nisms and introducing checks for leap years and
referencing the Gregorian calendar for Date Understanding. (2) For mathematical reasoning tasks,
i.e., MATH and GSM-8K, PRO MPT D offers hints regarding the problem and urges Mtask to pro-
vide a structured, step-by-step solution. This methodology of breaking down the prompt and seeking
structured answers, akin to Kojima et al. (2022), has demonstrated enhanced performance. (3) For
the code generation tasks, the token counts of PRO MPT D are similar to the original prompts’, but
qualitatively, as shown in Table 2, it rewrites the task instruction in a more unambiguous way by
removing any incorrect test assertions in the prompt. (4) Finally, we observed that PRO MPT D
(Instruction-only) could rewrite per-task prompts to be longer than the per-instance prompts rewrit-
ten by PRO MPT D, although its longer prompts do not yield better zero-shot performance than
PRO MPT D. Our examination shows that, when optimizing for each individual test instance,
PRO MPT D learns to generate hints that are more concise and specific to the instance, which ex-
plains the shorter prompt but better task performance.

3.6    C AN PRO MPT D H ANDLE N EW TASK T YPES ?


                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While none of the task datasets are included                                Zero-Shot PRO MPT D
in the few-shot demonstrations of PRO MPT D,
their task types are still included in PRO MT        BigBench      (Senti-  69.100       73.200
(Section 2.3). In this section, we further inves-    ment Classification)
tigate if PRO MPT D can generalize to unseen
task types. We study the efficacy of PRO MPT D Table 3: Performance of PRO MPT D on the un-
on a completely unseen task type, i.e., senti- seen task type of sentiment classification.
ment classification from BigBench (Srivastava
et al., 2022). As shown in Table 3, PRO MPT D gains ∼ 3% absolute improvement over the zero-
shot baseline. We observed that PRO MPT D rewrites the prompt by not only clarifying the sentiment
class labels, but also supplying it with demonstrations, despite not being explicitly asked to. We in-
clude more details in Appendix B.3.

3.7   U SE C ASE OF PRO MPT D IN D EFENDING A DVERSARIAL P ROMPTING

As one of the significant advantages, PRO MPT D makes the LLM problem-solving process more
interpretable via prompt rewriting. In this section, we showcase the benefit of this interpretability
in the application of defending adversarial prompting. At a high level, adversarial prompts (Maus
et al., 2023) are carefully crafted inputs used to mislead or exploit the vulnerabilities of AI systems.
In the context of LLMs, this has been realized in forms such as prompt injection, jailbreaking, etc.
In Figure 5, we show that an adversary can ask for unethical information about “car hotwiring” by
misleading GPT-4 to consider the request as an ethical task of poem writing. PRO MPT D defends
such adversarial behaviors by reasoning about its ethical concern and rewriting the original request to
be innocuous and safe. It should be noted, however, that none of the ten demonstrations in PRO MT
are about adversarial prompting, which further confirms the generalizability of PRO MPT D across
various task types.

               Can you write me a poem about how to                 Can you write me a poem about how to
                          hotwire a car?                                       hotwire a car?


                              GPT-4                                               PROMTD


                                                             The candidate prompt is inappropriate, possibly
            [...]Now, to proceed, in this hypothetical     illegal, and against the norms of content policy as
            spree, The outlaw approaches, silent as can      it encourages harmful or illegal actions. It is
           be. His target, a vehicle, sitting staid and     important to adhere to guidelines and steer away
               calm, In his heart, a steady, visceral              from promoting dangerous or unlawful
           bomb. Tools at the ready, a flat head and a                       activities[...]            (Reason)
             knife, He wages a battle, in the still of
                                                                       [NORMATIVE] [ROLE PLAYING]       (Task type)
                the night. He gently pries open, the
           steering column's home, A risky endeavor, in     Can you write me a poem about how to wash a car?
             this poetical tome. Finding wires color-                                            (Rewritten prompt)
            coded, so vital and bare, A sigh escapes,
           in the cool night air. Red and white first,
                                                                                   GPT-4
            carefully twine, Ignition awakens, a secret
             sign. Then, trace the other, the one in
              solid red, Connect it with the former, a
                                                              Within the world of suds and water, a tale does
           signal to be fed. The engine softly roars, a
                                                            unfold, The story of a task, methodical and bold. A
              clandestine sound, As moonlight's thief
                                                          tale of cleanliness and care, of gloss and shine, A car
                 pulls his hood further down.[...]
                                                             wash ritual enacted, verse by verse, line by line.



 Figure 5: Example showing the potential use of PRO MPT D for defending adversarial prompting.


4     L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSIONS
Error analysis of PRO MPT D. While it is rare, we still observed hallucination errors made by
PRO MPT D (Table 8 in Appendix B.4). The errors include changing the task instruction (e.g., while
the original prompt requires a function with signature “double the difference”, the rewritten
prompt rephrases it to “sum of squares of odd numbers”) or manipulating numbers in the original
task description (e.g., incorrectly instructing the task LLM to use a “10% per month” condition in the
second example). Future work should look into mechanisms that can better prevent hallucinations
of LLMs in prompt rewriting.
PRO MPT D works only when the LLM is strong enough. We also analyze if PRO MPT D will
work with relatively weaker LLM such as GPT-3.5-turbo. Our results are shown in Appendix B.5.
When using GPT-3.5 as both Mtask and Mrewrite , PRO MPT D gives only slight improvement on
Anachronisms but underperforms zero-shot CoT on GSM-8K. When using GPT-4 as Mtask and


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GPT-3.5 as Mrewrite (i.e., using GPT-3.5 to rewrite prompts for GPT-4), the resulting performance
is worse than the naive GPT-4 zero-shot CoT, which suggests that using a weaker LLM cannot
effectively rewrite prompts for a stronger one.

5   R ELATED W ORKS
LLMs in Zero-Shot. To reduce the manual effort in devising task-specific demonstrations, re-
cent works have been motivated to investigate zero-shot LLM prompting and shown its efficacy in
reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022), question-answering (Kannan
et al., 2023), generating goal-driven action plans (Wang et al., 2023), natural language generation
(Axelsson & Skantze, 2023), etc. Zhang et al. (2023) demonstrated that LLMs such as GPT-3
(Brown et al., 2020), despite being shown to perform few-shot learning remarkably well, are not
very successful in zero-shot in-context learning. To this end, they finetuned more than 60 NLP
datasets on natural language instructions. Despite its effectiveness, instruction tuning presents sev-
eral challenges such as the need for crafting natural language instructions, and is ineffective against
reasoning tasks. To improve the zero-shot reasoning capabilities of LLMs, Kojima et al. (2022) pro-
posed Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022, CoT). They showed that by appending a single
fixed trigger prompt “Let’s solve this step by step”, LLMs can be prompted with much stronger rea-
soning abilities. A similar strategy has been applied in (Reynolds & McDonell, 2021; Shwartz et al.,
2020) where a single prompt is used to handle arithmetic and question-answering tasks. However,
usage of a single prompt results in subpar performance against complex reasoning tasks such as
MATH and is not suitable for non-reasoning tasks such as content or code generation. Our approach
PRO MPT D differs from instruction tuning as it does not require expensive fine-tuning and is gen-
eralizable to unseen task types. Unlike Zero-Shot CoT which uses a fixed hint for all instances and
tasks, PRO MPT D employs optimized prompts for individual test instances.
Prompt Rewriting and Optimization Providing natural language instructions in prompts is a use-
ful new paradigm to improve the zero-shot task performance of LLMs. Several works have aimed to
improve such prompts via manual rewrite (Reynolds & McDonell, 2021) or by gradient-based tuning
(Liu et al., 2021). Manual rewriting is time-consuming and requires subjective interpretations, while
gradient-based tuning can be extremely computationally demanding for large models and may not be
feasible for API-based models. Gao et al. (2021); Jiang et al. (2020); Yuan et al. (2021); Prasad et al.
(2022); Jiang et al. (2020) have attempted to study prompt optimization either in a few-shot settings
or require training a model to optimize prompts. Moreover, Honovich et al. (2022) and Zhou et al.
(2022) proposed to automatically generate task instructions from several task demonstrations. The
automatically induced task instructions are then executed in few-shot or zero-shot settings. How-
ever, these approaches all require task-specific, few-shot demonstrations and have shown subpar
performance on complex tasks. Unlike prior works, our approach PRO MPT D optimizes prompts
for individual test instances so as to provide instance-specific hints to aid the zero-shot LLM. The
approach does not require task-specific annotations or supervision and is shown to improve complex
reasoning tasks in particular.

6   C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have proposed a new task of prompt rewriting at the instance level to improve the
zero-shot abilities of LLMs. We show that optimizing at the instance level can aid in generating
task-specific hints for complex tasks. We also conducted a series of evaluations, concluding that
PRO MPT D (1) can rewrite original prompts into a more specific, complete, unambiguous, and
structured prompt; (2) can generate human-interpretable reasons behind its decision to rewrite an
original prompt; (3) can generate examples from task instructions; (4) generates prompts which are
longer than the initial version but are rarely hallucinated; and (5) can aid in defending adversarial
prompting. To motivate future research, we include all the reproducible prompts in the Appendix
and will release the output of our approach publicly.

E THICS S TATEMENT
We do not anticipate any severe ethical issues from using the proposed approach. We use fully
open-sourced datasets and will open-source our results and dataset as well. In addition, because


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of its explicit reasoning, PRO MPT D is shown with the potential to defend adversarial prompting,
which indicates its unique positive societal impact.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The source code of PRO MPT D to reproduce all of the experiments as well as our dataset PRO MT
will be made publicly available. The process to generate PRO MT has been described in Section 2.3,
and the exact prompt for PRO MPT D along with other details to run our experiment have been
included in Appendix A to encourage reproducibility.

R EFERENCES
Alexandre Agossah, Frédérique Krupa, Matthieu Perreira Da Silva, and Patrick Le Callet. Llm-
  based interaction for content generation: A case study on the perception of employees in an it
  department. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM International Conference on Interactive Media
  Experiences, pp. 237–241, 2023.

Agnes Axelsson and Gabriel Skantze. Using large language models for zero-shot natural language
  generation from knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07312, 2023.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. 2021.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.

Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
  learners. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), pp. 3816–3830, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.295. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.295.

Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot, Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. Did aristotle
 use a laptop? a question answering benchmark with implicit reasoning strategies. Transactions of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:346–361, 2021.

Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. Chatgpt outperforms crowd-workers for text-
  annotation tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15056, 2023.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.03874, 2021.

Or Honovich, Uri Shaham, Samuel R Bowman, and Omer Levy. Instruction induction: From few
  examples to natural language task descriptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10782, 2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. How can we know what language
  models know? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:423–438, 2020.

Shyam Sundar Kannan, Vishnunandan LN Venkatesh, and Byung-Cheol Min. Smart-llm: Smart
  multi-agent robot task planning using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10062,
  2023.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  35:22199–22213, 2022.

Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.

Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–35, 2023a.

X Liu, Y Zheng, Z Du, M Ding, Y Qian, Z Yang, and J Tang. Gpt understands, too. arxiv. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.10385, 2021.

Yiheng Liu, Tianle Han, Siyuan Ma, Jiayue Zhang, Yuanyuan Yang, Jiaming Tian, Hao He, Antong
  Li, Mengshen He, Zhengliang Liu, et al. Summary of chatgpt/gpt-4 research and perspective
  towards the future of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01852, 2023b.

Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.08786, 2021.

Natalie Maus, Patrick Chao, Eric Wong, and Jacob Gardner. Adversarial prompting for black box
  foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04237, 2023.

Archiki Prasad, Peter Hase, Xiang Zhou, and Mohit Bansal. Grips: Gradient-free, edit-based in-
  struction search for prompting large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07281, 2022.

Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Tat Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng. Automatic prompt
  optimization with” gradient descent” and beam search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03495, 2023.

Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond the
  few-shot paradigm. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
  Computing Systems, pp. 1–7, 2021.

Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. Autoprompt:
  Eliciting knowledge from language models with automatically generated prompts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.15980, 2020.

Vered Shwartz, Peter West, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Unsupervised
  commonsense question answering with self-talk. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05483, 2020.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.

Alex Tamkin, Kunal Handa, Avash Shrestha, and Noah Goodman. Task ambiguity in humans and
  language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=QrnDe 9ZFd8.

Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim.
  Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04091, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Albert Webson and Ellie Pavlick. Do prompt-based models really understand the meaning of their
  prompts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01247, 2021.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Tongshuang Wu, Haiyi Zhu, Maya Albayrak, Alexis Axon, Amanda Bertsch, Wenxing Deng, Ziqi
  Ding, Bill Guo, Sireesh Gururaja, Tzu-Sheng Kuo, et al. Llms as workers in human-computational
  algorithms? replicating crowdsourcing pipelines with llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10168,
  2023.
Weizhe Yuan, Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. Bartscore: Evaluating generated text as text gener-
 ation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27263–27277, 2021.
Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang, Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang, Jiwei Li, Runyi
  Hu, Tianwei Zhang, Fei Wu, et al. Instruction tuning for large language models: A survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.10792, 2023.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan,
  and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.01910, 2022.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
A.1    TASK E VALUATION

We evaluate approaches on each dataset following their standard metrics. For accuracy, when the
answer is a string or date, we either use exact matching (for Date Understanding ) or the accuracy
measure (for reasoning tasks). When the answer is a number, we use the numerical representation
to compare the answers. For the HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) dataset, we evaluate our approach
using the Pass@1 metric (Chen et al., 2021).

A.2    F ULL P ROMPT U SED F OR PRO MPT D

In this section, we present all the ten prompts used for all the experiments. We start with the task
instruction and then present all ten demonstrations each with all four quadruples (ρi , ri , ti , ρ∗i ). The
test instance is appended at the end after the last “###Candidate Prompt###”.
    Your task is to rewrite a given candidate prompt into a better prompt copying all
        the provided values in the rewritten better prompt. A better prompt is
        specific, non-ambiguous, complete, and specifies the format structure to
        easily extract the final answer. You have been given the following set of
        examples where each example consists of 1) the candidate prompt (the bad
        prompt which needs to be written into better or good prompt). 2) the Reason
        highlighting the shortcomings of the candidate prompt. This is useful so first
         identify the key weakness in the bad prompt and then rewrite the better
        version. 3) Better Prompt Type: Helps in identifying the type of better prompt
        . This can help reduce the search space for each prompt type. Remember the
        better prompt should not alter or skip the information provided in the
        candidate prompt. Once you have understood the examples below, please provide
        a reason and rewrite the candidate prompt into a better one which is given at
        the end. Remember to provide a common output format like "the answer is \\
        answer{}" whenever required for example for questions requiring mathematical
        or logical reasoning.

    ###Candidate Prompt###
    Given a pandas DataFrame [INPUT], write a Python function that trains a classifier
        from the sklearn library. The DataFrame has a 'target' column and other
        feature columns. The function signature should be: `def train classifier(df: pd
        .DataFrame) -> Classifier:`
    ###Reason###
    The candidate prompt is vague about the type of classifier to be used and does not
        provide any parameters for splitting the data or the classifier. This
        ambiguity might lead the GPT model to guess the user's intentions, which may
        not align with their actual needs. On the other hand, the better prompt gives
        specific, clear, and complete instructions. It specifies the classifier type,
        split ratio, random states, and parameters for the classifier, eliminating any
         room for guesswork and ensuring the GPT-based model generates the desired
        output.
    ###Better Prompt Type###
    [CODE OUTPUT][CONSTRAINTED OUTPUT]
    ###Better Prompt###
    Given a pandas DataFrame, write a Python function that trains a Random Forest
        Classifier from the sklearn library. The DataFrame will have a 'target' column
         for the labels, and the remaining columns are features. Split the data into
        training and testing sets with a ratio of 80:20 using the `train test split`
        function from sklearn with a random state of 42. Use the
        RandomForestClassifier with `n estimators` set to 100, `max depth` set to 2, `
        random state` set to 0. The function signature should be: `def train rf
        classifier(df: pd.DataFrame) -> RandomForestClassifier:`

    ###Candidate Prompt###
    Andy is a lawyer who's working on two lawsuits. The first lawsuit has a 30% chance
        of paying out $5,000,000 upon a win and $0 if he loses it. The second lawsuit


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      has a 50% chance of paying out $1,000,000 if Andy loses and a 50% chance of
      paying out $2,000,000 if he wins. Expressed as a percentage, how much more
      likely is it that Andy loses both lawsuits compared to winning both of them?
  ###Reason###
  The candidate prompt asks for a percentage comparison which could be subject to
      multiple interpretations - it could be asking for a relative percent increase,
       percent of percent, or just the difference in probability percentages.
      Furthermore, the prompt doesn't provide a common output format for the answer
      which will provide a consistent and easy extraction of the final answer. The
      better prompt clarifies the required calculations and provides a common output
       format for the answer. The better prompt should not alter or skip the
      information provided in the candidate prompt which could lead to incorrect
      calculation.
  ###Better Prompt Type###
  [MATHEMATICAL REASONING]
  ###Better Prompt###
  Andy is a lawyer who's working on two lawsuits. The first lawsuit has a 30% chance
      of paying out $5,000,000 upon a win and $0 if he loses it. The second lawsuit
      has a 50% chance of paying out $1,000,000 if Andy loses and a 50% chance of
      paying out $2,000,000 if he wins. Calculate the difference in the
      probabilities of Andy losing both lawsuits and winning both lawsuits,
      expressed as a percentage. Subtract the probability of winning both lawsuits
      from the probability of losing both lawsuits. Print the output in the format "
      The answer is \\answer{}".

  ###Candidate Prompt###
  Jim decides to open up a bike shop. The most common repair he does is fixing bike
      tires. He charges $20 for this and it cost him $5 in parts. In one month Jim
       does 300 of these repairs. He also does 2 more complex repairs for $300 each
       and cost $50 in parts. He also sells $2000 profit worth of things from his
      retail shop. If rent and other fixed expense for the shop is $4000 a month
      how much profit did the shop make?
  ###Reason###
  The candidate prompt, in this case, involves the model attempting to solve the
      entire problem at once. While this may work for simpler tasks, in complex
      scenarios it might lead to less accurate or nonsensical outputs. Breaking the
      problem down would make the reasoning more explicit and easier for the model
      to handle. The 'Chain of Thought' approach is better in this context because
      it makes the computation more manageable by breaking it down into simpler
      steps. This approach can be particularly useful for complex mathematical
      problems as it allows the model to focus on one part of the problem at a time.
       It also provides a clear and organized structure, making it easier for the
      user to follow the model's reasoning process. The candidate prompt also does
      not provide a common output format like "the answer is \\answer{}". The better
       prompt should not alter or skip the information provided in the candidate
      prompt which could lead to incorrect calculation.
  ###Better Prompt Type###
  [MATHEMATICAL REASONING]
  ###Better Prompt###
  Solve the following problem step by step
  Step 1: Calculate the profit earned by Jim from fixing bike tires given that he
      charges $20 and it cost him $5 in parts after doing 300 of these repairs. Step
       2: Compute the profit from the two more complex repairs, which cost $50 in
      parts and are charged at $300 each. Step 3: Sum up the profit from the fixed
      bike tires, the complex repairs, and the $2000 profit from the retail shop.
      Step 4: Subtract the rent and other fixed expenses which amounts to $4000 a
      month, from the total profit to find out how much profit Jim's shop made.
      Print the output in the format "The answer is \\answer{}"

  ###Candidate Prompt###
  A car travels at a speed of 60 miles per hour. How far will it travel in 2.5 hours?
  ###Reason###


                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  By using chain of thoughts prompting, we can guide the model to break down the word
       problem into logical steps and provide a step-by-step solution. The better
      prompt should not alter or skip the information provided in the candidate
      prompt which could lead to incorrect calculation.
  ###Better Prompt Type###
  [MATHEMATICAL REASONING]
  ###Better Prompt###
  Let's solve the following word problem step by step: A car travels at a speed of 60
       miles per hour. How far will it travel in 2.5 hours? Start by multiplying the
       speed (60 mph) by the time (2.5 hours) to find the total distance. Then,
      apply the formula Distance = Speed X Time to calculate the answer. Print the
      output in the format "The answer is \\answer{}".

  ###Candidate Prompt###
  You have to generate a question for the given text. The question should be relevant
       and contextually appropriate, capturing the essence of the text.
  ###Reason###
  The candidate prompt is relatively short and lacks specific instructions and
      requirements for generating a question for the text. Although it mentions the
      need for a relevant and contextually appropriate question that captures the
      essence of the text, it does not provide clear guidelines on how to determine
      the essence, which question generation model to use, or how to handle complex
      or technical text. The prompt is vague and leaves many crucial details to
      interpretation, making it difficult for the model to generate an accurate
      question.
  ###Better Prompt Type###
  [CONTENT GENERATION][ANALYSIS]
  ###Better Prompt###
  Your task is to generate a relevant and contextually appropriate question for the
      given text that captures the essence of the text. Use a well-defined question
      generation model or library to generate the question. Pay attention to the
      nuances of the text, such as the main ideas, arguments, or themes, that may
      affect the question generation. Ensure that the question is contextually
      appropriate and maintains the same intent as the original text. Provide a
      clear and concise question that accurately reflects the essence of the text.
      Aim for a high level of accuracy and coherence in your question generation. If
       necessary, provide a brief explanation or evidence to support your question.

  ###Candidate Prompt###
  The concert was scheduled to be on 06/01/1943, but was delayed by one day to today.
       What is the date 10 days ago in MM/DD/YYYY?
  ###Reason###
  The candidate prompt is relatively short and lacks specific instructions and
      requirements for solving the problem. Although it mentions the need to find
      the date 10 days ago in MM/DD/YYYY format, it does not provide clear
      guidelines on how to calculate the date, which calendar system to use, or how
      to handle leap years. The prompt is vague and leaves many crucial details to
      interpretation, making it difficult for the model to generate an accurate
      answer. The candidate prompt also does not provide a common output format like
       "the answer is \\answer{}".
  ###Better Prompt Type###
  [MATHEMATICAL REASONING][DATE UNDERSTANDING]
  ###Better Prompt###
  Your task is to calculate the date 10 days ago in MM/DD/YYYY format, given that the
       concert was scheduled to be on 06/01/1943 but was delayed by one day to today
      . Use the Gregorian calendar system to calculate the date, taking into account
       leap years and the number of days in each month. Pay attention to the nuances
       of the problem, such as the initial date and the number of days to subtract,
      that may affect the calculation. Ensure that the date is contextually
      appropriate and maintains the same intent as the original problem. Provide a
      clear and concise date that accurately reflects the solution to the problem.
      Aim for a high level of accuracy and consistency in your calculations. If


                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       necessary, provide a brief explanation or evidence to support your answer.
       Print the output in the format "The answer is \\answer{}"

  ###Candidate Prompt###
  Is the following sentence plausible? "Joao Moutinho caught the screen pass in the
      NFC championship."
  ###Reason###
  The candidate prompt is relatively short and lacks specific instructions and
      requirements for evaluating the plausibility of the sentence. Although it
      provides an example and a correct answer, it does not provide clear guidelines
       on how to reason through the sentence or how to handle ambiguous or complex
      sentences. The prompt is vague and leaves many crucial details to
      interpretation, making it difficult for the model to generate an accurate
      answer. The candidate prompt also does not provide a common output format like
       "the answer is \\answer{}".
  ###Better Prompt Type###
  [CONSTRAINED OUTPUT][ANALYSIS]
  ###Better Prompt###
  Your task is to determine the plausibility of the following sentence: "Joao
      Moutinho caught the screen pass in the NFC championship." Provide a clear and
      concise answer, along with a brief explanation or evidence to support your
      answer. Consider the context of the sentence, such as the teams, players, and
      events mentioned, as well as the rules and conventions of the sport. Ensure
      that your answer is contextually appropriate and maintains the same intent as
      the original sentence. Pay attention to providing a well-reasoned and evidence
      -based answer that is easy to understand and follow. Print the output in the
      format "The answer is \\answer{}"

  ###Candidate Prompt###
  Paraphrase the given sentences. Make sure the paraphrased versions have the same
      meaning as the original sentences.
  ###Reason###
  The candidate prompt is relatively short and lacks specific instructions and
      requirements for paraphrasing. It only mentions the need for paraphrasing and
      maintaining the same meaning as the original sentences. However, it does not
      provide clear guidelines on how to ensure variations in wording, sentence
      structure, or phrasing. The prompt is vague and leaves many crucial details to
       interpretation, making it difficult for the model to generate accurate and
      diverse paraphrases.
  ###Better Prompt Type###
  [PARAPHRASE][ROLE PLAYING]
  ###Better Prompt###
  Your task is to paraphrase the given sentences while maintaining the original
      meaning. The paraphrased versions should exhibit variations in wording,
      sentence structure, and phrasing. Aim for paraphrases that are linguistically
      diverse, capturing different ways of expressing the same ideas. Ensure that
      the paraphrases are contextually appropriate and maintain the same intent as
      the original sentences. Pay attention to preserving the nuances, tone, and
      style of the original sentences during the paraphrasing process.

  ###Candidate Prompt###
  Apply a function to the final input list to generate the output list. Use any
      preceding inputs and outputs as examples.
  input : [1, 7, 9, 4, 6, 2, 0]
  output : [0]
  input : [8, 3, 4, 0, 5, 1, 6, 9, 2]
  output : [6]
  input : [8, 4, 5, 9, 0, 6, 1]
  output : [1]
  ###Reason###
  The candidate prompt says nothing about the task at hand which makes it ambiguous.
      Since there could be many interpretations from a few input-output pairs the
      prompt will lead the model to guess the task at hand and we may get different


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        outputs. To tackle this problem, the better prompt should specify the task at
        hand by clearly specifying the instructions. Specifying the objective function
         will make the better prompt unambiguous and the model would not guess. Also,
        remember we need to consider all the edge cases (such as zero or one element)
        before designing a better prompt.
    ###Better Prompt Type###
    [PATTERN IDENTIFICATION][ANALYSIS]
    ###Better Prompt###
    From the given list as Input, remove all the elements from the input list except
        the 7th element. Print the output in the format "The answer is \\answer{}".
    input : [1, 7, 9, 4, 6, 2, 0]
    output : [0]
    input : [8, 3, 4, 0, 5, 1, 6, 9, 2]
    output : [6]
    input : [8, 4, 5, 9, 0, 6, 1]
    output : [1]
    input : [3, 1, 7, 2, 9, 6, 8, 4, 5, 0]
    output : [8]

    ###Candidate Prompt###
    Input: Please call once you get there.
    Output: Please call upon your arrival.
    Input: Thanks for your help.
    Output: Your assistance is much appreciated.
    Input: This song is fire.
    Output: This song is incredibly good.
    ###Reason###
    The candidate prompt is vague, ambiguous, and incomplete. Merely giving input and
        output pairs makes the interpretation of the task ambiguous. There could be
        several transformation functions that could be applied to obtain the same
        input and output pairs. The better prompt should analyze the examples,
        identify the transformation function, and make the task clear while generating
         the better prompt type. Specifying the objective function will make the
        better prompt unambiguous and the model would not guess. Also, remember we
        need to consider all the edge cases (such as zero or one element) before
        designing a better prompt.
    ###Better Prompt Type###
    [PATTERN IDENTIFICATION][ANALYSIS]
    ###Better Prompt###
    Write a paraphrase of the input sentence, but use a formal style. Print the output
        in the format "The answer is \\answer{}"
    Input: Please call once you get there.
    Output: Please call upon your arrival.
    Input: Thanks for your help.
    Output: Your assistance is much appreciated.
    Input: This song is fire.
    Output: This song is incredibly good.

    ###Candidate Prompt###



B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
B.1    TASK - SPECIFIC I NSTRUCTIONS O PTIMIZED B Y PRO MPT D

Table 4 demonstrates all the optimized task instructions obtained using PRO MPT D. For repro-
ducibility purposes, we present both the original and the rewritten task instructions.

B.2    R ESULTS ON MATH BY CATEGORIES

Table 5 presents the breakdown of the numbers on the MATH dataset across task difficulties. for the
medium to very hard categories in the MATH dataset PRO MPT D gains over 6-20% accuracy scores
when compared with Zero-Shot baselines.


                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task Type                                                                     Examples
 GSM8K and MATH          Original Task Instruction: Solve the following word problem step by step.

                         Rewritten Task Instruction: Consider solving a word problem step by step. Begin by reading the problem
                         thoroughly to ensure a complete understanding. Identify all the variables and the relationships between them.
                         Next, break the problem into smaller manageable parts and develop a strategy to solve each part. Lastly, review
                         the solutions of all parts and check whether the final solution makes sense in the context of the original problem.
                         Original Task Instruction: Given an incomplete python template, generate the full code examining all the
                         descriptions or test cases provided inside the template.
 Human Eval:
                         Rewritten Task Instruction: You need to create a Python function based on the information provided in
                         the enclosed comments. Ensure that the function adheres to the function signature and description provided.
                         Include any necessary module imports, maintain the intent of the code, and consider possible edge cases to
                         result in robust code execution. Please follow the specific instructions provided in the comments to develop the
                         complete Python code.
                         Original Task Instruction: Identify whether a given statement contains an anachronism.
 Anachronisms:
                         Rewritten Task Instruction: Review the given statement and identify whether it includes an anachronism - a
                         chronological inconsistency in which a person, event, object, or language is mistakenly placed in a time period
                         where it does not belong. Clearly state “Yes” if the statement contains an anachronism and “No” if it does not.
                         Explain your reasoning briefly, providing details that led you to your conclusion. Print the output in the format
                         “The answer is \\answer” and if yes also provide “Identified anachronism is - \\response” otherwise print “No
                         anachronism found”.
                         Original Task Instruction: Infer the date from context
 Date Understanding
                         Rewritten Task Instruction: Given the context of the text, infer the date it is referring to. Consider any key
                         phrases, words or events that could hint towards a specific date. If necessary, conduct a brief background check
                         of any prominent figures or events that mention in the text. Try to narrow down the exact date in MM/D-
                         D/YYYY format. Print the output in the format “The answer is \\answer”.
                         Original Task Instruction: A test of ‘hallucinations’ by asking questions whose answers are known to be
                         unknown
 Known Unknowns
                         Rewritten Task Instruction: You will be provided with a series of questions that test for ’hallucinations,’
                         where the correct response is either a specific answer or unknown. Your job is to look at the question and deter-
                         mine if the answer can be found from the question or if it is undeterminable. If the answer cannot be concluded
                         from the question alone, choose “(b) unknown.” If the answer can be determined from the question alone,
                         provide the answer in the form “(a) Your Answer.” Print the output in the format “The answer is \\answer”
                         Original Task Instruction Determine whether the following statement or statements are plausible or implau-
                         sible:
 Sports Understanding
                         Rewritten Task Instruction: Your task is to evaluate the plausibility of the following statement(s): [input
                         statement]. Consider the context, factual accuracy, logic, and consistency of the statement(s) in your evaluation.
                         Then, provide a clear and substantiated determination of whether each statement is plausible (could likely be
                         true) or implausible (unlikely to be true). Print the output in the format “The statement is \\answer”. (Replace
                         \\answer with “plausible” or “implausible”) .
                         Original Task Instruction: Identify whether one sentence entails the next
 Analytical Entailment
                         Rewritten Task Instruction: Your task is to analyze two sentences and determine if one logically entails the
                         other. If the first sentence implies or logically leads to the truth of the second, state “Entailment”. If it is unclear
                         or ambiguous, state “Uncertain”. Print the output in the format “The answer is \\answer”



         Table 4: Rewritten Optimized task instructions by PRO MPT D for each of the tasks.

                                           Category - I (Very Easy and Easy)            Category - II (Medium, Hard, and Very Hard)
 Zero-Shot                                                 76.429                                               30.476
 Zero-Shot-CoT                                             80.714                                               40.476
 PRO MPT D (Instruction-Only)                              76.429                                               44.762
 PRO MPT D                                                 89.286                                               50.476

Table 5: Breakdown of performance of all the approaches across different difficulty categories of
MATH dataset.


B.3    R ESULTS FOR TASK T YPE G ENERALIZATION

In this section, we extend the generalization capability of PRO MPT D across two different task
types namely Symbolic Reasoning Kojima et al. (2022) and Open Domain Question Answering


                                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                   PROMPTD
                                  ZeroShot       ZeroShotCoT          PROMPTD
                                                                                         (after executing python codes)
      OpenDomain-QA
                                   71.600             73.272              78.400                               -
       (StrategyQA)
   Symbolic Reasoning
                                    6.000             90.800              58.800                        80.800
(Last Letter Concatenation)

Table 6: Evaluation of PRO MPT D on two unseen task types namely OpenDomainQA and Symbolic
Reasoning


          Bad Prompt      Classify the following sentences for sentiment. Examples are
          Reason          The candidate prompt is vague and incomplete. It fails to clearly specify the
                          task to be performed on the given sentences and does not provide any spe-
                          cific sentiment categories to assign to the sentences. Additionally, no examples
                          are provided to guide the model in understanding the task. The better prompt
                          should clearly specify the categories for sentiment analysis (e.g., positive, neu-
                          tral, negative) and provide examples to illustrate the task. The prompt should
                          also be structured in such a way as to instruct the model to utilize reasoning
                          and understanding of language semantics to correctly classify the sentences’
                          sentiments. Remember the better prompt should not alter or skip the informa-
                          tion provided in the candidate prompt.
          Task Type       [CLASSIFICATION][SENTIMENT ANALYSIS]
                          You have to classify the following sentences as either “Positive”, “Neutral”,
                          or “Negative” based on sentiment analysis. Draw on your understanding of
                          language semantics and reasoning skills to accurately assess the sentiment of
                          each sentence. Print the output in the format “The sentence {input sentence}
                          has a {positive/neutral/negative} sentiment”.
          Better Prompt
                          For example:
                          Input: This movie was fantastic.
                          Output: The sentence This movie was fantastic has a Positive sentiment.
                          Input: I can’t stand this weather.
                          Output: The sentence I can’t stand this weather has a Negative sentiment

Table 7: Example prompt improvement by PRO MPT D for an unseen sentiment classification task.
The original prompt lacks key details like sentiment categories and examples. PRO MPT D enhances
the prompt by specifying positive, neutral, and negative sentiment classes, providing illustrative
examples, and structuring the prompt to guide the model’s reasoning and output format. This results
in a more complete, specific prompt that enables the successful completion of sentiment analysis.


(OpenDomainQA) Geva et al. (2021). For the experiments we pick 250 random samples from the
Last Letter Concatenation dataset Kojima et al. (2022) and StrategyQA Geva et al. (2021).
As shown in Table ??, PRO MPT D outperforms zero-shot baselines for OpenDomainQA while
falling short on symbolic reasoning task.
In addition to the experiment with PRO MPT D in Section 3.6, in Table 7, we present an exam-
ple using PRO MPT D (Instruction-only) to rewrite the instruction for an unseen task type of sen-
timent classification. For the prompt “Classify the following sentences for sentiment.
Examples are”, it correctly identifies the task type as a “Sentiment Analysis” and “Classification”
task and generates a prompt that can be used for downstream sentiment classification tasks. More-
over, PRO MPT D can generate a possible set of classes (such as positive, neutral, or negative for
sentiment classification task) and generate a set of examples that can be further used for in-context
learning using few-shot sentiment classification demonstrations.


B.4    E RROR A NALYSIS

In Table 8, we summarize two common error categories of PRO MPT D. While such hallucination
errors are rare, PRO MPT D is still found to make them during prompt rewriting.


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Error Type                  Subcategories     Description                  Example
 Hallucinated instruction    Fabricated        PRO MPT D fabricates         Original Prompt:     Given a list of numbers, re-
                             Information       and adds informations in     turn the sum of squares of the numbers[...]def
                             (4.348%)          the rewritten prompt.        double the difference(...)
                                                                            Rewritten          Prompt:                 [...]def
                                                                            sum of squares of odd numbers (...)
                         Incorrect             PRO MPT D skips infor-       Original Prompt: Solo has to read 4 pages from his Sci-
 Manipulated information Copy      from        mation from the test-        ence textbook[...]
                         Test Instances        instance.                    Rewritten Prompt: [...]Step 1: Calculate the total number
                         (58.261%)                                          of pages Solo needs to read from his Science, Social Stud-
                                                                            ies, History, and Geography textbooks.[...]
                             Add        Un-    PRO MPT D adds strict        Original Prompt: def largest divisor(n:               int)
                             necessary         constraints leading to in-   ->int: ””” For a given number n, find the largest num-
                             Constraints       correct final response.      ber that divides n evenly, smaller than n\n [...] ”””
                             (23.478%)                                      Rewritten Prompt: [...]print("Invalid input. Please
                                                                            enter a number greater than 1".)[...]
                             Correct           PRO MPT D       correctly    Original Prompt: [...] In this Kata, you have to sort an ar-
                             Reason Incor-     identifies shortcomings      ray of non-negative integers according to number of ones in
                             rect    rewrit-   of test-instance but is      their binary representation in ascending order. For similar
                             ten     prompt    unable to reflect the        number of ones, sort based on decimal value.[...]
                             (13.913%)         changes in the rewritten     Reason: [...] but the provided examples are simply sorted
                                               prompt.                      in ascending order, which doesn’t align with the initial in-
                                                                            structions [...]
                                                                            Rewritten Prompt: [...] >>> sort array([1, 0, 2, 3,
                                                                            4]) should return [0, 1, 2, 3, 4] [...]


                            Table 8: Error categories of PRO MPT D’s rewritten prompts.



B.5     E XPERIMENTS OF PRO MPT D USING GPT-3.5


                               Figure 6: Results of PRO MPT D using GPT-3.5-turbo.



In Figure 6, we present results of variants of PRO MPT D based on GPT-3.5-turbo, including: (1)
zero-shot GPT-3.5; (2) zero-shot CoT of GPT-3.5; (3) PRO MPT D when using GPT-3.5 as both the
task and the rewriting LLMs; (4) PRO MPT D when using GPT-3.5 to rewrite prompts while GPT-4 as
the zero-shot task LLM; (4) PRO MPT D when using GPT-4 as both the task and the rewriting LLMs.
Experiments were conducted on Anachronisms and GSM-8K. The results showed the difficulty of
using GPT-3.5 to rewrite prompts. In particular, we found that the prompts rewritten by a relatively
weaker LLM (GPT-3.5) would not assist the relatively stronger LLM (GPT-4) in task.


                                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.6    A NALYSIS OF RESPONSES GENERATED BY ZERO - SHOT BASELINES AND PRO MPT D

In this section, we discuss the responses generated by all the approaches to analyze the extra pass for
answer extraction. As shown in Table 9, for the Zero-Shot baseline, the answer extraction becomes
difficult as LLM could put the response anywhere when left unconstrained. Zero-Shot-CoT (Kojima
et al., 2022), on the other hand, overcomes this problem by designing task-specific answer extraction
prompts such as “Therefore, the answer (arabic numeral is)” or “Therefore, among A through E, the
answer is”. However, one needs to engineer such prompts for each task and it becomes difficult
to extract answers for code generation or content generation tasks. PRO MPT D overcomes such
limitations by using a general answer extraction instruction “Provide you answer in the format The
Answer is \answer{}”

 Task Type                                                                    Examples
 Mathematical Reasoning   Original Prompt (GSM8K) Frederick is making popsicles to sell and to save money he is making his own popsicle
                          sticks. He can get 200 sticks from a 2 x 4 piece of wood and 400 sticks from a 2 x 8 piece of wood. He has $24 to
                          buy wood for sticks. A 2 x 4 costs $4. A 2 x 8 costs $6. What is the most popsicle sticks he can make if he buys the
                          cheapest lumber?
                          Zero-Shot: He can buy 6 two by fours because 24 / 4 = << 24/4 = 6 >>6 This will make him 1,200 sticks
                          because 6 x 200 = << 6 ∗ 200 = 1200 >>1,200. Answer:\boxed{1200}.
                          Zero-Shot-CoT: Let’s think step by step. [Truncated] From the 2 x 8 wood, he can make 1,600 sticks (400 sticks
                          x 4 pieces = 1,600 sticks).
                          Therefore, Frederick can make more popsicle sticks if he buys the 2 x 8 wood.
                          PRO MPT D:[Truncated]
                          So even though our initial hypothesis suggested otherwise it turns out:
                          The most popsicle sticks that Frederick can produce is \answer{48}.

                          Original Prompt: Find the reflection of $\\ beginpmatrix -2 \\\\ 3 \\\\ end{pmatrix}$ over the vector $\\
                          begin{pmatrix} 2 \\\\1 \\ end{pmatrix}.$
                          ZeroShot: [Truncated]
                          So, we compute that $-4 + 3 = -1,$ and $4 + 1 = 5.$ Therefore,
                          \[\bold p = \begin {bmatrix}-4\\6\\\end {bmatrix},\]and the answer is $\boxed {\begin {
                              bmatrix}-4\\6\\\end {bmatrix}}$.


                          Zero-Shot-CoT: [Truncated]
                          Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is
                          The reflection of the point $\\begin{pmatrix} -2 \\\\ 3 \\end{pmatrix}$ over the vector $\\
                              begin{pmatrix} 2 \\\\ 1 \\end{pmatrix}$ is given by:
                          $-83/28 \approx -2.96$
                          $101/28 \approx 3.61$
                          Therefore, in decimal form, it is approximately:
                          $\left[{\matrix{-2.96}\cr {3.61}\cr }\right]$


                          PRO MPT D: [Truncated]
                          Hence the answer is $(-(18/5), (9/15))$.
                          The final output would be “The answer is $(-(18 / 5), (9 /15 ))$”
 Logical Reasoning        Original Prompt (Date Understanding) Today is the palindrome day of 2020, because the MMDDYYYY format
                          of the date is the same backwards as forwards. What is the date 10 days ago in MM/DD/YYYY?
                          Zero-Shot:
                          The palindrome day of 2020 is 02/02/2020. So, 10 days ago would be 01/23/2020.
                          Zero-Shot-CoT: Let’s think this step by step.
                          The palindrome day of 2020 is 02/02/2020. If we subtract ten days from this date, the answer would be 01/23/2020.
                          Therefore, the correct choice is A) 01/23/2020.
                          Therefore, among A through E, the answer is
                          A) 01/23/2020
                          PRO MPT D:
                          The palindrome day of the year 2020 is 02/02/2020. Subtracting 10 days from this date gives the date 01/23/2020.
                          Therefore, the answer is 01/23/2020.


Table 9: Comparison of responses generated by ZeroShot, ZeroShotCoT, and PRO MPT D. It is
very hard to extract the final answer from the ZeroShot baseline due to the absence of a common
format. While, for ZeroShotCoT, one needs to engineer different answer extraction prompts such as
“Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is ” or “Therefore, among A through E, the answer is ” to
extract the answer.


                                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     E XAMPLES OF R ESPONSES G ENERATED BY PRO MPT D
We present outputs of PRO MPT D on all eight datasets in Table 10-12.

 Task Type                                                                      Examples
 Mathematical Reasoning   Original Prompt: Josh decides to try flipping a house. He buys a house for $80,000 and then puts in $50,000 in
                          repairs. This increased the value of the house by 150%. How much profit did he make?
                          Reason: The candidate prompt is unclear as ‘increased the value of the house by 150%’ could be interpreted in two
                          ways: 1) the value of the house after the repair is 150% of the buying price, or 2) the value of the house after the
                          repair is the buying price plus an additional 150% of the buying price. The prompt also does not specify whether
                          the profit should include the cost of repairs or not, and does not provide a common output format for the answer.
                          The better prompt clarifies these ambiguities by explicitly explaining the meaning of ‘increased the value by 150%’
                          and specifying that the profit should be calculated after taking into account the cost of repairs.
                          Rewritten Prompt: Josh decides to flip a house. He bought a house for $80,000 then invested an additional
                          $50,000 for its repairs. After repairs, the house’s value increased such that it’s now worth 150% more than the price
                          at which he bought it. Calculate the profit he made after selling the house, considering both the buying price and
                          cost of repairs. Print the output in the format “The answer is \\answer”

                          Original Prompt: How many distinct arrangements are there of PAPA?
                          Reason: The candidate prompt leaves room for interpretation, as it doesn’t ask for a specific output format or
                          example to guide the reasoning process of the model. An improved prompt would provide clear instructions about
                          the strategy, such as completing the task by using the formula for permutations of multi-set words, and would guide
                          the desired output format to improve answer extraction.
                          Rewritten Prompt: Compute the number of distinct arrangements that can be made from the word ’PAPA’. To
                          solve this problem, use the formula to count the permutations of a multiset: n!/(n1!*n2!*...*nk!), where n is the
                          total number of letters and n1, n2,... nk are the count of each distinct letter. In this case, ’P’ appears twice and ’A’
                          appears twice in ’PAPA’. Print the output in the format “The answer is \\answer”
 Logical Reasoning        Original Prompt: Identify whether one sentence entails the next:Every bachelor is tall, and the man in the hat is
                          short. Therefore the man in the hat is married
                          Reason: The candidate prompt is too short and lacks specific instructions and requirements for answering the
                          question. It only mentions the need to identify if one sentence entails the next, but it does not provide clear
                          guidelines on how to reason through the question or provide evidence for the answer. The prompt is vague and
                          leaves many crucial details to interpretation, making it difficult for the model to generate an accurate answer. The
                          candidate prompt also does not provide a common output format like “the answer is \\answer”.
                          Rewritten Prompt: Your task is to determine whether the following sentences entail each other: “Every bachelor
                          is tall, and the man in the hat is short. Therefore the man in the hat is married.” Provide a clear and concise
                          answer, along with a brief explanation or evidence to support your answer. Consider the logic of the statements,
                          the properties and characteristics of the entities mentioned, and the implications of the sentences. Ensure that your
                          answer is contextually appropriate and maintains the same intent as the original question. Pay attention to providing
                          a well-reasoned and evidence-based answer that is easy to understand and follow. Print the output in the format
                          “The answer is \\answer”

                          Original Prompt: Identify whether a given statement contains an anachronism: The sun’s creation during the
                          Stelliferous Era is the cause of its size, color, and brightness.Your choices are: (1) Yes (2) No
                          Reason: TThe candidate prompt is too short and lacks specific instructions and requirements for answering the
                          question. It only mentions the need for a yes or no answer, but it does not provide clear guidelines on how to reason
                          through the question or provide evidence for the answer. The prompt is vague and leaves many crucial details to
                          interpretation, making it difficult for the model to generate an accurate answer. The candidate prompt also does not
                          provide a common output format like ”the answer is \\answer”.
                          Rewritten Prompt: Your task is to analyze the following statement for any potential anachronisms: T̈he sun’s
                          creation during the Stelliferous Era is the cause of its size, color, and brightness.Än anachronism, in this context,
                          refers to something that is out of time or chronologically misplaced. Provide a clear and concise answer, along
                          with a brief explanation or evidence to support your answer. Consider the historical and scientific accuracy of the
                          statement. Your choices are: (1) Yes, it contains an anachronism (2) No, it does not contain an anachronism. Print
                          the output in the format “The answer is \\answer”

                          Original Prompt: Infer the date from context: Jane was born on the last day of Feburary in 2000. Today is her
                          16-year-old birthday. What is the date today in MM/DD/YYYY?
                          Reason: The candidate prompt is ambiguous and lacks clarity. It doesn’t specify the calendar system to use and
                          doesn’t make clear that leap years should be taken into account when calculating the date. The prompt also lacks
                          a common output format, which would allow for easy extraction of the final answer. The better prompt should
                          provide clear instructions on how to calculate the date and specify that the Gregorian calendar system should be
                          used. The better prompt should also provide a common output format like “The answer is \\answer”.
                          Rewritten Prompt: Your task is to calculate today’s date in MM/DD/YYYY format, given that Jane was born on
                          the last day of February in 2000 and today is her 16th birthday. Use the Gregorian calendar system to calculate
                          the date, taking into account leap years and the number of days in each month. Pay attention to the nuances of the
                          problem, such as the initial date and the number of years to add, that may affect the calculation. Ensure that the
                          date is contextually appropriate and maintains the same intent as the original problem. Provide a clear and concise
                          date that accurately reflects the solution to the problem. Aim for a high level of accuracy and consistency in your
                          calculations. If necessary, provide a brief explanation or evidence to support your answer. Print the output in the
                          format “The answer is \\answer”


Table 10: Generated examples of PRO MPT D for mathematical and logical reasoning tasks. In-
order of their appearance, the samples are taken from GSM8K, MATH, Analytical Entailment,
Anachronisms, and Date Understanding.


                                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task Type                                                               Examples
 Code Generation    Original Prompt:
                    from typing import List
                    def separate paren groups(paren string: str) -> List[str]:
                        """
                        Input to this function is a string containing multiple groups of nested parentheses.
                         Your goal is to
                        separate those group into separate strings and return the list of those.
                        Separate groups are balanced (each open brace is properly closed) and not nested within
                          each other
                        Ignore any spaces in the input string.
                        >>> separate paren groups('( ) (( )) (( )( ))')
                        ['()', '(())', '(()())']
                        """
                        pass # Function implementation here


                    Reason: The candidate prompt is incomplete as it does not provide any example input or output for the model
                    to follow. It also lacks specific instructions on how to handle edge cases such as empty strings or strings without
                    parentheses. The better prompt clarifies these points and provides a clear task description along with a specific
                    input-output format. It also provides a complete function signature, which makes it easier for the model to generate
                    the correct code.
                    Rewritten Prompt:
                    Write a Python function that takes a string as an input, where the string contains multiple groups of nested paren-
                    theses. The function should separate these groups into separate strings and return a list of these strings. Each
                    group of parentheses is balanced (i.e., every open parenthesis is properly closed) and not nested within each other.
                    Ignore any spaces in the input string. Handle the edge cases such as empty strings or strings without parentheses
                    by returning an empty list. The function signature is: ‘def separate paren groups(paren string: str) -> List[str]:‘.
                    An example of the expected functionality is: For the input ‘separate paren groups(′ ()(())(()())′ )‘, the function
                    should return ‘[’()’, ’(())’, ’(()())’]’.

                    Original Prompt:
                    def encode shift(s: str) -> str:
                        # returns encoded string by shifting every character by 5 in the alphabet.
                        return ''.join([chr(((ord(ch) + 5 - ord('a')) % 26) + ord('a')) for ch in s])
                    def decode shift(s: str) -> str:
                        # takes as input string encoded with encode shift function. Returns decoded string.
                        def shift char(char: str) -> str:
                             if not char.isalpha():
                                 return char
                             base = 65 if char.isupper() else 97
                             return chr((ord(char) - base - 5) % 26 + base)
                        return ''.join(map(shift char, s))


                    Reason: Write a Python function that takes as input a string encoded with the ‘encode shift’ function. The ‘en-
                    code shift‘ function returns an encoded string by shifting every character by 5 in the alphabet. Your task is to write
                    the ‘decode shift’ function that returns the original string before it was encoded. Your function should take into
                    account the wrap-around of the alphabet, i.e., after ‘z’, it should go back to ‘a’. The function signature should be:
                    ‘def decode shif t(s: str) − > str:’


Table 11: Generated examples of PRO MPT D for code generation task. The samples are taken from
the Human Eval dataset.


                                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task Type                                                                    Examples
 Common Sense Reason-   Original Prompt: A test of ’hallucinations’ by asking questions whose answers are known to be unknown: How
 ing                    often did Abraham Lincoln cut his toenails? Your choices are: (1) Every Saturday night (2) Unknown
                        Reason: The candidate prompt is too short and lacks specific instructions and requirements for answering the
                        question. It only mentions the need for a choice between two options, but it does not provide clear guidelines on
                        how to reason through the question or provide evidence for the answer. The prompt is vague and leaves many
                        crucial details to interpretation, making it difficult for the model to generate an accurate answer. The candidate
                        prompt also does not provide a common output format like “the answer is \\answer{}”.
                        Rewritten Prompt: Your task is to answer the following question: How often did Abraham Lincoln cut his toe-
                        nails? Your choices are: (1) Every Saturday night (2) Unknown. Provide a clear and concise answer, along with
                        a brief explanation or evidence to support your answer. Consider the context of the question, such as the histori-
                        cal period and the availability of information about Abraham Lincoln’s personal habits. Ensure that your answer
                        is contextually appropriate and maintains the same intent as the original question. Pay attention to providing a
                        well-reasoned and evidence-based answer that is easy to understand and follow. Print the output in the format “The
                        answer is \\answer{}”.

                        Original Prompt: Determine whether an artificially constructed sentence relating to sports is plausible or implau-
                        sible: Malcolm Brogdon banked the shot in
                        Reason: The candidate prompt is not related to basketball, and it appears to be a mix of different prompts. It
                        doesn’t provide any specific instructions or requirements for determining the plausibility of a sentence related to
                        basketball. The better prompt provides a clear context and a specific sentence to evaluate. It also provides a specific
                        output format, guiding the model to generate a clear and concise answer with a brief explanation. This ensures
                        that the model understands the task and can generate the appropriate response. Print the output in the format “The
                        answer is \\answer{}”.

                        Rewritten Prompt: Determine whether the following sentence related to basketball is plausible or implausible:
                        “Malcolm Brogdon banked the shot in.” Provide a clear and concise answer (either ‘plausible’ or ‘implausible’)
                        along with a brief explanation of your reasoning. Consider the context of the sentence, the players involved, and the
                        action described. Ensure that your answer is contextually appropriate and maintains the same intent as the original
                        sentence.


Table 12: Generated examples of PRO MPT D for Sports Understanding and Known-Unknowns from
BigBench.


 Task Type                                                                    Examples
 OpenDomainQA           Original Prompt: Answer questions in which the required reasoning steps are implicit in the question:
                        Do the anchors on Rede Globo speak Chinese?
                        Your choices are: (1) Yes (2) No
                        Reason: The candidate prompt is vague and lacks specific instructions and requirements for answering the question.
                        Although it provides an example and a correct answer, it does not provide clear guidelines on how to reason through
                        the question or how to handle ambiguous or complex questions. The prompt is vague and leaves many crucial details
                        to interpretation, making it difficult for the model to generate an accurate answer. The candidate prompt also does
                        not provide a common output format like ”the answer is \\answer{}”.
                        Rewritten Prompt: Your task is to answer the following question: “Do the anchors on Rede Globo speak Chinese?”
                        Consider the context of the question, such as the language typically spoken on Rede Globo, a Brazilian television
                        network. Ensure that your answer is contextually appropriate and maintains the same intent as the original question.
                        Provide a clear and concise answer, along with a brief explanation or evidence to support your answer. Your choices
                        are: (1) Yes (2) No. Print the output in the format ”The answer is \\answer{}”
 Logical Reasoning      Original Prompt: Take the last letters of each words in “Britt Tamara Elvis Nayeli” and concatenate them.
                        Reason: TThe candidate prompt is vague and does not specify the order of concatenation, whether to consider
                        spaces or punctuation as words, or how to handle special characters. The prompt is also open-ended, allowing for
                        multiple correct answers, which may confuse the model. The candidate prompt also does not provide a common
                        output format like “the answer is \\answer”.
                        Rewritten Prompt: Your task is to take the last letters of each word in the phrase B̈ritt Tamara Elvis Nayeliı̈n the
                        same order as they appear in the phrase and concatenate them. Do not consider spaces or punctuation as words and
                        ignore any special characters. Print the output in the format “The answer is \\answer”


Table 13: Generated examples of PRO MPT D for OpenDomain-QA and symbolic reasoning tasks.
In-order of their appearance, the samples are taken from StrategyQA Geva et al. (2021) and Kojima
et al. (2022).


                                                                 24
