Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EARNING A BSTRACT W ORLD M ODELS FOR VALUE -
PRESERVING P LANNING WITH O PTIONS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         General-purpose agents require fine-grained controls and rich sensory inputs to
         perform a wide range of tasks. However, this complexity often leads to intractable
         decision-making. Traditionally, agents are provided with task-specific action and
         observation spaces to mitigate this challenge, but this reduces autonomy. Instead,
         agents must be capable of building state-action spaces at the correct abstraction
         level from their sensorimotor experiences. We leverage the structure of a given set
         of temporally-extended actions to learn abstract Markov decision processes (MDPs)
         that operate at a higher level of temporal and state granularity. We characterize
         state abstractions necessary to ensure that planning with these skills, by simulating
         trajectories in the abstract MDP, results in policies with bounded value loss in the
         original MDP. We evaluate our approach in goal-based navigation environments
         that require continuous abstract states to plan successfully and show that abstract
         model learning improves the sample efficiency of planning and learning.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising framework for embodied intelligence because of its
flexibility, generality, and online nature. Recently, RL agents have learned to control complex control
systems: stratospheric balloons (Bellemare et al., 2020), nuclear fusion reactors (Degrave et al.,
2022) and drones (Kaufmann et al., 2023). They have also mastered long-horizon decision-making
problems such as the game of Go and chess (Silver et al., 2016; 2018). To achieve these results,
each agent’s state representation and action spaces were engineered to make learning tractable: the
state space was designed to contain only relevant information for decision-making and the actions
were restricted to task-relevant decisions to be made at every time step. This is in conflict with the
state-action space required for versatile, general-purpose agents (e.g., robots), which must possess
broad sensory data and precise control capabilities to handle a wide variety of tasks, such as playing
chess, folding clothes or navigating a maze. Abstractions alleviate this tension: action abstractions
enable agents to plan at larger temporal scales and state abstractions reduce the complexity of learning
and planning; a combination of action and state abstraction results in a new task model that can
capture the natural complexity of the task, instead of the complexity of the agent (Konidaris, 2019).
For instance, in model-based RL (MBRL;Sutton (1991); Deisenroth and Rasmussen (2011)), there is
a long line of research that focuses on learning transition and reward models to plan by simulating
trajectories. Many modern methods learn abstract state spaces (Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018; Zhang
et al., 2019; Silver et al., 2018; Hafner et al., 2019; 2021; 2023) to handle complex observation
spaces. However, they learn models for the primitive action spaces and work within the single-task
setting. Recently, there has been interest in using MBRL for skill discovery: Hafner et al. (2022)
learn a model in an abstract state space and learn a further abstraction over it to discover goals in a
Feudal RL manner (Dayan and Hinton, 1992). Bagaria and Konidaris (2020); Bagaria et al. (2021a;b),
instead, assume that the abstract state space is a graph and learn skills that connect nodes in that
graph, effectively building a model that is both abstract in state and in actions. These approaches are
ultimately limited because they assume a discrete abstract state space.
On the other hand, in robotics, high-level planning searches for sequences of temporally-extended
actions (motor skills) to achieve a task. However, the agents needs a model to compute plans
composed of their motor skills and this is typically given to the agent. To enable the agent to learn
a model compatible with its motor skills from sensor data, Konidaris et al. (2018) propose novel


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: An agent needs to solve a task using its actuators and sensors (on the right). However,
it requires an abstract model of the task (on the left) to reason at long time scales. This can be
constructed by combining temporally-extended actions with a compatible abstract state representation
that contains the minimal information necessary for planning with those actions.


semantics to automatically learn logical predicates from the agent observation space that support task
planning with PDDL (Planning Domain Definition Language; Fox and Long (2003); Younes and
Littman (2004)). Moreover, they provide theoretical guarantees for learning predicates that support
sound task planning. In a similar vein, Ugur and Piater (2015a;b); Ahmetoglu et al. (2022) propose
to cluster the effects of motor skills to build discrete symbols for planning. Similarly, Asai et al.
(2022) introduce a discrete VAE (Variational Auto-encoder; (Kingma and Welling, 2013)) approach
to leverage modern deep networks for grounding PDDL predicates and action operators from complex
observations. While these approaches consider temporally-extended actions and are promising for
planning problems where the appropriate state abstractions are discrete, they are not applicable when
planning with the available high-level actions requires a continuous state representation.
Instead, we are interested in learning state abstractions that are continuous, compatible with modern
deep learning methods, and that guarantee value-preserving planning with a set of given skills.
Specifically, we focus on building abstract world models in the form of Markov decision processes
(MDPs) that have abstract state and action spaces and, in contrast to previous approaches, provide a
principled approach to characterize the abstract state space that ensures that planning in simulation
produces a policy with expected value equal to that by planning with the original MDP. In summary,
we (1) introduce the necessary and sufficient conditions for constructing an abstract Markov decision
process sufficient for value-preserving planning for a given set of skills; (2) introduce an information
maximization approach compatible with contemporary deep learning techniques, ensuring a bounded
value loss when planning using the abstract model; and finally, (3) provide empirical evidence that
these abstract models support effective planning with off-the-shelf deep RL algorithms in goal-based
tasks (Mujoco Ant mazes (Fu et al., 2020) and Pinball (Konidaris and Barto, 2009) from pixels).


2    BACKGROUND AND N OTATION

Markov Decision Processes A continuous state, continuous action Markov decision process (MDP)
(Puterman, 2014) is defined as the tuple M = (S, A, T, R, p0 , ) where S ✓ Rds is the state space
and A ✓ Rda is the action space (ds , da 2 N), T : S ⇥ A ! (S) is the transition kernel that
represent the dynamics of the environment, R : S ⇥ A ! R is the reward function bounded by
RM ax 2 R, 2 [0, 1) is the discount factor and p0 2 (S) is the initial state distribution.
Planning and Bellman Equation A solution     P1to an MDP is a policy ⇡ : S ! (A) that
maximizes the expected return J(⇡) = E [ t=0 t R(St , At )| S0 ⇠ p0 , ⇡, T ]. An important
family of solution methods for MDPs are based on the Bellman optimality principle and the
Bellman equation.
             P1 For      a given policy ⇡, the state-value function v ⇡ : S ! R is defined as
v (s) := E [ t=0 R(St , At )|S0 = s, ⇡]. The state-value function represents the expected dis-
  ⇡                  t

counted return when following the policy ⇡ from state s. Importantly, the value function satisfy the
following recursion, known as the Bellman
                                       ⇥ equation,Rwhich is used in many⇤ current planning and
learning methods for MDPs: v ⇡ (s) = E R(s, a) + S T (s0 |s, a)v ⇡ (s0 )ds0 .
Action Abstractions Options (Sutton et al., 1999) are a formalization of temporally-extended actions,
or skills, that are used by the agent to plan with a longer temporal scope than that allowed by primitive
actions. An option o is defined by the tuple (Io , ⇡o , o ) where Io : S ! {0, 1} is the initiation
set, that is, the set of states in which the option can start execution; ⇡o is the policy function, and
  o : S ! [0, 1] is the termination probability function that indicates the probability of terminating
the option execution at state s.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Expected-length Model of Options Generally, options are used to plan in Semi-Markov decision
processes (SMDP; Sutton et P      al. (1999)), in which modelling jointly the option’s dynamics T and
                                     1
duration
    hP    ⌧  as T  (s 0
                        |s, o) =i ⌧ =0 Pr(S⌧ = s , (s⌧ )|S0 = s, o) and its reward as R(s, o) =
                                          ⌧             0

        ⌧ 1 t
E⌧      t=0     R(St , At )|s, o , result in the Multi-time model of options. However, we will use
a simpler and more practical model of options dynamics: the expected-length model of options
(Abel et al., 2019). In this case, the option’s duration is modeled independently from the next-state
distribution. More precisely, let ⌧˜o be the average number of timesteps taken to execute the option o,
then T (s0 |s, o) = ⌧˜o p(s0 |s, o) where p(s0 |s, o) is the probability density function over the next-state
observed when the option is executed as a black-box skill.
State Abstractions and Probabilistic Groundings State abstractions (or state aggregation) have
commonly been defined in the form of surjective functions f : S ! S̄ where S̄ is an abstract state
space. Recently, Konidaris et al. (2018) propose probabilistic groundings to define a new class of
state abstractions. These groundings are defined by G : S̄ ! (S) and, contrary to state aggregation
approaches, these can have overlapping support. That is, for a state s and abstract states s̄1 and s̄2 ,
we can have that Gs̄1 (s) > 0 and Gs̄2 (s) > 0. In state aggregation methods, one state has just one
abstract state to map to. Therefore, this provides a more expressive framework to build abstractions.


3       VALUE - PRESERVING A BSTRACT MDP S

To plan with a set of options, we must build a model of their effects. In this section, we formalize this
model as an MDP with the following characteristics: (1) Action Abstraction, the action space is the
set of task-relevant temporally-extended skills (i.e., the ground actions are not used for planning); (2)
State Abstraction, because the set of skills operate at a higher-level of abstraction, the observation
space will contains more information than required to plan with the skills; (3) Sufficient for Planning,
the model must support computing a plan with the option set for task-specific rewards. In the case of
abstract MDPs, the abstract model must guarantee accurate trajectory simulations to leverage the
planning and RL algorithms developed for MDPs.


3.1       G ROUND AND A BSTRACT MDP S

We start by defining the ground MDP M , the environment that the agent observes by only executing
the options.
Definition 3.1 (Ground MDP). Let O be a set of options defined over the agent’s state-action space.
The ground MDP is M = (S, O, T, R, , ⌧, p0 ). T (s0 |s, o) is the next-state probability density
function seen by
               P⌧the agent when executing option o at s and its accumulated discounted reward is
R(s, o) = E⌧ [ t=1 t R(St , At )|s, o], and ⌧ : S ⇥ O ! [0, 1) is the expected option’s execution
time of option o when initiated at state s1 .
Definition 3.2 (Abstract MDP). The abstract MDP is M̄ = (S̄, O, T̄ , R̄, , ⌧¯, p¯0 ) where S̄ is the
abstract state space, T̄ : S̄ ⇥ O ! (S̄) is the abstract transition kernel, R̄ : S̄ ⇥ O ! R is the
abstract reward function, is the discount factor, ⌧¯ : S̄ ⇥ O ! [0, 1) is the option’s duration model
and p̄0 is the initial abstract state distribution.

Given that the objective is to compute plans in the abstract model, we will only consider policies of
the form ⇡ : S̄ ! O in the rest of the paper. Moreover, to connect the abstract MDP to the ground
MDP, we use a grounding function defined in terms of probability density functions, as introduced by
Konidaris et al. (2018). The grounding of an abstract state s̄ is defined by the probability of the agent
being in a state s.
Definition 3.3 (Grounding function). Let M be a ground MDP and M̄ be an abstract MDP. A
grounding function G : S̄ ! (S) maps s̄ to probability measures over S of M . Given an abstract
state s̄, we denote by Gs̄ its grounding probability density. We will denote the tuple (M, M̄ , G) as a
grounded abstract model.

    1
        The ground MDP would be an SMDP if we used the multi-time model of options (Sutton et al., 1999).


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2       T HE DYNAMICS P RESERVING A BSTRACTION

Our goal is to build an abstract model that enables the agent to simulate trajectories as though it had
access to a simulator of the ground model. To achieve this, we establish two key distributions: the
future state distribution and the grounded future state distribution.
Definition 3.4 (Future State Distribution). Let the tuple (M, M̄ , G) be a grounded abstract model.
Let the future state distribution be Bt , and defined recursively as follows,
                 B0 (s0 ) = p0 (s0 )
                 Bt (st , ..., s0 |o0 , ..., ot 1 ) = T (st |st 1 , ot 1 )Bt 1 (st 1 , ..., s0 |o0 , ..., ot 2 ).
and the grounded future state distribution B̄t is the estimate obtained by grounding the estimate
obtained by simulating trajectories in the abstract model M̄
 P (st , s̄t , ..., s0 , s̄0 |o0 , ..., ot 1 ) = Gs̄t (st )T̄ (s̄t |s̄t 1 , ot 1 )Pt 1 (st 1 , s̄t 1 , ..., s0 , s̄0 |o0 , ..., ot 2 )
                                                 Z
        B̄t (st , ..., s0 |o0 , ..., ot 1 ) = P (st , s̄t , ..., s0 , s̄0 |o0 , ..., ot 1 )ds̄0 ...s̄t .
Hence, we say that when Bt (st |o0 , ..., ot 1 ) = B̄t (st |o0 , ..., ot 1 ), then simulating a trajectory in
the abstract model is the same as in the ground model. To satisfy this, we can build an abstract model
based on dynamics-preserving abstractions2 .
Definition 3.5 (Dynamics Preserving Abstraction). Let be a mapping : S ! Z ✓ Rdz for some
dimension dz 2 N. If for all o 2 O and all s 2 S that are reachable, the following holds,
                                      T (s0 |s, o) = T (s0 | (s), o);                                     (1)
                                  Pr(Io = 1|s) = Pr(Io = 1| (s));                                         (2)
where, Io is an indicator variable corresponding to the option’s initiation set. Then, we say that is
dynamics-preserving. That is, the information in (s) is sufficient to predict the effect of the option
and to determine if an option is executable.
This is similar to model-preserving abstractions (Li et al., 2006) and bisimulation (Givan et al., 2003;
Ferns et al., 2004). However, 1) it is stronger in the sense that z must be a sufficient statistic for
next-state prediction, and more importantly 2) this does not impose a condition over the ground
reward function. Because we want to build an abstract model to be re-used for task-specific rewards
(as we will see in Section 4.3), the ground reward function is considered as a way to measure the
cost (negative reward) of executing a skill—retaining Markovianity with respect to the ground reward
function would limit how much information can potentially be abstracted away.
We will now build a sensible abstract MDP M̄ , as follows. Let : S ! Z be a dynamics-preserving
abstraction. Given that T (s0 |s, o) = T (s0 |z, o) where (s) = z, then we can build a transition
function in Z-space, T (z 0 |z, o), and a grounding function G, that can let us reconstruct T (s0 |z, o).
                       Z
              p0 (z) = p0 (s)1[ (s) = z]ds;
                       Z
        T (z 0 |z, o) = T (s0 |z, o)1[ (s0 ) = z 0 ]ds0 ;
                       ( p (s)1[ (s)=z0 ]
                   0
                          0
                              p0 (z 0 )         if z 0 is an initial state (there is not previous (z, o))
      G(s|z, o, z ) = T (s|z,o)1[            0
                                        (s)=z ]                                                           ;
                              T (z 0 |z,o)      otherwise
Given that just knowing z is not enough to determine its grounding distribution, we can build an
abstract state space S̄ , Z ⇥ O ⇥ Z of transition tuples—with special values values z? and o? to
form s̄0 = (z? , o? , z0 ) for initial abstract states. Let s̄ = (ẑ, ô, z) and s̄0 = (z̃, õ, z 0 ) be two abstract
states in S̄, we define the abstract MDP functions in this new S̄, as follows.
                           Gs̄ (s) = G(s|z, o, z 0 );
                                       ⇢
                                         T (z 0 |z, o) if z̃ = z and õ = o
                     T̄ (s̄0 |s̄, o) =                                       ;
                                         0             otherwise
                             R̄(s̄, o) = Es⇠Gs̄ [R(s, o)] ;            ⌧¯(s̄, o) = Es⇠Gs̄ [⌧ (s, o)] ;

Finally, the following theorem formally states that this construction is sound.
    2
        We defer all proofs to Appendix A.1.


                                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3.6. Let the tuple (M, M̄ , G) be a grounded abstract model and a function : S !
Z ✓ Rdz . The model satisfies that Bt (· | o0 , ..., ot 1 ) = B̄t (· | o0 , ..., ot 1 ) if and only if is
dynamics-preserving.

This theorem proves that if we learn a dynamics-preserving abstraction, we can simulate accurate
trajectories in the abstract model. Therefore, planning in the abstract model is accurate, in the sense,
that the value of an abstract state v ⇡ (s̄) computed using the abstract model is the same as the one
would get by generating trajectories in the ground MDP and computing the expected value under
grounding G, Es⇠Gs̄ [v ⇡ (s)]].
Corollary 3.7. Let the tuple (M, M̄ , G) be a grounded abstract model. If the dynamics preserving
property holds then the value of policy ⇡ computed in abstract model M̄ satisfies that v ⇡ (s̄) =
E[v ⇡ (s)|s ⇠ Gs̄ ]. That is, the grounded abstract model preserves the expected value under the
grounding G.

Proof. Given that we have that, by definition, T (s0 |s, o) = T (s0 |s̄, o) = Es̄0 ⇠T̄ (·|s̄,o) [Gs̄0 (s)]. It
follows that
                                       ⇥      ⇥                                              ⇤⇤
             Es⇠Gs̄ [v ⇡ (s)] = Es⇠Gs̄ Eo⇠⇡ R(s, o) + Es0 ⇠T (s0 |s,o) [ ⌧ v ⇡ (s0 )]
                                     ⇥                                                          ⇤
                              = Eo⇠⇡ Es⇠Gs̄ [R(s, o)] + Es⇠Gs̄ ,s0 ⇠T (s0 |s,o) [ ⌧ v ⇡ (s0 )]
                                     ⇥                                                    ⇤
                              = Eo⇠⇡ R̄(s̄, o) + Es̄0 ⇠T̄ (·|s̄,o) Es0 ⇠Gs̄ [¯ v ⇡ (s0 )]
                                     ⇥                                           ⇤
                              = Eo⇠⇡ R̄(s̄, o) + Es̄0 ⇠T̄ (·|s̄,o) [¯ v ⇡ (s̄0 )] = v ⇡ (s̄).


The Skills to Symbols framework (Konidaris et al., 2018) introduces the strong subgoal property to
build grounded discrete symbols for sound classical planning. The next corollary proves that the
strong subgoal is a special case of the dynamics preserving property when the appropriate abstraction
function has finite co-domain. Therefore, we can build discrete dynamics preserving models if and
only if the strong subgoal property holds.
Corollary 3.8. Let the tuple (M, M̄ , G) be a grounded abstract model. Let the strong subgoal
property (Konidaris et al., 2018) for an option o be defined as, Pr(s0 |s, o) = Pr(s0 |o). The dynamics
preserving property holds with a finite abstract state space Z = [N ] for some N 2 N if and only if
the strong subgoal property holds.

4     L EARNING THE A BSTRACT M ODEL

4.1   I NFORMATION M AXIMIZATION TO L EARN A DYNAMICS -P RESERVING

The mutual information between random variables X and Y , M I(X; Y ), measures the information
that each variable holds about the other. We are interested in finding a function that is dynamics-
preserving such that we can build our abstract MDP. By Definition 3.5, we want to learn (s) that is
maximally predictive of the effect of o when executed in s and to predict if option o is executable.
That is, we want to maximize the following:
                 max M I(S 0 , I; (S), O) ⌘ max M I(S 0 ; (S), O) + M I(I; (S)),                               (3)
                  2                               2

where is a class of functions that map the high-dimensional ground states to lower-dimensional
space. I is binary random variable for the initiation set prediction. S 0 , S, O are random variables over
the ground states S and the options set O.
In general, by the data processing inequality, M I(S 0 ; (S), O) is upper-bounded by
M I(S 0 ; S, O).Therefore, we can show that optimizing the above objective results in a bounded
value loss when using the abstract model to plan. To see this, we first note that by compressing
through , we lose information M I , M I(S 0 ; S, O) M I(S 0 ; Z, O), where Z = (S), in the
transition dynamics simulation. We show that,
          (a)
                 h   ⇣                            ⌘i (b)            h                                     i
      M I = Ep(s) DKL T (s0 |s, o)||T̃ (s0 |z, o)        2 ln 2Ep(s) kT (s0 |s, o)        T̃ (s0 |z, o)k21 .


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where p(s) is a distribution over s that will depend on the data collection policy and (a) follows from
the definition of the KL divergence and (b) from the well-known bound relating the KL divergence
and L1 norm3 . Therefore, the error in the learned transition dynamics is minimized by our objective
and this implies, by the following theorem, that this objective also minimizes the value loss resulting
from the approximation.
Theorem
R            4.1 (Value Loss Bound). Let (M, M̄ , G) be a grounded abstract model and T̃ (s0 |s̄, o) =
  Gs̄0 (s0 )T̄ (s̄0 |s̄, o)ds̄0 be the approximate transition dynamics from the grounded model. If the follow-
ing conditions hold for all o 2 O and all s 2 S with Gs̄ (s) > 0: (1) kT (s0 |s, o) T̃ (s0 |s̄, o)k21  ✏T ,
and (2)|R(s, o) R̄(s̄, o)|2  ✏R ; then, for any policy ⇡,
                                                              p              p
                                                                ✏R + VM ax ✏T
                                    |Q⇡ (s, o) Q⇡ (s̄, o)|                       .
                                                                    1

4.2      C ONTRASTIVE A BSTRACT M ODEL L EARNING

We maximize the previous Infomax objective (3) as follows. The term M I(I; Z) reduces to a
cross entropy loss, so we will focus on estimating the term M I(S 0 ; Z, O): we can prove that
maximizing both sides of the identity M I(Z 0 ; Z, O) = (M I(S 0 ; Z 0 ) M I(S 0 ; Z 0 |Z, O)) implicitly
maximizes M I(S 0 ; Z, O) (see extended derivation details in Appendix A.2). Intuitively, the first
term M I(Z 0 ; Z, O) makes z 0 predictable from knowing the option executed and the previous z. The
second term avoids collapsing to a trivial solution: maximizing M I(S 0 ; Z 0 ) M I(S 0 ; Z 0 |Z, O)
makes retain information about the ground state s (avoiding collapse of the representation) that is
maximally predicted by the previous (z, o).
We choose to maximize these mutual informa-
tion terms contrastively using InfoNCE (Oord
et al., 2018) to avoid making assumptions about
                                                           Algorithm 1 Planning and Learning with an Ab-
tractable density models (other MI estimators
                                                           stract Model
(Poole et al., 2019; Alemi et al.; Belghazi et al.,
2018) can be used). Using these estimators Require: Agent ⇡, Ground Environment M,
allows the model to implicitly learn complex                   Abstract Model M̄ , Goal G
grounding functions that improve the quality 1: Initialize dataset D by rolling out N trajecto-
of the abstract state space. Note that by using                 ries
InfoNCE for the terms above, this algorithm cor-            2:  M̄      PretrainAbstractMDP(D)
responds to Temporal Predictive Coding (TPC; 3: M̄                      MakeTaskMDP(M̄ , G)
Nguyen et al. (2021)) which proposes abstract               4: while true do
states without reconstruction objectives. There- 5:                D      Roll out for L steps.
fore, our formulation approaches to the TPC al-             6:     if H  steps have passed then
gorithm in the degenerate case of options being 7:                    M̄     TrainModel(M̄ ,D)
the primitive actions 4 .                                   8:        ⇡     TrainAgentImagination(M̄ , ⇡)
                                                            9:     end if
In practice, we assume that we have ac- 10: end while
cess to a dataset of transition samples D =
                                 i=1 that correspond to the execution ofP
{(si , oi , ri , s0i , ⌧i , Ii )}N                                          option oi from state si , terminat-
                                                                              ⌧i 1 t
ing in s0i with a duration of ⌧i and accumulated return ri = t=0                      rt . Ii corresponds to the
initiation sets of all options in state si . This dataset might be initialized by rolling out trajectories
with a random agent and further enhanced during the agent’s learning (see Algorithm 1).
We propose to learn the abstract model M✓ = (T✓ , R✓ , I✓ , ⌧✓ ) based on the abstraction parameter-
ized by a function approximator f . Notice, that because we need to guarantee good initiation sets by
M I(I; (S)), the initiation set loss also affects the learning of f :
                                 L =         M I (Z 0 ; Z, O)      M I (S 0 ; Z 0 );
                                LI✓, =       wi log I✓ (Ii |f (si ));
                                LT✓,   =     log T̄✓ (f (s0i )|f (si ), oi );

   3
       DKL (P, Q) 2 ln 2kP Qk21
   4
       Extended discussion in Appendix A.2


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, L , LI✓, and LT✓, are used to learn the abstraction function f . Moreover, we use a
weighted negative log-likelihood loss for the initiation loss to learn an initiation classifier to be used
during planning. To learn the rest of the model, we consider f fixed and minimize the following
losses and consider samples of the form (si 1 , oi 1 , si , oi , ri , ⌧i ) which can be obtained by slicing
trajectories appropriately. We map them considering f and minimize the following,
           LR
            ✓ = (R✓ (zi 1 , oi 1 , zi , oi )   ri ) 2 ;       L⌧✓ = (⌧✓ ((zi 1 , oi 1 , zi , oi )   ⌧i ) 2 ;
Finally, we minimize L✓, = info L + I LI✓, +                     T
                                                              T L✓ +
                                                                            R
                                                                         R L✓ +     ⌧ L✓ . In our experiments, all
                                                                                       ⌧

constants were info = I = T = R = ⌧ = 1.

4.3   G OAL - BASED P LANNING WITH AN A BSTRACT M ODEL

Consider a goal set G ⇢ S and G ⇢ Z, its mapping to Z. In order to define the task MDP
MG for the agent to plan in, we define the task reward function for abstract state s̄ = (ẑ, ô, z)
as RG (s̄, o) = R✓ (s̄, o) + Rtask 1[z 2 G ] where Rtask is the goal reward. The first term can
be interpreted as the base cost/reward of executing a skill while the second term indicates to the
agent the task-specific rewarding states. Moreover, we augment the transition dynamics and set all
z 2 G as terminating states by setting T̄G (zdone |z, o) = 1[z 2 G ]. The agent uses the task MDP
M̄G to simulate trajectories and improves its policy and it can, optionally, rollout the policy in the
environment to collect new data that further improves the abstract model; this is shown in Algorithm 1.



5     E XPERIMENTS
Pinball environment (Konidaris and Barto,
2009) This domain has a continuous state space
with position vector (x, y) 2 [0, 1]2 and veloci-
ties (ẋ, ẏ) 2 [ 1, 1]2 . As opposed to its original
formulation, we consider a variant with contin-
uous actions that decrease or increase the ve-
                                                                    (a) Pinball             (b) Medium Antmaze
locity by (ẋ, ẏ) 2 [ 1, 1]2 . Moreover, we
also consider the top view pixel observation of           Figure 2: MI matrix: ground features s are in the
the environment as the agent’s observation. As            vertical axis and abstract features z are in the hori-
options, we handcrafted position controllers im-          zontal axis. High MI (first two rows) correspond
plemented as PID controllers that move the ball           to position of the ball or the ant.
in the coordinate directions by a fixed step size.
Antmaze We consider the problem of control-
ling a Mujoco (Todorov et al., 2012; Fu et al., 2020) Ant to navigate through a maze. The state
space is a 29-dimensional vector that contains the position of the ant in the maze and the ant’s
proprioception. We consider the Medium Play maze as defined by (Fu et al., 2020). We use 8 options
learned using TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) that move the ant in the coordinate directions (north, south,
east, west and the diagonal directions) in the maze by a fixed step size.

5.1   A BSTRACT S TATE S PACE P RESERVES R ELEVANT I NFORMATION FOR P LANNING

Our main hypothesis is that abstract actions drive state abstraction because the information needed to
plan with a structured option set will be less than the ground perception space of the agent. To quantify
this, we measure the information contained in the abstract state space about the ground features
by estimating the MI using non-parametric methods based on k-nearest neighbors (Kozachenko
and Leonenko, 1987). We use Scikit-learn implementation (Pedregosa et al., 2011). In Figure 2a,
we show the MI matrix between Pinball’s ideal features (position and velocities) and the learned
features from the pixel observations. For Antmaze (Figure 2b), we purposely over-parameterized
the abstract space to give enough capacity to learn the full observation, if necessary. However,
we can see that features that are not necessary for planning with the skills are effectively ab-
stracted away. In the case of Pinball only the first two dimensions corresponding to the ball
position have high MI. In the Antmazes, similarly, the first 7 dimensions have the highest MI
which corresponds to position in the maze (first two dimensions) and orientation of the ant’s torso.

                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Qualitatively, we can visualize the learned ab-
stract state space using Multidimensional Scal-
ing (MDS) (Borg and Groenen, 2005). Figure
3 shows the abstract state space learned for the
Antmaze and it reveals the pattern of the coor-
dinate positions of the ant in the maze. Addi-
tionally, we show grounded observations that
correspond to an abstract state: the ant at the
represented position in the maze with many dif-
ferent configurations of the joints and torso.

5.2   P LANNING WITH AN A BSTRACT MDP

We use our learned abstract models to plan us- Figure 3: Medium Antmaze. 2D MDS projection
ing Double DQN (Van Hasselt et al., 2016). The of the learned : it learns to represent the position
DDQN agent rolls out trajectories in imagina- in the maze. The average grounding shows possi-
tion to improve its policy and the new data col- ble configurations of the ant joints when it is in the
lected is used to improve the model as in Algo- represented position .
rithm 1. As our baseline, we use DDQN tuned
to plan with the same options but interacting with the ground MDP.
For the pinball domain with use pixel observations. In Figure 4a, we compare learning curves
averaged over 8 goals and 5 seeds where the gray area represent the number of samples required
for pre-training the model. In Figure 4b, we show an analogous plot for the Antmaze (9 goals and
5 seeds). Both cases show the usefulness of the abstract models for diverse goal-based planning
and the sample-complexity gain afforded by the model. Additionally, we show learning curves plot
sequentially on Figure 4. The dashed lines separate learning curves for different goals. The bottom
axis show the accumulated number of steps required by the ground agent and the top axis shows
the steps needed by the agent using the abstract model. Notice that the top axis does not start at
zero because of the initial samples required for model pre-training and we still observe a significant
improvement in sample efficiency.


                     (a) Pinball                                      (b) Antmaze

Figure 4: Planning with an abstract model. (Left) Success rate v. Environment steps averaged over
goals and 5 seeds. The gray area represents the offset for the steps needed to pre-train the model
(Right) Success rate for a subset of the goals that shows the amount of steps needed for the ground
environment (bottom axis) and the abstract agent (top axis).

6     R ELATED W ORKS
Grounded Classical Planning Konidaris et al. (2018) present a skill-driven method for constructing
PDDL predicates (Fox and Long, 2003; Younes and Littman, 2004) for classical planning. This
family of work formally bridges the options framework to classical planning, and recent work have
extended this framework to work with portable skills (James et al., 2020) and object-centric skills
(James et al., 2022), and to ground natural language in robotics (Gopalan et al., 2017). Importantly,


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


this framework offers guarantees that the learned grounded symbols support sound planning. A
related body of work bridges deep learning with classical planning. Asai and Fukunaga (2018); Asai
(2019); Asai et al. (2022) learn abstract binary representations to ground PDDL predicates and action
operators from complex observations. Similarly, Ugur and Piater (2015a;b) approach the grounding
problem by clustering action effects to create discrete symbols for planning, and Ahmetoglu et al.
(2022) extends this approach to leverage deep learning methods. While these approaches manage to
empirically work with complex observations, they do not offer formal guarantees that the symbols
learned are sufficient for planning. Our approach, while not applied to classical planning, generalizes
abstract state learning to continuous cases, it is compatible with the deep learning toolbox and it is
theoretically principled.
Model-based RL and State Abstractions Learning MDP models from experience has been exten-
sively studied (Sutton, 1991; Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011) for their benefits in generalization,
sample efficiency, and knowledge transfer. Recent successful approaches use deep networks to handle
complex observations spaces and long-term reasoning (Krishnan et al., 2015; Ha and Schmidhuber,
2018; Silver et al., 2018; Gregor et al., 2018; Buesing et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Hansen et al.,
2022). An important challenge of this approach is learning an effective abstract state space and,
most of them, have focused in learning abstract representations of complex observations based on
reconstruction losses Gregor et al. (2018); Buesing et al. (2018); Zhang et al. (2019); Hafner et al.
(2019; 2021; 2023). In contrast, recent approaches have moved away from this idea and focused
in minimal abstract state spaces relevant for acting such as value prediction (Silver et al., 2018),
Markov states (Gelada et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Allen et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2021), and
controllability (Lamb et al., 2022). In fact, many of these explicitly use information maximization
and information bottleneck approaches that are theoretically justified by our work.
From a theoretical point of view, there is extensive research to characterize the types of state
abstractions (or state aggregation) (Li et al., 2006; Ferns et al., 2004; Castro and Precup, 2010) that
are useful for RL. More recent work characterizes approximate state abstractions (Abel et al., 2016;
2018) that guarantee bounded value loss and the type of options that are compatible with a given state
abstraction to guarantee value preservation (Abel et al., 2020).
Temporally-extended Models MDP models with skills have been recently considered in skill
discovery research. Some work approach the problem assuming that the abstract state space is a graph
and options are learned to reach the initiation set of another option (Bagaria and Konidaris, 2020;
Bagaria et al., 2021a;b). Hafner et al. (2022) approaches the problem by building on the Dreamer
algorithm (Hafner et al., 2019; 2021; 2023) and discover goals by abstracting over the learned abstract
state. Similarly, Nair and Finn (2019) use generative models for subgoal generation and skill learning,
and plan with a learned model in observation space. Other approaches learn forward dynamics models
for skills discovered from an offline set of trajectories but do not abstract the state based on these
skills (Freed et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). While our method assumes that the
options are given, it does not impose discrete constraints to the abstract state space, does not need to
model the state dynamics at the finest time step, and it builds a principled abstract state space.

7    C ONCLUSION
We introduce a method for learning abstract world models, designed to have agents with effective
planning capabilities for goal-oriented tasks. Our core premise is that an agent must be capable of
building a reusable abstract model for planning with a given skill set. We do this in a principled
manner by characterizing the state abstraction that guarantees lossless planning in simulation. In other
words, planning with a learned abstract model is sufficient to compute a policy for the real-world
environment. Additionally, this work provides theoretical justification for information maximization
approaches as a reliable strategy for learning abstract state representation learning.

R EFERENCES
David Abel, David Hershkowitz, and Michael Littman. Near optimal behavior via approximate state
  abstraction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2915–2923. PMLR, 2016.
David Abel, Dilip Arumugam, Lucas Lehnert, and Michael Littman. State abstractions for lifelong
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10–19. PMLR,


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  2018.
David Abel, John Winder, Marie DesJardins, and Michael Littman. The expected-length model of
  options. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
 1951–1958, 2019.
David Abel, Nate Umbanhowar, Khimya Khetarpal, Dilip Arumugam, Doina Precup, and Michael
  Littman. Value preserving state-action abstractions. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pages 1639–1650. PMLR, 2020.
A. Ahmetoglu, M.Y. Seker, J. Piater, E. Oztop, and E. Ugur. DeepSym: Deep symbol generation and
  rule learning for planning from unsupervised robot interaction. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 75:709–745, 2022.
Alexander A Alemi, Ian Fischer, Joshua V Dillon, and Kevin Murphy. Deep variational information
  bottleneck. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Cameron Allen, Neev Parikh, Omer Gottesman, and George Konidaris. Learning markov state
  abstractions for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:8229–8241, 2021.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder,
 Bob McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
M. Asai. Unsupervised grounding of plannable first-order logic representation from images. In
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, pages
 583–591, 2019.
M. Asai and A. Fukunaga. Classical planning in deep latent space: Bridging the subsymbolic-
 symbolic boundary. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 pages 6094–6101, 2018.
M. Asai, H. Kajino, A. Fukunaga, and C. Muise. Classical planning in deep latent space. Journal of
 Artificial Intelligence Research, 74:1599–1686, 2022.
A. Bagaria and G.D. Konidaris. Option discovery using deep skill chaining. In Proceedings of the
  Eighth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
A. Bagaria, J. Senthil, and G.D. Konidaris. Skill discovery for exploration and planning using deep
  skill graphs. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2021a.
A. Bagaria, J. Senthil, M. Slivinski, and G.D. Konidaris. Robustly learning composable options
  in deep reinforcement learning. In IProceedings of the 30th International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 2021b.
Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi, Aristide Baratin, Sai Rajeshwar, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron
 Courville, and Devon Hjelm. Mutual information neural estimation. In International conference
 on machine learning, pages 531–540. PMLR, 2018.
Marc G Bellemare, Salvatore Candido, Pablo Samuel Castro, Jun Gong, Marlos C Machado, Sub-
 hodeep Moitra, Sameera S Ponda, and Ziyu Wang. Autonomous navigation of stratospheric
 balloons using reinforcement learning. Nature, 588(7836):77–82, 2020.
Ingwer Borg and Patrick JF Groenen. Modern multidimensional scaling: Theory and applications.
  Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.
Lars Buesing, Theophane Weber, Sébastien Racaniere, SM Eslami, Danilo Rezende, David P Reichert,
  Fabio Viola, Frederic Besse, Karol Gregor, Demis Hassabis, et al. Learning and querying fast
  generative models for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03006, 2018.
Pablo Castro and Doina Precup. Using bisimulation for policy transfer in mdps. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 24, pages 1065–1070, 2010.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P. Dayan and G.E. Hinton. Feudal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems V, 1992.

Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco Carpanese,
  Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de Las Casas, et al. Magnetic control of
  tokamak plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7897):414–419, 2022.

Marc Deisenroth and Carl E Rasmussen. Pilco: A model-based and data-efficient approach to policy
 search. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on machine learning (ICML-11),
 pages 465–472, 2011.

Norm Ferns, Prakash Panangaden, and Doina Precup. Metrics for finite markov decision processes.
  In Proceedings of the 20th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI ’04, page
 162–169, Arlington, Virginia, USA, 2004. AUAI Press. ISBN 0974903906.

Maria Fox and Derek Long. Pddl2. 1: An extension to pddl for expressing temporal planning domains.
 Journal of artificial intelligence research, 20:61–124, 2003.

Benjamin Freed, Siddarth Venkatraman, Guillaume Adrien Sartoretti, Jeff Schneider, and Howie
  Choset. Learning temporally AbstractWorld models without online experimentation. In Andreas
  Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan
  Scarlett, editors, Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 10338–10356. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023.

Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.

Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1587–1596. PMLR,
  2018.

Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, Jacob Buckman, Ofir Nachum, and Marc G Bellemare. Deepmdp:
  Learning continuous latent space models for representation learning. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pages 2170–2179. PMLR, 2019.

Robert Givan, Thomas Dean, and Matthew Greig. Equivalence notions and model minimization in
  markov decision processes. Artificial Intelligence, 147(1-2):163–223, 2003.

N. Gopalan, M. desJardins, M.L. Littman, J. MacGlashan, S. Squire, S. Tellex, J. Winder, and L.S.
  Wong. Planning with abstract Markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh
  International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, pages 480–488, 2017.

Karol Gregor, George Papamakarios, Frederic Besse, Lars Buesing, and Theophane Weber. Temporal
  difference variational auto-encoder. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.

David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2450–2462. Neural information processing
  systems foundation, 2018.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International conference on
  machine learning, pages 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy P Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Danijar Hafner, Kuang-Huei Lee, Ian Fischer, and Pieter Abbeel. Deep hierarchical planning from
  pixels. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26091–26104, 2022.

Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains
  through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N Hansen, X Wang, and H Su. Temporal difference learning for model predictive control. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2022.
S. James, B. Rosman, and G.D. Konidaris. Learning portable representations for high-level planning.
   In Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
   4682–4691, 2020.
S. James, B. Rosman, and G.D Konidaris. Autonomous learning of object-centric abstractions
   for high-level planning. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Elia Kaufmann, Leonard Bauersfeld, Antonio Loquercio, Matthias Müller, Vladlen Koltun, and
  Davide Scaramuzza. Champion-level drone racing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 620
  (7976):982–987, 2023.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.             Auto-encoding variational bayes.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
G. Konidaris. On the necessity of abstraction. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 29:1–7, 2019.
G.D. Konidaris and A.G. Barto. Skill discovery in continuous reinforcement learning domains using
  skill chaining. In Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans, J. Lafferty, C. K. I. Williams, and A. Culotta, editors,
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 22, pages 1015–1023, 2009.
George Konidaris, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomas Lozano-Perez. From skills to symbols: Learn-
  ing symbolic representations for abstract high-level planning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 61:215–289, 2018.
Lyudmyla F Kozachenko and Nikolai N Leonenko. Sample estimate of the entropy of a random
  vector. Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, 23(2):9–16, 1987.
Rahul G Krishnan, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag.             Deep kalman filters.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1511.05121, 2015.
Alex Lamb, Riashat Islam, Yonathan Efroni, Aniket Rajiv Didolkar, Dipendra Misra, Dylan J Foster,
  Lekan P Molu, Rajan Chari, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Guaranteed discovery
  of control-endogenous latent states with multi-step inverse models. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research, 2022.
Lihong Li, Thomas J Walsh, and Michael L Littman. Towards a unified theory of state abstraction for
  mdps. 2006.
Suraj Nair and Chelsea Finn. Hierarchical foresight: Self-supervised learning of long-horizon tasks
  via visual subgoal generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Tung D Nguyen, Rui Shu, Tuan Pham, Hung Bui, and Stefano Ermon. Temporal predictive coding
  for model-based planning in latent space. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
  8130–8139. PMLR, 2021.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Ben Poole, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Van Den Oord, Alex Alemi, and George Tucker. On variational
  bounds of mutual information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5171–
  5180. PMLR, 2019.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Joseph J Lim, and Youngwoon Lee. Skill-based model-based reinforcement
  learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 2262–2272. PMLR, 2023.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
  learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):
 1140–1144, 2018.
Richard S Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. ACM Sigart
  Bulletin, 2(4):160–163, 1991.
Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework
  for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1-2):181–211, 1999.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pages 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012.
E. Ugur and J. Piater. Bottom-up learning of object categories, action effects and logical rules:
  From continuous manipulative exploration to symbolic planning. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pages 2627–2633. IEEE, 2015a.
E. Ugur and J. Piater. Refining discovered symbols with multi-step interaction experience. In
  Proceedings of the 15th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots, pages 1007–
  1012. IEEE, 2015b.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Håkan LS Younes and Michael L Littman. Ppddl1. 0: An extension to pddl for expressing planning
  domains with probabilistic effects. Techn. Rep. CMU-CS-04-162, 2:99, 2004.
Amy Zhang, Rowan Thomas McAllister, Roberto Calandra, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning
 invariant representations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Jingwei Zhang, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Arunkumar Byravan, Leonard Hasenclever, Abbas Ab-
   dolmaleki, Dushyant Rao, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller. Leveraging jumpy models for
   planning and fast learning in robotic domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12617, 2023.
Marvin Zhang, Sharad Vikram, Laura Smith, Pieter Abbeel, Matthew Johnson, and Sergey Levine.
 Solar: Deep structured representations for model-based reinforcement learning. In International
 conference on machine learning, pages 7444–7453. PMLR, 2019.


                                                 13
