Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROMPT S KETCHING FOR L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Many recent prompting strategies for large language models (LLMs) query the
         model multiple times sequentially – first to produce intermediate results and then
         the final answer. However, using these methods, both decoder and model are
         unaware of potential follow-up prompts, leading to disconnected and undesirably
         wordy intermediate responses. In this work, we address this issue by proposing
         prompt sketching, a new prompting paradigm in which an LLM does not only
         respond by completing a prompt, but by predicting values for multiple variables in a
         template. This way, sketching grants users more control over the generation process,
         e.g., by providing a reasoning framework via intermediate instructions, leading to
         better overall results. The key idea enabling sketching with existing, autoregressive
         models is to adapt the decoding procedure to also score follow-up instructions
         during text generation, thus optimizing overall template likelihood in inference.
         Our experiments show that in a zero-shot setting, prompt sketching outperforms
         existing, sequential prompting schemes such as direct asking or chain-of-thought on
         7 out of 8 LLM benchmarking tasks, including state tracking, arithmetic reasoning,
         and general question answering. To facilitate future use, we release a number of
         generic, yet effective sketches applicable to many tasks, and an open source library
         called dclib, powering our sketch-aware decoders.


1    I NTRODUCTION
While early prompting strategies for large language models (LLMs) focused on simple trigger phrases
to elicit the desired responses (Kojima et al., 2022), more recent work considers conversational
(Ouyang et al., 2022), multi-part, and template-guided LLM interactions, where a model is queried
several times in a constrained way, based on a template or grammar. This offers control over LLM
reasoning by filling in a template of pre-defined steps (Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023; Lundberg and
Ribeiro), allows interfacing with automated software systems, and enables syntactically reliable code
generation (Poesia et al., 2022).

Key Challenge: Decoding with (Hard) Structural Constraints We consider a simple application,
illustrated in Figure 1. The goal is to generate a list of items, satisfying two hard requirements:
(1) the result should be a dashed list of exactly four items and (2) the second item should be Frisbee.
To guarantee that these requirements are satisfied, prompting and fine-tuning alone are insufficient,
as unconstrained LLMs remain inherently stochastic, even with good instructions, demonstrations,
or training Arora et al. (2023); Zhao et al. (2021). To address this issue, template-guided inference
constructs a template from the (hard) constraints, leaving multiple holes for the LLM to fill during
the generation (top right, Figure 1). Unfortunately, the naive strategy of calling an unconstrained
model (Figure 1, left) for each placeholder fails frequently, as the model runs on, beyond the template,
generating many items per placeholder. A practical alternative is stop-and-go inference (middle):
By feeding the template incrementally, item-by-item, and enforcing stopping-conditions for each
call, we can force the overall output to adhere to the template. While this method is effective for
output formatting (Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023; Lundberg and Ribeiro), the model remains unaware of
the overall template when decoding each placeholder, leading to sub-optimal reasoning strategies.
For instance, in Figure 1, stop-and-go generates Frisbee as the first item, leading to a repetition of
the word, which would otherwise be unlikely under the model’s distribution. This example raises
three important questions: (1) How does stop-and-go inference compare to unconstrained inference –
Beurer-Kellner et al. (2023); Lundberg and Ribeiro do not evaluate this – in terms of overall model
performance on reasoning tasks? (2) Can we improve on naive stop-and-go inference by anticipating


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Prompt:   A list of single-word,      (Hard) Specification: A list of            Template: - [ITEM]
     fun things to bring to a trip.        exactly four items,     with      ’Fris-            - Frisbee
                                           bee’ as second element, such                        - [ITEM]
                                           that the resulting output is                        - [ITEM]
                                           guaranteed to be a parsable list.



     Unconstrained Inference                      Stop-And-Go Inference                   Prompt Sketching (ours)

    - ITEM Frisbee     ✗ Fails to adhere          - ITEM Frisbee ⬣                       - ITEM Camera ⬣
     - Camera          to template                - Frisbee                              - Frisbee
     - Snacks          ✗ Repeats itself           - ITEM Camera ⬣                        - ITEM Snorkeling gear ⬣
     - Sunglasses      ✗ Seq. Decoding            - ITEM Snacks ⬣                        - ITEM Hammock ⬣
     - Hammock
     - ...<EOS>                                   ✓Adheres to template                    ✓ Adheres to template
    - Frisbee                                     ✗ Repeats itself                        ✓ Does not repeat
    - ITEM Sunscreen                              ✗ Sequential Decoding                   ✓ Beam Search over template
     ...



Figure 1: Prompt Sketching is a novel inference method for template-guided text generation with
LLMs. In comparison to standard inference and sequential stop-and-go inference, prompt sketching
optimizes overall template likelihood, prevents repetitions, and adheres to the template structure.
Output generated by the model is highlighted, and enforced stopping phrases are indicated as ⬣.

the overall template during generation? And, (3) what are the general effects of these inference
methods, i.e., do they impair or improve the model’s reasoning capabilities?

This Work: Prompt Sketching To answer these questions, we present prompt sketching, a
novel framework for template-guided LLM inference. The key technical difference of sketching
in contrast to prior techniques is that we phrase the entire template as one segmented sequence
decoding problem, rather than multiple isolated model calls. This, (1) theoretically anchors standard
stop-and-go inference as a special case and (2) allows us to generalize and implement novel, sketch-
aware decoding procedures based on beam search, that optimize templates end-to-end. Figure 1
compares sketch-aware decoding (right) with unconstrained inference (left) and stop-and-go (middle).
Sketching allows us to adhere to the provided prompt template, while also optimizing multiple
placeholder variables jointly, in this case, avoiding a repetition of Frisbee. We carry out an extensive
experimental evaluation, showing that sketching outperforms non-templated prompting methods like
chain-of-thought on 7/8 LLM reasoning tasks, demonstrating the effectiveness of template-guided
inference in general reasoning. In our experiments, sketching allows us to consistently enforce
reasoning strategies across all tasks, enabling a more controlled form of LLM programming going
beyond simple prompting. For 5/8 tasks, we even observe significant improvements over simple
stop-and-go templating, demonstrating that sketch-aware decoding and joint optimization of multiple
variables are crucial components of effective template-guided LLM inference.

Main Contributions Our core contributions are:
     • A framework of prompt sketching, phrasing multi-step and template-guided LLM inference
       as a segmented sequence decoding problem.
     • Two novel sketch-aware decoding procedures, transferring several insights from constrained
       sequence decoding to general template-guided inference.
     • A collection of ready-to-use, generic prompt sketches that work well with a number of hard
       LLM reasoning tasks and can be easily adapted.
     • The first extensive evaluation of sketching using stop-and-go as well as a several novel
       (sketch-aware) decoding strategies, along with a comparison to non-templated inference.
Additionally, we publish an open source library dclib, included in the supplementary material (see
App. E), which allows the implementation of sketch-aware decoding procedures on top of OpenAI,
transformers, and llama.cpp models, thus facilitating future research and open source work.



2   BACKGROUND
We first provide relevant background on prompting and decoding, before discussing prompt sketching.


                                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Decoding Most recent language models operate left-to-right only, i.e., they predict a probability
distribution p(yt |y<t , x) over the next token yt given an input sequence x = ⟨x1 , x2 , ..., xn ⟩ and
previously predicted tokens y<t = ⟨y1 , y2 , ..., yt ⟩. Thus, a core task is to transduce or decode a
model output y ⋆ that maximizes some scoring function:
                                     y ⋆ = arg max score(y, x).                                      (1)
                                              y∈Y

A popular choice for this scoring function is the posterior or joint probability assigned to the decoded
sequence by the language model. This leads to the so-called maximum a posteriori (MAP) solution:
    yMAP := arg max p(y|x) = arg max ΠN                             N
                                      t=1 p(yt |y<t , x) = arg max Σt=1 log p(yt |y<t , x)           (2)
               y∈Y                  y∈Y                              y∈Y

However, solving the MAP decoding exactly is generally intractable, as it requires all conditional
probabilities p(yt |y<t , x) over an exponentially large search space to be evaluated. To solve this
problem, a range of decoding strategies have been introduced, which aim to find approximate
solutions. To discuss them, it is helpful to imagine Y as a tree with the prompt or prefix x at the root
and children of a node corresponding to possible continuations, all scored by score(y<t , x).

A RG M AX Decoding corresponds to a depth-first search of our decoding tree that terminates once
the first solution has been found. Operationally, at every decoding step, we extend our hypothesis
y<(t−1) by choosing the next token yt to maximize score(yt | y<(t−1) , x):
                                              N
                                              M
                                yA RGMAX :=         arg max p(yt |y<t , x)                           (3)
                                              t=1    yt ∈Y

where ⊕ denotes concatenation. A RG M AX decoding is efficient, but will also disregard many
alternative hypotheses due to its greedy nature.

Beam Search corresponds to a breadth-first search in the decoding tree where the breadth (at every
tree depth) is limited to the beam width n. Operationally, we first determine the n best continuations
of all of our n hypotheses and then retain the n best ones across all these n2 continuations. This
yields high-quality solutions at moderate computational cost, making Beam Search popular across a
wide range of tasks. Interestingly, thus obtained solutions often outperform exact decodings (or very
large beam widths) in down-stream tasks (Holtzman et al., 2020). Meister et al. (2020) suggest that
this is due to beam search inducing a regularization towards uniform information density, which is
preferred in human speech.

Grid Beam Search (Hokamp and Liu, 2017) extends beam search to facilitate constraint decoding,
i.e., transducing a response such that it contains certain strings or satisfies constraints. As sequences
complying with such constraints typically achieve a much lower score than natural model predictions,
they would never be included using vanilla beam search. Grid beam search solves this problem by
introducing separate comparison pools for hypotheses satisfying different numbers of constraints.
To avoid a linear increase in beam width and thus computational cost in the number of constraints,
Post and Vilar (2018) introduce a dynamic beam allocation scheme that keeps the total beam width
constant and assigns slots on this beam depending on the number of satisfied constraints.

Length Normalization (Wu et al., 2016) is frequently employed to compare sequences of different
lengths, to compensate for the summation of additional negative logprobs. We can simply weight our
scoring function with a length normalization term, parametrized by β ∈ R≥0 and α ∈ [0, 1]:
                                                 (β + 1)α
                                           w=              ,                                         (4)
                                                (β + |y|)α
where β = 0 and α = 1 recovers the mean and α = 0 no normalization.

3    P ROMPT S KETCHING
The core of prompt sketching is template-guided LLM inference, i.e., alternating model output
with template-derived intermediate tokens. This is different from sequential prompting methods


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


like chain-of-thought or answer-only, where first, the model consumes an input such as a ques-
tion or instructions and then generates an answer in an unconstrained way. More formally, we
consider a sketch S to be a template of the form S := "<p1 > [v2 ] . . . <pk−2 > [vk−1 ] <pk >" where,
pi are deterministic sequences of tokens, specified by the template, and vi are variables that are
completed by the model. This definition captures existing forms of prompting, where e.g. answer-
only (AO) can be written as SAO := "<Q> A: [ANSWER]" and chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting as
SCoT := "<Q> A: Let's think step by step. [COT].", where <Q> corresponds to a question and the
variable COT contains model reasoning as well as the final answer.

Single vs. Multi-Variable Sketches We consider SAO and SCoT as sequential, single-variable
sketches, as the variable is placed at the end of the template. The model, therefore, first digests all
provided information such as a question and reasoning instructions before generating the answer. In
contrast, with more general sketches, values for multiple variables can be generated, and deterministic
intermediate instructions can be inserted during the generation process. Existing examples of multi-
variable problems include conversational systems like ChatGPT, agentic prompting like ReAct (Yao
et al., 2022a), language model programming (Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023), and language model
cascades (Dohan et al., 2022).

Autoregressive Sketch Decoding Sketching extends the range of decoding strategies beyond just
sequential generation. However, most language models are still simple next-token predictors, i.e.,
given some prompt x, they generate a sequence of tokens y autoregressively, that is, one token at a
time, conditioned only on the previously generated tokens:
                                                         |y|
                                                         Y
                                          p(y|x) =             p(yi |x, y<i )                                 (5)
                                                         i=1
To align this with sketching, we split the generated sequence y = {y1 , . . . , yn }, including both deter-
ministic and variable portions,
                                  into k consecutive chunks Cy = {c1 , . . . , ck } of lengths n1 , . . . , nk
respectively, i.e., Cy = {y1 , . . . , yn1 }, . . . , {yn(k−1) +1 , . . . , ynk } . Each chunk in Cy is then asso-
ciated either with a deterministic prompt part pi or a model-predicted variable vi . The overall joint
probability of all chunks is then defined as

                                                         k         nj
                                                         Y         Y
                                 p(c1 , . . . , ck ) =                     p(yi |y<i )                        (6)
                                                         j=1   i=nj−1 +1

Crucially, we derive the values of all chunks from a single sequence of tokens y, which can be
predicted sequentially using an autoregressive model. A chunk- and variable-partitioned sequence can
then be leveraged by decoding algorithms to obtain higher-quality responses or inject deterministic
phrases during generation. The main challenge of this approach is the chunking strategy, i.e., a way
to split a generated sequence of tokens y into chunks of an a priori unknown length to determine
which variables they should be associated with.

Chunking with Stopping Phrases Like in stop-and-go inference, sketching relies on the use of
per-variable stopping phrases (SPs). SPs are specified as part of a prompt sketch and terminate the
generation of the current chunk i on occurence. This allows us to chunk the output sequence y,
assigning the resulting subsequences to variables vi , and keep the model from running-on without
respecting the sketch template. In case no specified stopping phrase occurs before the model predicts
its designated end-of-sequence token, we do not terminate the entire generation process, but only the
decoding of the current chunk, unless no further chunks remain.

Deterministic and Constrained Chunks To inject deterministic phrases during generation, we
force a predetermined sequence pi to be decoded, while still evaluating its likelihood p(ci |c<i ).
Further, we consider constrained variables as a special case of non-deterministic variables, whose
values are predicted by the model, but can only be chosen from a restricted set of sequences (e.g.,
only numbers, matching a regular expression, etc.). To implement constrained variables, we rely
on the LMQL query language for LLMs (Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023). This allows us to mask out all
tokens that will not satisfy a given constraint during generation, such that the resulting value of some
restricted variable ci is guaranteed to satisfy the constraint.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                        <S1> [IS_NEEDED1] to answer <Q>. However, <S2> [IS_NEEDED2]. Therefore, [CONCLUSION]



Example We show two example sketch templates in Figure 2. In                        Reasoning Framework
                                                                                    <Question>
the Reasoning Framework example, we guide the model’s reasoning                     Let’s weigh our options:
process by inserting deterministic phrases such as "On the one hand",               On the one hand [THOUGHT]
"On the other hand", or "In conclusion" inbetween generated reasoning               However, on the other
steps. In the Interleaved Reasoning example, we feed the model our prob-            hand [THOUGH]
lem definition, e.g. sentence by sentence as chunks Qi , prompting for              In conclusion, [ANSWER]
intermediate results after each one. Once the full problem description has          Interleaved Reasoning
been fed to the model, we generate the overall conclusion and answer.               Let’s digest this step by step.
                                                                                    <Q1>
3.1   S KETCH -AWARE D ECODING                                                      So now, [STATE]
                                                                                    <Q2>
                                                                                    So now, [STATE]
Sketching allows us to denote template-guided LLM inference as one long,
                                                                                    Overall this means [ANSWER]
segmented sequence decoding problem. With greedy A RG M AX decoding
and autoregressive model conditioned on previously generated tokens only,
this recovers stop-and-go inference. As discussed in Section 1, however, Figure 2: Two exam-
this form of sequential decoding does not account for yet-to-come parts of ples of simple multi-
the template. At the same time, we operate greedily so after a deterministic variable sketches.
chunk has been inserted, we cannot retroactively change the previously generated variable values.
To address this, we leverage the probabilistic understanding of sketching and propose a novel class
of decoding procedures that, in contrast to traditional token-level decoders, operate on the level of
the template to guide the decoding process end-to-end. Concretely, we experiment with two novel
decoder adaptations, namely: (1) Hierarchical Variable-Level Beam Search (VAR) and (2) Grid-Based
Beam Search (B EAM VAR). Next, we discuss the implementation of these methods in more detail.

VAR: Variable-Level Beam Search is based on the idea of applying beam search on the level of
the decoded placeholder variables. This means that instead of extending each active hypothesis by
the n most likely next tokens, we extend it by n sampled values for the currently decoded variable.
Starting with an empty sequence of tokens, we decode variable by variable. When at variable vi , we
have at most n hypotheses for which the variables v<i have been chosen. For each of them, we then
generate n proposals for variable vi , thus giving us n2 hypotheses over the variables v≤i . Among
these, we then select the n most likely ones according to the model score and move to the next
variable. Deterministic chunks are handled by appending them to the set of active hypotheses all at
once. This process is repeated until all variables have been decoded. See App. A, for a pseudo-code
implementation of VAR.

B EAM VAR: Variable-Grid Beam Search is based on the idea that the number of decoded variables
is an important measure of decoding progress and should thus be considered when comparing the
scores of different sequences during token-level beam search, to decide which to explore further. This
is particularly important in the presence of deterministic chunks, which, by their very nature, typically
have lower likelihoods under the model distribution than non-deterministic variables and would
thus never be included in a decoded hypothesis. To this end, we adapt the dynamic beam allocation
method of Post and Vilar (2018) to the sketching setting and propose Variable-Grid Beam Search
(B EAM VAR): We partition our beam width into separate pools depending on the currently decoded
variable vi and only compare scores per pool. To decide how many slots to allocate to each pool and
thus variable, we divide the beam width by the number of unique, currently decoded variables and
allocate the remainder to the pool with the most decoded variables, reassigning unused slots to pools
decoding later variables, to ensure progress at the template-level. A pseudo-code implementation of
B EAM VAR can be found in App. A.


4     E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
We focus our evaluation on the following questions: (1) Is templated-guided inference and sketching
effective at improving the performance of LLMs on reasoning tasks? (2) Can sketch-aware decoders
outperform existing decoders in and outside of the sketching setting? And (3), what kind of tasks
benefit the most from sketching? To answer these questions, we compare model performance with
non-templated, sequential inference on a wide range of different reasoning benchmarks for LLMs
(Section 4.1) and also experiment with novel applications enabled by prompt sketching (Section 4.2).


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: text-davinci-003 task accuracy with Answer-Only, Chain-Of-Thought, and Prompt Sketching
(ours) using A RG M AX, B EAM, B EAM VAR (ours) and VAR (ours) decoding. Each configuration is
evaluated on 100 uniformly sampled instances per task. Best results are bold.
                                                      Sequential Decoding                             Sketch-Aware Decoding (ours)
                    Task                   Answer-Only               Chain-Of-Thought Prompting                      Prompt Sketching (ours)
                                            A RG M AX      A RG M AX     B EAM       B EAM VAR     VAR      A RG M AX    B EAM VAR    VAR      B EAM
   Logical Reasoning
                Date Understanding+            0.48           0.70          0.75        0.75        0.69      0.72          0.73      0.66       -
           Information Essentiality+∗            -              -             -           -           -       0.01          0.25      0.06     0.15

   Question Answering
            AQuA (Ling et al., 2017)           0.31           0.37          0.37        0.35        0.35      0.40          0.47      0.35       -
      StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021)           0.68           0.71          0.72        0.67        0.67      0.69          0.77      0.66       -

   Arithmetic Reasoning
               Multistep Arithmetic+           0.20           0.43          0.44        0.49        0.44      0.45          0.48      0.38       -
        GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)             0.08           0.56          0.58        0.64        0.57      0.57          0.53      0.59       -

   Interleaved Reasoning
           Tracking Shuffled Objects+          0.19           0.62          0.47        0.52        0.62      0.64          0.62      0.66       -
                      Matrix Shapes+           0.61           0.77          0.77        0.71        0.76      0.81          0.79      0.85       -
     +
         Tasks extracted from the BIG benchmark suite (Srivastava et al., 2022).
     ∗
         Specifically adapted for our evaluation of forward referencing prompts.


                                                                                                           Sketched Chain-Of-Thought
Models We use OpenAI’s text-davinci-003 InstructGPT
                                                                                                  "Q: <question>"
model (175B parameters; Ouyang et al. (2022)) and Llama-2                                         "Answer Choices: (A)...(B)..."
Chat (13B parameters; Llama-2 in the following; Touvron                                           "A: Let's think step by step."
et al. (2023)) to evaluate. While text-davinci-003 clearly is
the more capable model, we find that Llama-2 provides an in-                                      for i in range(12):
teresting comparison point for the applicability of sketching                                       "- [THOUGHT]"
to smaller, more open models. We further also experimented                                          if not THOUGHT.endswith("\\n"):
with OpenAI’s smaller text-curie-001 model (comparative                                              "\\n"
study in App. C.2).                                                                                 if "answer" in THOUGHT: break

                                                                                                  "Overall this means,[CONCLUSION]
Baselines As a baseline, we compare sketching to non- Therefore, among A through E,
templated zero-shot formulations of answer-only (AO) and the answer is[answer]"
chain-of-thought (CoT ), using zero-shot CoT (Kojima et al.,
2022) for the latter. Examples of all used prompts/sketches Figure 3: A sketched formulation of
are given in App. F. During generation, no task demonstra- chain-of-though reasoning.
tions are provided and the model is prompted with simple instructions only. This highlights a core
benefit of sketching: the ability to precisely guide the model during generation without concrete
demonstrations. Still, we also include a comparison with few-shot prompting in App. C.1, which is
generally orthogonal to sketching.

Datasets and Sketches We evaluate on a total of 8 LLM reasoning tasks. For each task, we apply
one of two generic sketch templates: For arithmetic and logical reasoning, date understanding, and
general question answering, we rely on a sketched form of chain-of-thought, as shown in Figure 3.
For state tracking and matrix shape reasoning, we employ an interleaved reasoning sketch, as shown
in Figure 2, splitting task descriptions into sentences and interleaving them with the model’s reasoning
steps. For a detailed description of the tasks and sketches, we refer to App. F.

Compute and Dataset Size The total costs of our OpenAI experiments are roughly $4,000 USD in
API use. To limit these costs for our OpenAI experiments specifically, we evaluate only 100 uniformly
random samples per task-decoder configuration, with confidence bounds reported in App. C.3. For
Llama-2, on the other hand, we run all of our experiments on 1000 samples per task (or the full
datasets), using a single NVIDIA H100 GPU with 80GB memory.

Decoder Configurations As a baseline for our sketch-aware decoding procedures, we compare
with A RG M AX and traditional beam search (B EAM), applied to each sketch variable individually.
Based on this, we examine the benefit of sketching with and without our sketch-aware decoders VAR
and B EAM VAR. For B EAM, VAR, and B EAM VAR we use a beam width of n = 2 and rely on length
normalized scoring in line with previous work (Wu et al., 2016), using β = 0 and α = 0.7.


                                                                               6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Evaluation results for Llama-2 Chat (13 billion parameters) analogous to Table 1. Zero-shot
task accuracy with Answer-Only, Chain-Of-Thought, and Prompt Sketching (ours) using A RG M AX,
B EAM, B EAM VAR (ours) and VAR (ours) decoding. Best results in bold.

                                                         Sequential Decoding                            Sketch-Aware Decoding (ours)
                       Task                   Answer-Only               Chain-Of-Thought Prompting                     Prompt Sketching (ours)
                                               A RG M AX      A RG M AX     B EAM      B EAM VAR     VAR     A RG M AX    B EAM VAR     VAR      B EAM
      Logical Reasoning
                   Date Understanding+           0.496          0.591       0.599         0.613      0.580     0.634         0.656      0.642      -
              Information Essentiality+∗           -              -           -             -          -       0.088         0.132      0.132    0.132

      Question Answering
               AQuA (Ling et al., 2017)          0.231          0.291       0.311         0.275      0.271     0.239         0.255      0.243      -
         StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021)          0.564          0.555       0.566         0.570      0.568     0.638         0.630      0.640      -

      Arithmetic Reasoning
                  Multistep Arithmetic+          0.038          0.133       0.120         0.138      0.132     0.126         0.142      0.103      -
           GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)            0.049          0.276       0.296         0.305      0.296     0.320         0.353      0.350      -

      Interleaved Reasoning
              Tracking Shuffled Objects+         0.197          0.196       0.204         0.198      0.188     0.227         0.210      0.234      -
                         Matrix Shapes+          0.227          0.068       0.065         0.056      0.191     0.205         0.200      0.204      -
        +
            Tasks extracted from the BIG benchmark suite (Srivastava et al., 2022).
        ∗
            Specifically adapted for our evaluation of forward referencing prompts.


4.1         TASK ACCURACY

In Tables 1 and 2, we report our main results on task performance with text-davinci-003 and Llama-2,
respectively. Considering only A RG M AX decoding, we consistently observe improved or maintained
performance with sketching, as compared to sequential CoT or AO (7 out of 8 improved for
text-davinci-003, 6 out of 8 with Llama-2). This shows, that simple A RG M AX sketching can already
be effective (up to 4% and 8% points improvement for text-davinci-003 and Llama-2 respectively).
Manual inspection reveals that sketching consistently results in clearly structured reasoning, while
with CoT the model makes a seemingly random choice about the form of reasoning applied to each
sample (simple text, a list of steps, etc.), impairing task accuracy (see App. F for detailed examples).

Llama-2 largely confirms our results for text-davinci-003. Two outliers are the matrix shapes task
and the AQuA dataset Ling et al. (2017). For both, Llama-2 exhibits very bad performance across all
decoding and prompting strategies, suggesting that the model is likely unable to perform these tasks
at all. We attribute this to the difference in model size when compared to OpenAI. text-davinci-003
has 175 billion parameters, while the Llama-2 variant only has 13 billion parameters. As shown by
Kojima et al. (2022), model size directly relates to an increase in general reasoning capabilities.

Decoders Combining simple sketches with sketch-aware decoding, we observe even stronger
performance gains of up to 10% points, e.g., for B EAM VAR compared to sequential prompting with
A RG M AX or B EAM on the question answering datasets AQuA (Ling et al., 2017) and StrategyQA
(Geva et al., 2021) with text-davinci-003. We observe VAR to perform particularly well on tasks
that rely on interleaved reasoning while B EAM VAR is more effective in other settings. For Llama-2,
we observe analogous effects, e.g., B EAM VAR improves performance on Date Understanding and
GSM8K by almost 7% points, compared to non-templated CoT and simple A RG M AX.
For text-davinci-003, we also observe notable performance gains of up to 6% points, when using
our sketch-aware decoders in combination with the established Zero-Shot CoT (Kojima et al., 2022)
prompting scheme (cf. Table 1). This is because Zero-Shot CoT already is a two-part prompting
scheme, which naturally benefits from our sketch-aware decoders, letting them optimize over the
reasoning process (first variable) and final answer (second variable) jointly.

4.2         N OVEL A PPLICATIONS E NABLED BY P ROMPT S KETCHING                                                  <S1> [IS_NEEDED1]
                                                                                                                 to answer <Q>
In addition to reasoning performance, sketching also enables novel                                               However, <S2> [IS_NEEDED2].
applications, for which non-templated       sequential inference either
                                Reasoning Framework                                                              Therefore, [CONCLUSION]
fails completely or is much less<Question>
                                 effective and reliable. We highlight
multiple scenarios here (causalLet’s
                                 reordering,     sudoku, interactive en- Figure 4: Information Essen-
                                     weigh our options:
vironments) and expand on them      in one
                                On the App.      (JSON generation and tiality prompt with forward
                                           handB[THOUGHT]
graph traversal).               However, on the other                    references (details in App. F).
                                                   hand [THOUGH]
                                                   In conclusion, [ANSWER]
                                                                                 7
                                                   Interleaved Reasoning
                                                   Let’s digest this step by step.
                                                   <Q1>
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Sketch-aware decoding enables sudoku solving and more effective graph and world traversal.
                               Sequential Prompting                          Prompt Sketching (ours)
                                    A RG M AX              A RG M AX               B EAM VAR                  VAR
                Sudoku (3x3)
           text-davinci-003     98/100 (reordered)          15/100                   66/100                  62/100
             text-curie-001      9/100 (reordered)           5/100                   38/100                  33/100
             Dungeon Escape
           text-davinci-003             -             93/100 (∼4.14 steps)    100/100 (∼2.75 steps)    96/100 (∼3.42 steps)
             text-curie-001             -              38/100 (∼4.0 steps)     76/100 (∼2.94 steps)    46/100 (∼2.30 steps)

                  TextWorld
           text-davinci-003             -             24/32 (∼11.21 steps)     27/32 (∼9.37 steps)     24/32 (∼9.56 steps)


Causal Reordering First, we investigate forward referencing abilities with our sketch-aware
decoders. More specifically, we examine whether sketch-aware decoders enable the model to
anticipate future information to some degree. For this, we adapt the existing Information Essentiality
dataset (Srivastava et al., 2022), by reordering it according to the template shown in Figure 4. The
model has to determine the essentiality of two statements <S1 > and <S2 >, with respect to a given
question <Q>. However, in our reordered prompt, the result variable IS_NEEDED1 is decoded before the
<Q> is shown. For this custom task (cf. Table 1), we indeed observe that A RG M AX is incapable of
producing any meaningful results (0.01 accuracy), whereas, B EAM VAR and VAR achieve an improved
accuracy of 0.25 and 0.06 respectively, by exploring a wider hypotheses space.

Sudoku We further examine the capabilities of a model to solve simple 3 × 3 sudoku-like puzzles:
the LLM is tasked to complete a partial grid with unique numbers in 1 − 9. Similar to before, this
task requires forward referencing to effectively choose the correct numbers. As shown in Table 3, out
of 100 puzzles with 1 − 6 empty spots, sequential A RG M AX decoding is only capable of solving 15.
This is expected, as greedy decoding does not allow to anticipate any future information (i.e. fixed
numbers), before choosing earlier ones. In contrast, B EAM VAR and VAR solve 66/100 and 62/100
puzzles respectively, demonstrating again that they explore a wider hypotheses space. A potential
alternative is to re-order the template, which allows text-davinci-003 to achieve perfect accuracy
with A RG M AX, although re-ordering is not always an option with more complex multi-step puzzles.

Interactive Environments Sketch-aware decoders can take the effect of template-induced continu-
ations into account. If we choose these continuations dynamically based on previous model output,
we can effectively leverage them to explore interactive environments (Driess et al., 2023). For this,
we experiment with LLM-guided graph and world traversal, where an LLM agent traverses a world,
starting out in a randomly chosen room, with the goal of finding the exit or completing some other
task. For this, we run with random graphs (Dungeon Escape), as well as generated TextWorld (Côté
et al., 2019) environments. For further details on the setup, we refer to App. B.2. As shown in Table 3,
in Dungeon Escape, A RG M AX mostly finds the exit, but often requires a lot more steps (∼ 4) than
VAR (∼ 2.8) and B EAM VAR (∼ 2 − 3) for both OpenAI models, with the smaller text-curie-001
model being less effective overall. In TextWorld, wee generally see similar trends, though lower
success rates.

4.3   D ISCUSSION

Our evaluation shows that sketching and, by extension, template-guided LLM inference in general,
can significantly improve model reasoning capabilities. Here, we briefly discuss limitations and other
considerations relating to design, compuational, and applicability aspects.

Sketch Design and Iteration While still sensitive to wording, prompt sketching does offer more
control over exact model behavior, thereby addressing some of the difficulties of traditional prompt
design (Reynolds and McDonell, 2021; Arora et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2021). However, sketching is
also not a silver bullet: Most importantly, we find that an effective sketch must not be too restrictive
to not impair model performance. Still, as substantiated by our results, even simple sketches can
already be effective at improving reasoning capabilities. Lastly, much like non-templated prompts,
sketches still require iterative development and tuning to achieve optimal performance on a given
task. More importantly, however, they offer benefits such as improved control, a guaranteed output
format, and reduced free-text formatting instructions, otherwise needed.


                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Applicability While sketch design still requires some effort, we find that many tasks in our
evaluation can be solved with a small set of generic sketches. For instance, we find that a sketched
form of chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022a) (see Figure 3) is already effective for a wide range of
tasks, including arithmetic reasoning and general question answering. For direct adoption, we also
publish the sketches used in our evaluation, which can be adapted or used as-is by practitioners.

Computational Overhead Of Sketch-Aware Decoding Sketch-aware decoders naturally incur
computational overhead compared to simple, greedy search. While B EAM VAR requires as much
compute as regular beam search, VAR requires an additional factor of beam width n more hypotheses
to be tracked in parallel. Similar to regular beam search, this is a well-known trade-off: branching
decoders are more expensive but still widely used, especially when improved performance and
diversity are important.

5   R ELATED W ORK
Prompting Recent works have proposed a variety of different prompting techniques including
chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022a;b), interactive question answering (Yao et al., 2022b),
self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022a), and ThinkSum (Ozturkler et al., 2022). These prompt pro-
gramming techniques (Reynolds and McDonell, 2021; Zhou et al., 2022), aim to leverage the general
reasoning abilities of LLMs to solve diverse tasks. To enable the efficient implementation of such
complex prompting techniques, LM-focused programming systems have recently been introduced:
PromptChainer (Wu et al., 2022), PromptSource (Bach et al., 2022), and LMQL (Beurer-Kellner
et al., 2023) provide development environments for LM interaction. We build on LMQL, as it
supports variable constraints and control flow within prompts, enabling the efficient representation of
sketches. Finally, language model cascades (Dohan et al., 2022) view LM querying as probabilistic
programming over multiple variables, thus implicitly assuming a sketching setting and opening up
interesting perspectives for more advanced decoders in the future. In contrast to prompt sketching,
however, existing works compose multiple LLM calls in a disconnected manner, and, crucially, do
not consider the overall likelihood of the resulting sequence.

Language Model Decoding Most decoding techniques either aim to approximately recover the
maximum a posteriori solution under the model distribution or sample from it. Beyond direct
sampling from the model distribution, Nucleus Sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020) clips away the
tail of the distribution and Locally Typical Sampling (Meister et al., 2022) considers a subset that
yields uniform information density sequences. While A RG M AX can be seen as a best-first search
of the decoding tree with a maximum width of 1, Beam Search can be seen as a width-first search
with a width constrained to k (often 5) trajectories. Best First Beam Search (Meister et al., 2020)
combines the two ideas, always exploring the sequence with the largest score while maintaining
the width limit, to increase efficiency. Best-k Search (Xu et al., 2022a) drops the width restriction
and always explores the k highest scoring sequences. Lattice decoding (Xu et al., 2022b) allows for
the recombination of similar trajectories, leading to more diverse solutions. Diverse Beam Search
(Vijayakumar et al., 2016) includes a diversity objective in scoring beams. To improve performance
on constraint decoding problems, Grid Beam Search (Hokamp and Liu, 2017) creates separate beams
for sequences satisfying a different number of constraints. Post and Vilar (2018) propose Dynamic
Beam Allocation to instead partition a fixed beam width into pools depending on the number of
satisfied constraints, with Hu et al. (2019) introducing a vectorized implementation.

6   C ONCLUSION
We presented prompt sketching, a novel framework for template-guided LLM inference that phrases
templated generation as a segmented sequence decoding problem. This perspective unlocks novel
sketch-aware decoding procedures that optimize for overall template likelihood and not just sequen-
tially generate text. Our experiments show that sketching outperforms naive templating as well
as sequential prompting like chain-of-thought on 7 out of 8 hard LLM reasoning tasks, improving
task accuracy by up to 10% points. Looking forward, we also show how sketching enables novel
applications such as reliable output formatting, forward references in reasoning, and LLM-guided
graph traversal, inspiring future work in this direction.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY
We publish our code, prompts, and detailed instructions on how to reproduce our results at
ANONYMIZED, providing an anonymized version to the reviewers in the supplementary mate-
rial, including our implementation of dclib (also see App. E). Additionally, we provide detailed
descriptions of all prompts in App. F.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
T. Kojima, S. S. Gu, M. Reid, Y. Matsuo, and Y. Iwasawa, “Large Language Models are Zero-Shot
   Reasoners,” ArXiv preprint, vol. abs/2205.11916, 2022.

L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama,
   A. Ray et al., “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 27 730–27 744, 2022.

L. Beurer-Kellner, M. Fischer, and M. Vechev, “Prompting is programming: A query language for
   large language models,” Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, vol. 7, no. PLDI,
   pp. 1946–1969, 2023.

S. Lundberg and M. T. C. Ribeiro, “Guidance-ai/guidance: A guidance language for controlling large
   language models.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/guidance-ai/guidance

G. Poesia, A. Polozov, V. Le, A. Tiwari, G. Soares, C. Meek, and S. Gulwani, “Synchromesh:
  Reliable code generation from pre-trained language models,” in The Tenth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022.
  OpenReview.net, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=KmtVD97J43e

S. Arora, A. Narayan, M. F. Chen, L. J. Orr, N. Guha, K. Bhatia, I. Chami, and C. Ré,
  “Ask me anything: A simple strategy for prompting language models,” in The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5,
  2023. OpenReview.net, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=bhUPJnS2g0X

Z. Zhao, E. Wallace, S. Feng, D. Klein, and S. Singh, “Calibrate before use: Improving few-shot
  performance of language models,” in Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, ser. Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, M. Meila and T. Zhang, Eds., vol. 139. PMLR, 2021, pp. 12 697–12 706.
  [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/zhao21c.html

A. Holtzman, J. Buys, L. Du, M. Forbes, and Y. Choi, “The curious case of neural text degeneration,”
  in Proc. of International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.

C. Meister, R. Cotterell, and T. Vieira, “If beam search is the answer, what was the question?” in
  Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP), 2020.

C. Hokamp and Q. Liu, “Lexically constrained decoding for sequence generation using grid beam
  search,” in Proc. of Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), R. Barzilay and M. Kan,
  Eds., 2017.

M. Post and D. Vilar, “Fast lexically constrained decoding with dynamic beam allocation for neural
 machine translation,” in Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
 Papers), 2018.

Y. Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi, W. Macherey, M. Krikun, Y. Cao, Q. Gao,
  K. Macherey, J. Klingner, A. Shah, M. Johnson, X. Liu, L. Kaiser, S. Gouws, Y. Kato, T. Kudo,
  H. Kazawa, K. Stevens, G. Kurian, N. Patil, W. Wang, C. Young, J. Smith, J. Riesa, A. Rudnick,
  O. Vinyals, G. Corrado, M. Hughes, and J. Dean, “Google’s neural machine translation system:
  Bridging the gap between human and machine translation,” ArXiv preprint, vol. abs/1609.08144,
  2016.

S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning
   and Acting in Language Models,” ArXiv preprint, vol. abs/2210.03629, 2022.

D. Dohan, W. Xu, A. Lewkowycz, J. Austin, D. Bieber, R. G. Lopes, Y. Wu, H. Michalewski, R. A.
  Saurous, J. Sohl-dickstein, K. Murphy, and C. Sutton, “Language Model Cascades,” ArXiv preprint,
  vol. abs/2207.10342, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W. Ling, D. Yogatama, C. Dyer, and P. Blunsom, “Program induction by rationale generation:
  Learning to solve and explain algebraic word problems,” in Proc. of Association for Computational
 Linguistics (ACL), 2017.
M. Geva, D. Khashabi, E. Segal, T. Khot, D. Roth, and J. Berant, “Did aristotle use a laptop? a
 question answering benchmark with implicit reasoning strategies,” Transactions of the Association
 for Computational Linguistics, vol. 9, 2021.
K. Cobbe, V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser, M. Plappert, J. Tworek,
  J. Hilton, R. Nakano et al., “Training verifiers to solve math word problems,” ArXiv preprint, vol.
  abs/2110.14168, 2021.
A. Srivastava, A. Rastogi, A. Rao, A. A. M. Shoeb, A. Abid, A. Fisch, A. R. Brown, A. San-
  toro, A. Gupta, A. Garriga-Alonso, A. Kluska, A. Lewkowycz, A. Agarwal, A. Power, A. Ray,
  A. Warstadt, A. W. Kocurek, A. Safaya, A. Tazarv, A. Xiang, A. Parrish, A. Nie, A. Hussain,
  A. Askell, A. Dsouza, A. Rahane, A. S. Iyer, A. Andreassen, A. Santilli, A. Stuhlmüller, A. M. Dai,
  A. La, A. K. Lampinen, A. Zou, A. Jiang, A. Chen, A. Vuong, A. Gupta, A. Gottardi, A. Norelli,
  A. Venkatesh, A. Gholamidavoodi, A. Tabassum, A. Menezes, A. Kirubarajan, A. Mullokandov,
  A. Sabharwal, A. Herrick, A. Efrat, A. Erdem, A. Karakas, and et al., “Beyond the imitation game:
  Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities,” ArXiv preprint, vol. abs/2206.04615, 2022.
H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra,
  P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale et al., “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
D. Driess, F. Xia, M. S. Sajjadi, C. Lynch, A. Chowdhery, B. Ichter, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, Q. Vuong,
  T. Yu et al., “Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378,
  2023.
M.-A. Côté, A. Kádár, X. Yuan, B. Kybartas, T. Barnes, E. Fine, J. Moore, M. Hausknecht, L. El Asri,
  M. Adada et al., “Textworld: A learning environment for text-based games,” in Computer Games:
 7th Workshop, CGW 2018, Held in Conjunction with the 27th International Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, IJCAI 2018, Stockholm, Sweden, July 13, 2018, Revised Selected Papers 7. Springer,
  2019, pp. 41–75.
L. Reynolds and K. McDonell, “Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond the few-
   shot paradigm,” in CHI ’21: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Virtual
  Event / Yokohama Japan, May 8-13, 2021, Extended Abstracts, 2021.
J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, E. Chi, Q. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain of thought
   prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
J. Wei, M. Bosma, V. Y. Zhao, K. Guu, A. W. Yu, B. Lester, N. Du, A. M. Dai, and Q. V. Le,
   “Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners,” in Proc. of International Conference on
   Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “React: Synergizing reasoning
   and acting in language models,” ArXiv preprint, vol. abs/2210.03629, 2022.
X. Wang, J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. V. Le, E. H. Chi, and D. Zhou, “Self-consistency improves chain
  of thought reasoning in language models,” ArXiv preprint, vol. abs/2203.11171, 2022.
B. Ozturkler, N. Malkin, Z. Wang, and N. Jojic, “Thinksum: Probabilistic reasoning over sets using
  large language models,” ArXiv preprint, vol. abs/2210.01293, 2022.
Y. Zhou, A. I. Muresanu, Z. Han, K. Paster, S. Pitis, H. Chan, and J. Ba, “Large language models are
   human-level prompt engineers,” ArXiv preprint, vol. abs/2211.01910, 2022.
T. Wu, E. Jiang, A. Donsbach, J. Gray, A. Molina, M. Terry, and C. J. Cai, “Promptchainer: Chaining
   large language model prompts through visual programming,” in CHI ’22: CHI Conference on
   Human Factors in Computing Systems, New Orleans, LA, USA, 29 April 2022 - 5 May 2022,
   Extended Abstracts, 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S. H. Bach, V. Sanh, Z. X. Yong, A. Webson, C. Raffel, N. V. Nayak, A. Sharma, T. Kim, M. S. Bari,
   T. Févry, Z. Alyafeai, M. Dey, A. Santilli, Z. Sun, S. Ben-David, C. Xu, G. Chhablani, H. Wang,
   J. A. Fries, M. S. AlShaibani, S. Sharma, U. Thakker, K. Almubarak, X. Tang, D. R. Radev, M. T.
   Jiang, and A. M. Rush, “Promptsource: An integrated development environment and repository
   for natural language prompts,” in Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
   Computational Linguistics, ACL 2022 - System Demonstrations, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022,
   2022.
C. Meister, T. Pimentel, G. Wiher, and R. Cotterell, “Locally typical sampling,” ArXiv preprint, vol.
  abs/2202.00666, 2022.
J. Xu, C. Xiong, S. Savarese, and Y. Zhou, “Best-k search algorithm for neural text generation,” ArXiv
   preprint, vol. abs/2211.11924, 2022.
J. Xu, S. Jonnalagadda, and G. Durrett, “Massive-scale decoding for text generation using lattices,”
   in Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
   Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL 2022, Seattle, WA, United
   States, July 10-15, 2022, 2022.
A. K. Vijayakumar, M. Cogswell, R. R. Selvaraju, Q. Sun, S. Lee, D. J. Crandall, and D. Batra,
  “Diverse beam search: Decoding diverse solutions from neural sequence,” ArXiv preprint, vol.
  abs/1610.02424, 2016.
J. E. Hu, H. Khayrallah, R. Culkin, P. Xia, T. Chen, M. Post, and B. Van Durme, “Improved lexically
   constrained decoding for translation and monolingual rewriting,” in Proceedings of the 2019
   Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
   Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), 2019.
C. J. Clopper and E. S. Pearson, “The use of confidence or fiducial limits illustrated in the case of the
  binomial,” Biometrika, vol. 26, no. 4, 1934.
X. Wang, J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. Le, E. Chi, S. Narang, A. Chowdhery, and D. Zhou,
  “Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,” arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    D ECODING A LGORITHMS

Variable-Level Beam Search VAR The pseudo-code implementation of VAR is given in Algorithm 2.
The function expanddet , expands a given sequence by a deterministic chunk if the next chunk in
the prompt template is not a variable. The function expandsample , expands a given sequence by
sampling n different continuations for the next variable value in the prompt template. Lastly, topn
selects the n best sequences from a given set of sequences, according to the the length normalized
beam search score as discussed in Section 2. In practice, an additional early stopping criterion on
done is employed.


Algorithm 1 Variable-Level Beam Search (VAR)
Require: Input n: number of beams, V set of variables
Ensure: set of n VAR-best hypotheses done
 1: h ← {<bos>}, h′ ← {}
 2: for vi ∈ V do
 3:   h ← expanddet (h)
 4:   for s ∈ h do
 5:      h′ ← h′ + expandsample (s, n)
 6:   end for
 7:   h ← topn (h′ )
 8:   done, h ← separate_done(h)
 9: end for


Variable-Grid Beam Search VAR The simplified pseudo-code implementation of B EAM VAR is
given in Algorithm 2. The function expanddet , expands a given sequence by a deterministic chunk if
the next chunk in the prompt template is not a variable. The function expandtop , expands a given
sequence by the top-n token continuations according to the model distribution. post_vilar determines
the dynamic beam size per group according to Post and Vilar (2018), where groups are defined by the
currently decoded variable and or deterministic chunk. Lastly, topn selects the n best sequences from
a given set of sequences, according to the the length normalized beam search score as discussed in
Section 2. In practice, an additional early stopping criterion on done is employed.


Algorithm 2 Variable-Grid Beam Search (B EAM VAR)
Require: Input n: number of beams, N : maximum length, V set of variables
Ensure: set of n B EAM VAR-best hypotheses done
 1: h ← {<bos>}, h′ ← {}
 2: for i ∈ {1, . . . , N } do
 3:   h ← expanddet (h)
 4:   h′ ← {}
 5:   {Expand each hypothesis in h by its top-n continuations}
 6:   for s ∈ h do
 7:       h′ ← h′ + expandtop (s, n)
 8:   end for
 9:   h ← {}
10:   {Determine dynamic beam size per group according to Post and Vilar (2018)}
11:   {n0 . . . n|V| } ← post_vilar(h′ )
12:   for vi ∈ V do
13:       h ← h + topnvi (h′ )
14:   end for
15:   {Filter out completed sequences}
16:   done, h ← separate_done(h)
17: end for


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     A PPLICATIONS
B.1     S KETCHING FOR O UTPUT F ORMATTING
                                                                                Alex Kim is a software architect at Intel, designing and
One direct application of sketching, is to generate schema- implementing complex systems for the company's processors. He
conform JSON objects with LLMs, given only free text as graduated          from the University of California, Los Angeles with a
                                                                degree in Computer Science and enjoys playing video games and
input, as illustrated in Figure 5. Using sketching, we can As JSON:
                                                                practicing photography.

guarantee the output format 10/10 times with different ex- {
                                                                  "name": "[VALUE] Alex Kim",
amples similar to the one shown in Figure 5. This works for       "job": "[VALUE] software architect",
both, text-davinci-003 and text-curie-001, regardless of          "role": "[VALUE] systems engineer",
                                                                  "education": {
the model (size) used. Without sketching, text-davinci-003            "university": "[VALUE] University of
                                                                                         California, Los
requires detailed descriptions of the output format in the                               Angeles",
prompt to produce valid JSON at a similar rate. At the same           "degree": "[VALUE] Computer Science",
                                                                  },
time it may still fail stochastically (no guarantees), and the    "interests": "[VALUE] video games,
smaller text-curie-001 is not be able to produce valid JSON }                       photography",

at all when just instructed to do so. Further, including de-
tailed data format instructions in non-templated queries in
this way, causes a high average inference cost of 179.5 to- Figure 5: Sketched JSON parsing.
kens per sample, reduced to 28.7 when using sketching, an Only highlighted text is completed by
84% reduction in inference cost.                               the model.

B.2     I NTERACTIVE E NVIRONMENTS

As part of our evaluation, we also consider the use of sketching and our sketch-aware decoders in
interactive environments.

Dungeon Escape For our Dungeon Escape experiment, we generate 100 random dungeons with
8 − 10 rooms each, where the average shortest exit route is 2.3 steps away. At each node, the model
is asked for the next room/node to traverse to. We rely on the following interactive sketch program
with corresponding constraints on sketch variable ACTION:
node = <initialized to start node>
steps = 0
max_steps = 10

while rooms[node] != 'Exit':
    name = rooms[node]
    neighbours = hallways[node]
    "System: You are in room {node} '{name}'. "
    "You can go to {neighbours}. "
    "Where do you want to go?\n"
    "You:[ACTION]\n"
    next_node = int(ACTION.strip())
    if next_node not in neighbours:
        "System: {next_node} is not a valid neighboring
         room of '{name}'. Valid rooms are {neighbours}.\n"
    else:
        node = next_node
    steps += 1

    if steps > max_steps:
        "System: You have taken too many steps. You lose.\n"
        return "failure"
return "success"


Constraints: ACTION in ["0", "1", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7", "8", "9"]
Depending on the graph that is being explored, this results in a runtime instantiation of a prompt
sketch as shown in Figure 6. The sketch-aware decoder is then used to generate the next action
to take, given the current state of the environment. The generated action is then executed in the
environment and the process is repeated until the agent reaches the exit or the maximum number
of steps is exceeded. Depending on the decoding algorithm, the agent can be made to explore the


                                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


environment in different ways. For example, A RG M AX will result in a greedy, depth-first search,
while VAR and B EAM VAR result in a breadth-first search.


                            Figure 6: Exploring a graph using prompt sketching.


TextWorld For our TextWorld experiments, we rely on the following command, to generate custom
environments of different sizes and difficulty levels:
tw-make custom --world-size 5 --nb-objects 10 --quest-length {i} --seed 4321 --output
eval_games/game-{i}.z8


We choose i ∈ [2,10] and generate 4 worlds per size. We decode a sketch that uses an LLM to
decode the next TextWorld action to perform. We report the detailed results about the number of steps
and the number of games solved in Figure 7. As shown, especially towards larger game size (more
actions required), B EAM VAR and VAR solve more games and require less steps to do so, compared to
A RG M AX. This is in line with our results on the Dungeon Escape environment. A RG M AX performs a
greedy, single, depth-first traversal with in-context backtracking, while VAR and B EAM VAR perform a
breadth-first search, allowing them to complete quests quicker and more reliably.

                            17.5
                                       Var
                            15.0       Argmax
                                       BeamVar
                            12.5
                            10.0
                    Moves


                             7.5
                             5.0
                             2.5
                             0.0 3      4     5      6     7     8      9    10
                                                    Game Size

Figure 7: Solving TextWorld with A RG M AX, B EAM VAR and VAR. Circles mark solved games, while
crosses mark unsolved games which are counted as games with step limit exceeded (16)


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Few-Shot Task Accuracy with Answer-Only, Chain-Of-Thought and Prompt Sketching (ours)
using A RG M AX, B EAM, B EAM VAR (ours) and VAR (ours) decoding. The best results are highlighted in
bold.

                                                                 Two-Shot                              Zero-Shot
                     Task                                Sequential Decoding                       Sketch-Aware
                     Task                   Answer-Only        CoT                    Prompt Sketching (ours)
                                             A RG M AX      A RG M AX     A RG M AX         VAR    B EAM VAR       VAR

    Question Answering
             AQuA (Ling et al., 2017)           0.29           0.45            0.46         0.44      0.47         0.35
       StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021)           0.67           0.74            0.78         0.78      0.77         0.66

    Interleaved Reasoning
            Tracking Shuffled Objects+           0.1           0.46            0.57         0.57      0.62         0.66
                       Matrix Shapes+           0.67           0.76            0.81         0.77      0.79         0.85
      +
          Tasks extracted from the BIG benchmark suite (Srivastava et al., 2022).
      ∗
          Specifically adapted for our evaluation of forward referencing prompts.


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
C.1       F EW-S HOT P ROMPTING

In addition to evaluating zero-shot performance of sketching, we also evaluate a two-shot setting (two
demonstrations) for selected datasets (AQuA, StrategyQA, Tracking Shuffled Objects and Matrix
Shapes) and report the results in Table 4. We rely on few-shot samples exhibiting the same reasoning
structure as enforced by the respective sketches. For comparison, we also include the best zero-shot
result from the paper.
While we observe a slight increase in performance for the question-answering tasks, performance for
the interleaved reasoning tasks is surprisingly decreased in the few-shot setting. In all considered set-
tings, sketching outperforms CoT. In fact, zero-shot sketching with the best decoder even outperforms
few-shot CoT with argmax decoding in all settings. Upon manual inspection, we observe that the
LLM generally follows the demonstrated reasoning process. However, for Tracking Shuffled Objects,
the added demonstrations seem to impair task performance, possibly because the model is confused
by the unrelated extra information. Overall, the results of this ablation study suggest that zero-shot
sketching with the right decoder may be able to replace few-shot demonstrations by enforcing a given
reasoning structure via intermediate instructions and task decomposition. At the same time, note that
sketching is much more cost-effective, as few-shot samples increase overall sequence lengths, and
thus API cost when using OpenAI models or computational cost (scaling quadratically with sequence
length) when using local models.

C.2       P ROMPT S KETCHING W ITH S MALLER O PENAI M ODELS

We also examine the use of smaller OpenAI models. However, the strong zero-shot performance we
rely on has previously (for CoT) only been observed in models of sufficient size (150B+ parameters
(Kojima et al., 2022)). Nonetheless, we also run our evaluation to the smaller InstructGPT (Ouyang
et al., 2022) model text-curie-001 (1 level below text-davinci-00x, 6.7 billion parameters). For
comparison, we also include the best results for text-davinci-003, as reported in the paper in Table 5.
Overall, we observe almost no reasoning capabilities, with scores close to random guessing for
multiple-choice tasks, and close to zero for open-ended questions like Matrix Shapes. As noted
above, this is in line with previous results (Kojima et al., 2022). However, as our main evaluation
demonstrates, the slightly larger and more recent Llama-2 Chat 13B Touvron et al. (2023) (13 billion
parameters), does clearly benefit from sketching.


                                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Task Accuracy with text-curie-001 with Answer-Only, Chain-Of-Thought and Prompt
Sketching (ours) using A RG M AX, B EAM, B EAM VAR (ours) and VAR (ours) decoding, compared to the
results with text-davinci-003. The best results are highlighted in bold.

                                                                                                       text-curie-001                                                    text-davinci-003

                                Task                                                       Sequential Decoding                                                         Sketch-Aware
                                Task                                    Answer-Only                       CoT                                    Prompt Sketching (ours)
                                                                           A RG M AX                   A RG M AX               A RG M AX                   VAR          B EAM VAR                VAR

        Question Answering
                 AQuA (Ling et al., 2017)                                      0.16                       0.24                      0.27                    0.17              0.47               0.35
           StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021)                                      0.46                       0.53                      0.58                    0.52              0.77               0.66

        Interleaved Reasoning
                Tracking Shuffled Objects+                                     0.18                       0.19                      0.22                    0.24              0.62               0.66
                           Matrix Shapes+                                      0.04                       0.07                      0.01                     0.0              0.79               0.85
           +
               Tasks extracted from the BIG benchmark suite (Srivastava et al., 2022).
           ∗
               Specifically adapted for our evaluation of forward referencing prompts.


C.3            C ONFIDENCE B OUNDS AND S CALING OF O PENAI- SPECIFIC R ESULTS

To check for significance of our smaller scale OpenAI-specific experiments, we additionally examine
the corresponding confidence bounds. For this, we report all main OpenAI results with a Clopper-
Pearson 95% two-sided confidence interval in Table 6.
Lastly, we scale our best OpenAI results for the Matrix Shapes task Srivastava et al. (2022), by
evaluating with 1000 instead of 100 samples, sampled uniformly from the original dataset. Doing so,
we can confirm our main result in Table 7, i.e. that prompt sketching and interleaved reasoning specif-
ically are effective at improving LLM reasoning performance on this task. Due to cost considerations,
we cannot scale all OpenAI experiments like this, but expect similar results, similar to the trends we
observe in our large scale experiments with Llama-2 Chat 13B ( Touvron et al. (2023) (see Section 4).

Table 6: Task accuracy of text-davinci-003 with Clopper-Pearson 95% two-sided confidence intervals
Clopper and Pearson (1934).
                                                         Sequential Decoding                                                                        Sketch-Aware Decoding (ours)
               Task                    Answer-Only                                Chain-Of-Thought Prompting                                                              Prompt Sketching (ours)
                                        A RG M AX           A RG M AX             B EAM                  B EAM VAR                 VAR              A RG M AX          B EAM VAR              VAR               B EAM
Logical Reasoning
             Date Understanding+     0.48 [0.38,0.58]    0.70 [0.6,0.79]      0.75 [0.65,0.83]         0.75 [0.65,0.83]       0.69 [0.59,0.78]    0.72 [0.62,0.81]   0.73 [0.63,0.81]    0.66 [0.56,0.75]           -
        Information Essentiality+∗           -                  -                     -                        -                      -           0.01 [0.0,0.05]    0.25 [0.17,0.35]    0.06 [0.02,0.13]   0.15 [0.09,0.24]

Question Answering
         AQuA (Ling et al., 2017)    0.31 [0.22,0.41]    0.37 [0.28,0.47]     0.37 [0.28,0.47]         0.35 [0.26,0.45]       0.35 [0.26,0.45]     0.40 [0.3,0.5]    0.47 [0.37, 0.57]   0.35 [0.26,0.45]          -
   StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021)    0.68 [0.58,0.77]     0.71 [0.61,0.8]     0.72 [0.62,0.81]         0.67 [0.57,0.76]       0.67 [0.57,0.76]    0.69 [0.59,0.78]   0.77 [0.68,0.85]    0.66 [0.56,0.75]          -

Arithmetic Reasoning
            Multistep Arithmetic+    0.20 [0.13,0.29]    0.43 [0.33,0.53]     0.44 [0.34,0.54]         0.49 [0.39,0.59]       0.44 [0.34,0.54]    0.45 [0.35,0.55]   0.48 [0.38,0.58]    0.38 [0.28,0.48]          -
     GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)      0.08 [0.04,0.15]    0.56 [0.46,0.66]     0.58 [0.48,0.68]         0.64 [0.54,0.73]       0.57 [0.48,0.68]    0.57 [0.47,0.67]   0.53 [0.43,0.63]    0.59 [0.49,0.69]          -

Interleaved Reasoning
                Shuffled Objects+    0.19 [0.12,0.28]    0.62 [0.52,0.72]     0.47 [0.37,0.57]         0.52 [0.42,0.62]       0.62 [0.52,0.72]    0.64 [0.54,0.73]   0.62 [0.52,0.72]    0.66 [0.56,0.75]          -
                  Matrix Shapes+     0.61 [0.51,0.71]    0.77 [0.68,0.85]      0.77 [0.61,0.8]         0.71 [0.66,0.84]       0.76 [0.66,0.84]    0.81 [0.72,0.88]    0.79 [0.7,0.87]    0.85 [0.76,0.91]          -
  +
    Tasks extracted from the BIG benchmark suite (Srivastava et al., 2022).
  ∗
    Specifically adapted for our evaluation of forward referencing prompts.



               Table 7: Task Accuracy when evaluating with 1000 samples from the original dataset.
                                                               Sequential Decoding                                                                    Sketch-Aware Decoding (ours)
                  Task                         Answer-Only                          Chain-Of-Thought Prompting                                                         Prompt Sketching (ours)
                                                 A RG M AX                 A RG M AX             B EAM          B EAM VAR             VAR           A RG M AX            B EAM VAR                VAR              B EAM
Interleaved Reasoning
                  Matrix Shapes+              0.572 [0.54,0.6]       0.779 [0.75,0.8]              -                      -              -       0.814 [0.79,0.84]             -           0.817 [0.79,0.84]           -
  +
      Tasks extracted from the BIG benchmark suite (Srivastava et al., 2022).


                                                                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4              C ONFIDENCE B OUNDS FOR L LAMA -2

As for the OpenAI models we report the confidence bounds for the Llama-2 Chat model (13 billion
parameters) in Table 8.

Table 8: Task accuracy of Llama-2 Chat (13B) with Clopper-Pearson 95% two-sided confidence
intervals Clopper and Pearson (1934). We either use 1000 uniformly drawn samples from the dataset
or the whole dataset.
                                                               Sequential Decoding                                                                              Sketch-Aware Decoding (ours)
              Task                       Answer-Only                                         Chain-Of-Thought Prompting                                                                   Prompt Sketching (ours)
                                           A RG M AX              A RG M AX                B EAM                B EAM VAR                 VAR                 A RG M AX              B EAM VAR                 VAR                   B EAM
Logical Reasoning
             Date Understanding+     0.496 [0.444, 0.548]    0.591 [0.539, 0.641]    0.599 [0.547, 0.649]   0.613 [0.561, 0.662]   0.580 [0.528, 0.631]   0.634 [0.583, 0.683]   0.656 [0.605, 0.704]   0.642 [0.591, 0.691]   0.591 [0.539, 0.641]
        Information Essentiality+∗             -                       -                       -                      -                      -            0.088 [0.033, 0.182]   0.132 [0.062, 0.236]   0.132 [0.062, 0.236]   0.132 [0.062, 0.236]

Question Answering
         AQuA (Ling et al., 2017)    0.231 [0.180, 0.288]    0.291 [0.235, 0.351]    0.311 [0.254, 0.372]   0.275 [0.221, 0.335]   0.271 [0.217, 0.330]   0.239 [0.188, 0.297]   0.255 [0.202, 0.314]   0.243 [0.191, 0.301]   0.283 [0.229, 0.344]
   StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021)    0.564 [0.533, 0.595]    0.555 [0.524, 0.586]    0.566 [0.535, 0.597]   0.570 [0.539, 0.601]   0.568 [0.537, 0.599]   0.638 [0.607, 0.668]   0.630 [0.599, 0.660]   0.640 [0.609, 0.670]   0.659 [0.629, 0.688]

Arithmetic Reasoning
            Multistep Arithmetic+    0.038 [0.027, 0.052]    0.133 [0.113, 0.156]    0.120 [0.101, 0.142]   0.138 [0.117, 0.161]   0.132 [0.111, 0.154]   0.126 [0.106, 0.148]   0.142 [0.121, 0.165]   0.103 [0.085, 0.124]   0.125 [0.105, 0.147]
     GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)      0.049 [0.036, 0.064]    0.276 [0.248, 0.305]    0.296 [0.268, 0.325]   0.305 [0.277, 0.335]   0.296 [0.268, 0.325]   0.320 [0.291, 0.350]   0.353 [0.323, 0.384]   0.350 [0.320, 0.380]   0.353 [0.323, 0.384]

Interleaved Reasoning
                Shuffled Objects+    0.197 [0.173, 0.223]    0.196 [0.172, 0.222]    0.204 [0.179, 0.230]   0.198 [0.174, 0.224]   0.188 [0.164, 0.214]   0.227 [0.201, 0.254]   0.210 [0.185, 0.237]   0.234 [0.208, 0.262]   0.157 [0.135, 0.181]
                  Matrix Shapes+     0.227 [0.201, 0.254]    0.068 [0.053, 0.085]    0.065 [0.051, 0.082]   0.056 [0.043, 0.072]   0.191 [0.167, 0.217]   0.205 [0.180, 0.231]   0.200 [0.176, 0.226]    0.204 [0.179, 0.23]   0.200 [0.176, 0.226]
  +
    Tasks extracted from the BIG benchmark suite (Srivastava et al., 2022).
  ∗
    Specifically adapted for our evaluation of forward referencing prompts.


                                                                                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: Self-Consistency Wang et al. (2022b) prompting compared to simple A RG M AX chain-of-
thought prompting (text-davinci-003, 100 samples as in Table 1). Results that are greyed out are not
comparable to the respective sketching results, due to different levels of computation.
                                                                 Chain-Of-Thought                         Chain-Of-Thought/Sketching (ours)
                   Task                 A RG M AX     S ELF C ONSIST (n = 2)     S ELF C ONSIST (n = 4)             Sketch-Aware

    Logical Reasoning
             Date Understanding+           0.70                0.64                      0.72               0.75   (CoT+B EAM VAR)

    Question Answering
          AQuA (Ling et al., 2017)         0.37                0.33                      0.32               0.47   (Sketching+B EAM VAR)
    StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021)         0.71                0.64                      0.70               0.77   (Sketching+B EAM VAR)

    Arithmetic Reasoning
            Multistep Arithmetic+          0.43                0.40                      0.47               0.49   (CoT+B EAM VAR)
      GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)           0.56                0.56                      0.66               0.64   (CoT+B EAM VAR)

    Interleaved Reasoning
        Tracking Shuffled Objects+         0.62                0.39                      0.43               0.66   (Sketching+VAR)
                   Matrix Shapes+          0.77                0.66                      0.66               0.85   (Sketching+VAR)
      +
          Tasks extracted from the BIG benchmark suite (Srivastava et al., 2022).
      ∗
          Specifically adapted for our evaluation of forward referencing prompts.


D     S ELF -C ONSISTENCY BASELINE
We also considered self-consistency Wang et al. (2022b) (SC) as a possible baseline in our experi-
ments. Based on our decoder experiments, we ran self-consistency with chain-of-thought and n = 2
and n = 4 consistency samples. Computationally, this is comparable to B EAM VAR n = 2 and VAR
n = 2 respectively, as in our main evaluation. We report the results in Table 9. We find SC mostly
does not even outperform a simple A RG M AX chain-of-thought baseline, except with n = 4 on the
GSM8K dataset. There, it achieves 0.66, outcompeting even B EAM VAR with n = 2 (0.64). However,
we note that B EAM VAR with n = 2, is also half as computationally expensive as SC with n = 4,
while achieving comparable performance.
Increasing the number of self-consistency samples to a higher n would be possible but is not a useful
comparison, as it would increase the cost of SC significantly, over our sketch-aware decoders (see
Section 4.3). Lastly, we note that self-consistency and sketch-aware decoding are orthogonal, and
could be combined to further improve performance.


                                                                            20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: The adapted LMQL playground interface extended with dclib support allows users to
visualize the underlying decoding trees during sketch decoding.


E    U SING dclib AND SKETCH - AWARE DECODERS
In the supplementary material, we provide the Python library dclib, that contains implementations
for all compared (sketch-aware) decoding algorithms.
To install and use dclib, please consult the README.md file in the supplementary material.
Once installed, you can use an adapted version of the lmql playground as shown in Figure 8 to
interactively play with the different decoding algorithms and their parameters.


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    F ULL P ROMPTS
Here we list full exemplary prompts, per task and prompting method as used in our evaluation. We rely on the
same notation of sketches as in the main body of the paper. For control-flow (e.g. loops and conditions) and
constraints, we rely on the semantics of the LMQL query language for LMs, and refer to Beurer-Kellner et al.
(2023) for a more thorough introduction.
 Task                     Prompting Method         Query and Response
 date_understanding@ao Answer-Only                 Query
                                                   """Q: It was Sept. 1st, 2021 a week ago. What is the
                                                   date 10 days ago in MM/DD/YYYY?
                                                   Answer Choices: (A) 08/29/2021 (B) 08/28/2021 (C)
                                                   08/29/1925 (D) 08/30/2021 (E) 05/25/2021 (F) 09/19/2021
                                                   Among A through F, the answer is[answer]"""

                                                   Constraints
                                                   answer in [" A", " B", " C", " D", " E", " F"]

                                                   Model Response Q: It was Sept. 1st, 2021 a week ago. What is
                                                   the date 10 days ago in MM/DD/YYYY? Answer Choices: (A)
                                                   08/29/2021 (B) 08/28/2021 (C) 08/29/1925 (D) 08/30/2021 (E)
                                                   05/25/2021 (F) 09/19/2021 Among A through F, the answer is B ✗

 date_understanding@cot Chain-Of-Thought           Query
                                                   """Q: It was Sept. 1st, 2021 a week ago. What is the
                                                   date 10 days ago in MM/DD/YYYY?
                                                   Answer Choices: (A) 08/29/2021 (B) 08/28/2021 (C)
                                                   08/29/1925 (D) 08/30/2021 (E) 05/25/2021 (F) 09/19/2021
                                                   A: Let's think step-by-step.
                                                   [COT] Therefore, among A through F, the answer is[
                                                   answer]"""

                                                   Model Response Q: It was Sept. 1st, 2021 a week ago. What is
                                                   the date 10 days ago in MM/DD/YYYY? Answer Choices: (A)
                                                   08/29/2021 (B) 08/28/2021 (C) 08/29/1925 (D) 08/30/2021 (E)
                                                   05/25/2021 (F) 09/19/2021 A: Let’s think step-by-step.
                                                   Sept. 1st, 2021 was a week ago, so 10 days ago would be 8 days
                                                   before that, which would be August 23rd, 2021.
                                                   Therefore, the answer is (A) 08/23/2021. Therefore, among A
                                                   through F, the answer is A. ✓


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                  Prompting Method     Query and Response
 date_under-          Multi-Variable        Query
 standing@multivar2
                                            """Q: It was Sept. 1st, 2021 a week ago. What is the
                                            date 10 days ago in MM/DD/YYYY?
                                            Answer Choices: (A) 08/29/2021 (B) 08/28/2021 (C)
                                            08/29/1925 (D) 08/30/2021 (E) 05/25/2021 (F) 09/19/2021
                                            A: Let's think step by step."""
                                            for i in range(5):
                                            "\\n-[THOUGHT]"
                                            if not THOUGHT.endswith("\\n"): "\\n"
                                            if "Therefore" in THOUGHT: break
                                            if "According" in THOUGHT: break
                                            " Overall this means,[CONCLUSION] Therefore, among A
                                            through F, the answer is[answer]"

                                            Constraints
                                            STOPS_AT(THOUGHT, "\\n") and STOPS_AT(THOUGHT, ".") and
                                             STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, "\\n") and STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, "
                                            .")

                                            Model Response Q: It was Sept. 1st, 2021 a week ago. What is
                                            the date 10 days ago in MM/DD/YYYY? Answer Choices: (A)
                                            08/29/2021 (B) 08/28/2021 (C) 08/29/1925 (D) 08/30/2021 (E)
                                            05/25/2021 (F) 09/19/2021 A: Let’s think step by step. - Sept. - 1st -
                                            2021 - a week ago - 10 days ago Overall this means, 10 days before
                                            Sept. Therefore, among A through F, the answer is B: 08/28/2021.
                                            ✗


                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                     Prompting Method      Query and Response
 Information Essential-   Forward Referencing   Query
 ity
                                                "Cole is on the varsity basketball team. Therefore, the
                                                 statement that Cole is under 7 feet tall[var_1] to
                                                answer the question: Is Cole over 6 feet tall? However,
                                                 the statement that Every player on Cole's varsity
                                                basketball team is above 6'1''[var_2]. Therefore [
                                                answer]"

                                                Constraints
                                                var_1 in [" is sufficient", " is insufficient", " is
                                                not needed"] and var_2 in [" would also be sufficient",
                                                 " would alone be insufficient", " in addition is
                                                sufficient", " is sufficient" , " is insufficient", "
                                                is still insufficient", " is also not needed" ] and
                                                answer in ["the first statement alone is sufficient
                                                while the second statement alone is insufficient", "the
                                                 second statement alone is sufficient while the first
                                                statement alone is insufficient", "either the first or
                                                the second statement is sufficient", "the first and
                                                second statement taken together are sufficient", "the
                                                question can not be answered with the provided
                                                statements", "the question can be answered without
                                                either statement"]

                                                Model Response Cole is on the varsity basketball team. Therefore,
                                                the statement that Cole is under 7 feet tall is not needed to answer
                                                the question: Is Cole over 6 feet tall? However, the statement that
                                                Every player on Cole’s varsity basketball team is above 6’1" is also
                                                not needed. Therefore the question can be answered without either
                                                statement ✗


                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                  Prompting Method     Query and Response
 AQUA@ao              Answer-Only           Query
                                            """Q: What is the greatest number of identical bouquets
                                             that can be made out of 28 white and 98 red tulips if
                                            no flowers are to be left out? (Two bouquets are
                                            identical whenever the number of red tulips in the two
                                            bouquets is equal and the number of white tulips in the
                                             two bouquets is equal.)\\n"""
                                            "Answer Choices: (A) 4 (B) 7 (C) 10 (D) 14 (E) 21\\n"
                                            "A: Among A through E, the answer is[answer]"

                                            Model Response Q: What is the greatest number of identical bou-
                                            quets that can be made out of 28 white and 98 red tulips if no
                                            flowers are to be left out? (Two bouquets are identical whenever the
                                            number of red tulips in the two bouquets is equal and the number
                                            of white tulips in the two bouquets is equal.) Answer Choices: (A)
                                            4 (B) 7 (C) 10 (D) 14 (E) 21 A: Among A through E, the answer is
                                            D, 14. ✓

 AQUA@cot             Chain-Of-Thought      Query
                                            """Q: What is the greatest number of identical bouquets
                                             that can be made out of 28 white and 98 red tulips if
                                            no flowers are to be left out? (Two bouquets are
                                            identical whenever the number of red tulips in the two
                                            bouquets is equal and the number of white tulips in the
                                             two bouquets is equal.)\\n"""
                                            "Answer Choices: (A) 4 (B) 7 (C) 10 (D) 14 (E) 21\\n"
                                            "A: Let's think step by step.[COT] Therefore, among A
                                            through E, the answer is[answer]"

                                            Constraints
                                            STOPS_AT(answer, ".")

                                            Model Response Q: What is the greatest number of identical bou-
                                            quets that can be made out of 28 white and 98 red tulips if no
                                            flowers are to be left out? (Two bouquets are identical whenever the
                                            number of red tulips in the two bouquets is equal and the number
                                            of white tulips in the two bouquets is equal.) Answer Choices: (A)
                                            4 (B) 7 (C) 10 (D) 14 (E) 21 A: Let’s think step by step.
                                            We know that we have 28 white tulips and 98 red tulips. We also
                                            know that two bouquets are identical when the number of red tulips
                                            and white tulips are equal.
                                            Therefore, we can make the greatest number of identical bouquets
                                            by making sure that each bouquet has the same number of red and
                                            white tulips.
                                            The greatest number of identical bouquets that can be made out of
                                            28 white and 98 red tulips is 10. (C) Therefore, among A through
                                            E, the answer is C. ✗


                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                  Prompting Method     Query and Response
 AQUA@multivar        Multi-Variable        Query
                                            """Q: What is the greatest number of identical bouquets
                                             that can be made out of 28 white and 98 red tulips if
                                            no flowers are to be left out? (Two bouquets are
                                            identical whenever the number of red tulips in the two
                                            bouquets is equal and the number of white tulips in the
                                             two bouquets is equal.)\\n"""
                                            "Answer Choices: (A) 4 (B) 7 (C) 10 (D) 14 (E) 21\\n"
                                            "A: Let's think step by step.\\n"
                                            for i in range(12):
                                            "\\n- [THOUGHT]"
                                            if not THOUGHT.endswith("\\n"): "\\n"
                                            if "answer" in THOUGHT: break
                                            " Overall this means,[CONCLUSION] Therefore, among A
                                            through E, the answer is[answer]"

                                            Constraints
                                            STOPS_AT(answer, ".") and STOPS_AT(THOUGHT, "\\n") and
                                            STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, "\\n") and STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, ".
                                            ")

                                             Model Response Q: What is the greatest number of identical bou-
                                             quets that can be made out of 28 white and 98 red tulips if no
                                             flowers are to be left out? (Two bouquets are identical whenever the
                                             number of red tulips in the two bouquets is equal and the number
                                             of white tulips in the two bouquets is equal.) Answer Choices: (A)
                                            4 (B) 7 (C) 10 (D) 14 (E) 21 A: Let’s think step by step.
                                            - We have 28 white and 98 red tulips.
                                            - We need to make bouquets with the same number of white and red
                                             tulips in each bouquet.
                                            - The greatest number of identical bouquets that can be made is 14.
                                            - This is because we can make 7 bouquets with 4 white and 14 red
                                             tulips each, and 7 bouquets with 14 white and 4 red tulips each.
                                            - Therefore, the answer is (D) 14. Overall this means, 28 white and
                                             98 red tulips can make 14 identical bouquets. Therefore, among A
                                             through E, the answer is D. ✓


                                             26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                  Prompting Method     Query and Response
 StrategyQA@ao        Answer-Only           Query
                                            """Q: While on a liquid diet, are there some types of
                                            soup you cannot eat?\\n"""
                                            "A: The answer (yes or no) is[answer]"

                                            Constraints
                                            answer in [' yes', ' no', ' false', ' true']

                                            Model Response Q: While on a liquid diet, are there some types of
                                            soup you cannot eat? A: The answer (yes or no) is yes ✓

 StrategyQA@cot       Chain-Of-Thought      Query
                                            """Q: While on a liquid diet, are there some types of
                                            soup you cannot eat?\\n"""
                                            "A: Let's think step by step.\\n[COT] \\n Therefore,
                                            the answer (yes or no) is[answer]"

                                            Constraints
                                            answer in [' yes', ' no', ' false', ' true']

                                            Model Response Q: While on a liquid diet, are there some types of
                                            soup you cannot eat? A: Let’s think step by step.
                                            First, what is a liquid diet? A liquid diet is a diet that consists of
                                            only liquids, such as water, juices, and soups.
                                            Now, are there some types of soup you cannot eat while on a liquid
                                            diet? Generally speaking, no, there are no types of soup that you
                                            cannot eat while on a liquid diet. However, it is important to note
                                            that some soups may contain ingredients that are not allowed on a
                                            liquid diet, such as dairy products, nuts, and certain types of meat.
                                            Therefore, it is important to read the ingredients list of any soup
                                            you are considering eating while on a liquid diet to make sure it
                                            does not contain any of these ingredients. Therefore, the answer
                                            (yes or no) is no ✗


                                             27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                  Prompting Method     Query and Response
 StrategyQA@multivar   Multi-Variable       Query
                                            """Q: While on a liquid diet, are there some types of
                                            soup you cannot eat?\\n"""
                                            "A: Let's think step by step.\\n"
                                            for i in range(5):
                                            "\\n-[THOUGHT]"
                                            if not THOUGHT.endswith("\\n"): "\\n"
                                            if "Therefore" in THOUGHT: break
                                            if "According" in THOUGHT: break
                                            " Overall this means,[CONCLUSION] Therefore, the answer
                                             (yes or no) is[answer]"

                                            Constraints
                                            STOPS_AT(THOUGHT, "\\n") and STOPS_AT(THOUGHT, ".") and
                                             answer in [' yes', ' no'] and
                                            STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, "\\n") and STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, ".
                                            ")

                                            Model Response Q: While on a liquid diet, are there some types of
                                            soup you cannot eat? A: Let’s think step by step.
                                            - First, what is a liquid diet? A liquid diet is a diet that consists of
                                            only liquids, such as juices, smoothies, and soups.
                                            - Second, are there some types of soup you cannot eat on a liquid
                                            diet? Yes, there are some types of soup that are not suitable for a
                                            liquid diet.
                                            - Examples of soups that are not suitable for a liquid diet include
                                            cream-based soups, chunky soups, and soups with large chunks of
                                            vegetables or meat.
                                            - Additionally, some soups may contain ingredients that are not
                                            allowed on a liquid diet, such as dairy, sugar, or processed foods.
                                            - Finally, it is important to check with your doctor or nutritionist
                                            before starting any type of diet to make sure it is safe and appropriate
                                            for your individual needs. Overall this means, yes, there are some
                                            types of soup you cannot eat while on a liquid diet. Therefore, the
                                            answer (yes or no) is yes ✓


                                             28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                  Prompting Method     Query and Response
 multiarith2@ao       Answer-Only           Query
                                            """Q: Evaluate the arithmetic expression '((((-2 * 7 +
                                            -6) * (8 - 7 - 5)) - ((6 * -2 + 1) * (-8 * 3 * -1))) +
                                            (((9 - -7 - -7) - (0 + -7 - -3)) - ((8 * -2 + -6) * (-3
                                             - 3 - 8))))'.
                                            A: Let's think step by step.
                                            The answer (arabic numerals) is[answer]"""

                                            Constraints
                                            STOPS_AT(answer, ".")

                                            Model Response Q: Evaluate the arithmetic expression ’((((-2 * 7
                                            + -6) * (8 - 7 - 5)) - ((6 * -2 + 1) * (-8 * 3 * -1))) + (((9 - -7 - -7) - (0
                                            + -7 - -3)) - ((8 * -2 + -6) * (-3 - 3 - 8))))’. A: Let’s think step by
                                            step. The answer (arabic numerals) is -1490. ✗

 multiarith2@cot      Chain-Of-Thought      Query
                                            """Q: Evaluate the arithmetic expression '((((-2 * 7 +
                                            -6) * (8 - 7 - 5)) - ((6 * -2 + 1) * (-8 * 3 * -1))) +
                                            (((9 - -7 - -7) - (0 + -7 - -3)) - ((8 * -2 + -6) * (-3
                                             - 3 - 8))))'.
                                            A: Let's think step by step.
                                            [COT] Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is[answer
                                            ]"""

                                             Model Response Q: Evaluate the arithmetic expression ’((((-2 * 7 +
                                            -6) * (8 - 7 - 5)) - ((6 * -2 + 1) * (-8 * 3 * -1))) + (((9 - -7 - -7) - (0 +
                                            -7 - -3)) - ((8 * -2 + -6) * (-3 - 3 - 8))))’. A: Let’s think step by step.
                                             First, we need to evaluate the innermost expressions.
                                            ((6 * -2 + 1) * (-8 * 3 * -1)) = -153
                                            ((8 * -2 + -6) * (-3 - 3 - 8)) = -90
                                             Next, we need to evaluate the expressions that contain the innermost
                                             expressions.
                                            (((-2 * 7 + -6) * (8 - 7 - 5)) - (-153)) = -153
                                            (((9 - -7 - -7) - (0 + -7 - -3)) - (-90)) = -90
                                             Finally, we can evaluate the entire expression.
                                            ((-153) + (-90)) = -243 Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is
                                            -243. ✗


                                             29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                  Prompting Method     Query and Response
 multiarith@multivar   Multi-Variable       Query
                                            """Q: Evaluate the arithmetic expression '((((-2 * 7 +
                                            -6) * (8 - 7 - 5)) - ((6 * -2 + 1) * (-8 * 3 * -1))) +
                                            (((9 - -7 - -7) - (0 + -7 - -3)) - ((8 * -2 + -6) * (-3
                                             - 3 - 8))))'.
                                            A: Let's think step by step.\\n"""
                                            for i in range(10):
                                            "({i+1})[THOUGHT]"
                                            if not THOUGHT.endswith("\\n"): "\\n"
                                            if "answer" in THOUGHT: break
                                            "Overall this means,[CONCLUSION] Therefore, the answer
                                            (arabic numerals) is[answer]"""

                                            Constraints
                                            STOPS_AT(THOUGHT, "\\n") and STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, "\\n"
                                            ) and STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, ".")

                                             Model Response Q: Evaluate the arithmetic expression ’((((-2 * 7 +
                                            -6) * (8 - 7 - 5)) - ((6 * -2 + 1) * (-8 * 3 * -1))) + (((9 - -7 - -7) - (0 +
                                            -7 - -3)) - ((8 * -2 + -6) * (-3 - 3 - 8))))’. A: Let’s think step by step.
                                            (1) (-2 * 7 + -6) * (8 - 7 - 5) = -14 * 0 = 0 (2) 6 * -2 + 1) * (-8 * 3 *
                                            -1) = -12 * 24 = -288 (3) 9 - -7 - -7) - (0 + -7 - -3) = 16 - -4 = 20 (4)
                                             8 * -2 + -6) * (-3 - 3 - 8) = -16 * -14 = 224 (5) 0 - -288 + 20 - 224
                                             = -252 (6) The answer is -252. Overall this means, the expression
                                             evaluates to -252. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is -252.
                                             ✗


                                             30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                  Prompting Method     Query and Response
 GSM8@ao              Answer-Only           Query
                                            """Q: The girls are trying to raise money for a
                                            carnival. Kim raises \$320 more than Alexandra, who
                                            raises \$430, and Maryam raises \$400 more than Sarah,
                                            who raises \$300. How much money, in dollars, did they
                                            all raise in total?
                                            The answer (arabic numerals) is[answer]
                                            """

                                            Model Response Q: The girls are trying to raise money for a carni-
                                            val. Kim raises $320 more than Alexandra, who raises $430, and
                                            Maryam raises $400 more than Sarah, who raises $300. How much
                                            money, in dollars, did they all raise in total? The answer (arabic
                                            numerals) is $1780. ✗

 GSM8@cot             Chain-Of-Thought      Query
                                            """Q: The girls are trying to raise money for a
                                            carnival. Kim raises \$320 more than Alexandra, who
                                            raises \$430, and Maryam raises \$400 more than Sarah,
                                            who raises \$300. How much money, in dollars, did they
                                            all raise in total?
                                            A: Let's think step by step.[COT] Therefore, the answer
                                             (arabic numerals) is[answer]
                                            """

                                            Constraints
                                            STOPS_AT(answer, "\\n")

                                            Model Response Q: The girls are trying to raise money for a carni-
                                            val. Kim raises $320 more than Alexandra, who raises $430, and
                                            Maryam raises $400 more than Sarah, who raises $300. How much
                                            money, in dollars, did they all raise in total? A: Let’s think step by
                                            step.
                                            Kim raised $320 more than Alexandra, so Kim raised $750 ($430
                                            + $320). Maryam raised $400 more than Sarah, so Maryam raised
                                            $700 ($300 + $400).
                                            Therefore, the total amount of money the girls raised is $1,450
                                            ($750 + $700). Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 1,450
                                            dollars. ✗


                                             31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                  Prompting Method     Query and Response
 GSM8@multivar        Multi-Variable        Query
                                            """Q: The girls are trying to raise money for a
                                            carnival. Kim raises \$320 more than Alexandra, who
                                            raises \$430, and Maryam raises \$400 more than Sarah,
                                            who raises \$300. How much money, in dollars, did they
                                            all raise in total?\\n"""
                                            "A: Let's think step by step.\\n"
                                            for i in range(10):
                                            "({i+1})[THOUGHT]"
                                            if not THOUGHT.endswith("\\n"): "\\n"
                                            if "answer" in THOUGHT: break
                                            "Overall this means,[CONCLUSION] Therefore, the answer
                                            (arabic numerals) is[answer]"""

                                            Constraints
                                            STOPS_AT(answer, ".") and STOPS_AT(THOUGHT, "\\n") and
                                            STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, "\\n") and STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, ".
                                            ")

                                            Model Response Q: The girls are trying to raise money for a carni-
                                            val. Kim raises $320 more than Alexandra, who raises $430, and
                                            Maryam raises $400 more than Sarah, who raises $300. How much
                                            money, in dollars, did they all raise in total? A: Let’s think step
                                            by step. (1) Sarah raised $300 (2) Maryam raised $400 more than
                                            Sarah, so Maryam raised $700 (3) Alexandra raised $430 (4) Kim
                                            raised $320 more than Alexandra, so Kim raised $750 (5) The total
                                            amount of money they all raised is $300 + $700 + $430 + $750 =
                                            $2,280 (6) Therefore, the girls raised a total of $2,280 in dollars. (7)
                                            Answer: The girls raised a total of $2,280 in dollars. (8) Note: You
                                            can also solve this problem using algebra. Let x = Sarah’s amount,
                                            then Maryam raised x + 400, Alexandra raised x + 430, and Kim
                                            raised x + 750. The total amount is then x + x + 400 + x + 430 + x
                                            + 750 = 3x + 1580 = 2,280. (9) Therefore, the girls raised a total of
                                            $2,280 in dollars. (10) Answer: The girls raised a total of $2,280
                                            in dollars. Overall this means, the girls raised a total of $2,280 in
                                            dollars. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 2,280. ✓


                                             32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                  Prompting Method     Query and Response
 matrixshapes@ao      Answer-Only           Query
                                            "Multiply a matrix of shape (3,3,2) with a matrix of
                                            shape (3,2,4). Subtract the result from a matrix of
                                            shape (3,3,4). Compute the hadamard product of the
                                            result with a matrix of shape (3,3,4). Multiply the
                                            result with a matrix of shape (3,4,3). The shape of the
                                             overall result is[answer]"

                                            Constraints
                                            STOPS_AT(answer, ")")

                                            Model Response Multiply a matrix of shape (3,3,2) with a matrix
                                            of shape (3,2,4). Subtract the result from a matrix of shape (3,3,4).
                                            Compute the hadamard product of the result with a matrix of shape
                                            (3,3,4). Multiply the result with a matrix of shape (3,4,3). The
                                            shape of the overall result is:
                                            (3, 3, 3) ✓

 matrixshapes@cot     Chain-Of-Thought      Query
                                            "Multiply a matrix of shape (3,3,2) with a matrix of
                                            shape (3,2,4). Subtract the result from a matrix of
                                            shape (3,3,4). Compute the hadamard product of the
                                            result with a matrix of shape (3,3,4). Multiply the
                                            result with a matrix of shape (3,4,3). To determine the
                                             shape of the result, let's think step-by-step:[answer]
                                            "

                                            Model Response Multiply a matrix of shape (3,3,2) with a matrix
                                            of shape (3,2,4). Subtract the result from a matrix of shape (3,3,4).
                                            Compute the hadamard product of the result with a matrix of shape
                                            (3,3,4). Multiply the result with a matrix of shape (3,4,3). To
                                            determine the shape of the result, let’s think step-by-step:
                                            Step 1: Multiply a matrix of shape (3,3,2) with a matrix of shape
                                            (3,2,4).
                                            The result of this multiplication will be a matrix of shape (3,3,4).
                                            Step 2: Subtract the result from a matrix of shape (3,3,4).
                                            The result of this subtraction will be a matrix of shape (3,3,4).
                                            Step 3: Compute the hadamard product of the result with a matrix
                                            of shape (3,3,4).
                                            The result of this hadamard product will be a matrix of shape (3,3,4).
                                            Step 4: Multiply the result with a matrix of shape (3,4,3).
                                            The result of this multiplication will be a matrix of shape (3,3,3). ✓


                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                    Prompting Method   Query and Response
 matrixshapes@multivar Multi-Variable       Query
                                            "Multiply a matrix of shape (3,3,2) with a matrix of
                                            shape (3,2,4). The result is a matrix of shape[var]
                                            Subtract the result from a matrix of shape (3,3,4). The
                                             result is a matrix of shape[var] Compute the hadamard
                                            product of the result with a matrix of shape (3,3,4).
                                            The result is a matrix of shape[var] Multiply the
                                            result with a matrix of shape (3,4,3). The result is a
                                            matrix of shape[var]. The result is a matrix of shape[
                                            answer]"

                                            Constraints
                                            not "\\n" in var and STOPS_AT(var, ")") and STOPS_AT(
                                            answer, ")")

                                            Model Response Multiply a matrix of shape (3,3,2) with a matrix
                                            of shape (3,2,4). The result is a matrix of shape (3,3,4). Subtract
                                            the result from a matrix of shape (3,3,4). The result is a matrix of
                                            shape (3,3,4). Compute the hadamard product of the result with
                                            a matrix of shape (3,3,4). The result is a matrix of shape (3,3,4).
                                            Multiply the result with a matrix of shape (3,4,3). The result is a
                                            matrix of shape (3,3,3).. The result is a matrix of shape (3,3,3). ✓

 tracking_shuffled_ob-   Answer-Only        Query
 jects@ao
                                            """Q: Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve are holding a
                                            white elephant gift exchange. At the start of the event
                                            , they are each holding a present of a different color:
                                             Alice has a red present, Bob has a black ball, Claire
                                            has a pink ball, Dave has a orange ball, and Eve has a
                                            brown present.
                                            As the event progresses, pairs of people swap gifts.
                                            First, Claire and Alice swap their gifts. Then, Claire
                                            and Dave swap their gifts. Then, Alice and Bob swap
                                            their gifts. Then, Eve and Dave swap their gifts.
                                            Finally, Bob and Claire swap their gifts. At the end of
                                             the event, Alice has the[answer]"""

                                            Constraints
                                            answer in [" red present", " black ball", " pink ball",
                                             " orange ball", " brown present"]

                                            Model Response Q: Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve are holding
                                            a white elephant gift exchange. At the start of the event, they are
                                            each holding a present of a different color: Alice has a red present,
                                            Bob has a black ball, Claire has a pink ball, Dave has a orange
                                            ball, and Eve has a brown present. As the event progresses, pairs
                                            of people swap gifts. First, Claire and Alice swap their gifts. Then,
                                            Claire and Dave swap their gifts. Then, Alice and Bob swap their
                                            gifts. Then, Eve and Dave swap their gifts. Finally, Bob and Claire
                                            swap their gifts. At the end of the event, Alice has the black ball ✓


                                             34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                    Prompting Method   Query and Response
 tracking_shuffled_ob-   Chain-Of-Thought   Query
 jects@cot
                                            """Q: Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve are holding a
                                            white elephant gift exchange. At the start of the event
                                            , they are each holding a present of a different color:
                                             Alice has a red present, Bob has a black ball, Claire
                                            has a pink ball, Dave has a orange ball, and Eve has a
                                            brown present.
                                            As the event progresses, pairs of people swap gifts.
                                            First, Claire and Alice swap their gifts. Then, Claire
                                            and Dave swap their gifts. Then, Alice and Bob swap
                                            their gifts. Then, Eve and Dave swap their gifts.
                                            Finally, Bob and Claire swap their gifts.
                                            A: Let's think step by step.
                                            [COT] Therefore, At the end of the event, Alice has the
                                            [answer].
                                            """

                                            Constraints
                                            answer in [" red present", " black ball", " pink ball",
                                             " orange ball", " brown present"]

                                            Model Response Q: Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve are holding
                                            a white elephant gift exchange. At the start of the event, they are
                                            each holding a present of a different color: Alice has a red present,
                                            Bob has a black ball, Claire has a pink ball, Dave has a orange
                                            ball, and Eve has a brown present. As the event progresses, pairs
                                            of people swap gifts. First, Claire and Alice swap their gifts. Then,
                                            Claire and Dave swap their gifts. Then, Alice and Bob swap their
                                            gifts. Then, Eve and Dave swap their gifts. Finally, Bob and Claire
                                            swap their gifts. A: Let’s think step by step.
                                            Alice has a red present, Bob has a black ball, Claire has a pink ball,
                                            Dave has a orange ball, and Eve has a brown present.
                                            Claire and Alice swap their gifts, so Alice now has a pink ball and
                                            Claire has a red present.
                                            Claire and Dave swap their gifts, so Claire now has an orange ball
                                            and Dave has a pink ball.
                                            Alice and Bob swap their gifts, so Alice now has a black ball and
                                            Bob has a red present.
                                            Eve and Dave swap their gifts, so Eve now has an orange ball and
                                            Dave has a brown present.
                                            Finally, Bob and Claire swap their gifts, so Bob now has a pink ball
                                            and Claire has a black ball.
                                            Therefore, at the end of the event, Alice has a black ball, Bob has
                                            a pink ball, Claire has a black ball, Dave has a brown present, and
                                            Eve has an orange ball. Therefore, At the end of the event, Alice
                                            has the black ball. ✓


                                             35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task                    Prompting Method   Query and Response
 tracking_shuffled_ob-   Multi-Variable     Query
 jects@multivar2
                                            """Q: Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve are holding a
                                            white elephant gift exchange. At the start of the event
                                            , they are each holding a present of a different color:
                                             Alice has a red present, Bob has a black ball, Claire
                                            has a pink ball, Dave has a orange ball, and Eve has a
                                            brown present.
                                            As the event progresses, pairs of people swap gifts.
                                            First, Claire and Alice swap their gifts. \\n- This
                                            means, now[state_var] Whereas [state_var]\\nThen,
                                            Claire and Dave swap their gifts. \\n- This means, now[
                                            state_var] Whereas [state_var]\\nThen, Alice and Bob
                                            swap their gifts. \\n- This means, now[state_var]
                                            Whereas [state_var]\\nThen, Eve and Dave swap their
                                            gifts. \\n- This means, now[state_var] Whereas [
                                            state_var]\\nFinally, Bob and Claire swap their gifts.
                                            A: Overall this means[CONCLUSION] Therefore, At the
                                            end of the event, Alice has the[answer]"""

                                            Constraints
                                            answer in [" red present", " black ball", " pink ball",
                                             " orange ball", " brown present"] and STOPS_AT(
                                            state_var, ".") and STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, "\\n") and
                                            STOPS_AT(CONCLUSION, ".")

                                            Model Response Q: Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve are holding
                                            a white elephant gift exchange. At the start of the event, they are
                                            each holding a present of a different color: Alice has a red present,
                                            Bob has a black ball, Claire has a pink ball, Dave has a orange
                                            ball, and Eve has a brown present. As the event progresses, pairs of
                                            people swap gifts. First, Claire and Alice swap their gifts. - This
                                            means, now Alice has a pink present and Claire has a red present.
                                            Whereas Bob has a black ball, Dave has an orange ball, and Eve
                                            has a brown present. Then, Claire and Dave swap their gifts. -
                                            This means, now Claire has an orange present and Dave has a pink
                                            present. Whereas Alice has a pink present, Bob has a black ball,
                                            and Eve has a brown present. Then, Alice and Bob swap their gifts.
                                            - This means, now Alice has a black present and Bob has a pink
                                            present. Whereas Claire has an orange present, Dave has a pink
                                            present, and Eve has a brown present. Then, Eve and Dave swap
                                            their gifts. - This means, now Eve has an orange present and Dave
                                            has a brown present. Whereas Alice has a black present, Bob has
                                            a pink present, and Claire has an orange present. Finally, Bob and
                                            Claire swap their gifts. A: Overall this means, now Alice has a black
                                            present, Bob has an orange present, Claire has a pink present, Dave
                                            has a brown present, and Eve has an orange present. Therefore, At
                                            the end of the event, Alice has the black ball ✓


                                             36
