Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F INITE -T IME A NALYSIS OF O N -P OLICY H ETEROGE -
NEOUS F EDERATED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Chenyu Zhang                                                 Han Wang
 Data Science Institute                                       Department of Electrical Engineering
 Columbia University                                          Columbia University
 New York, NY 10025, USA                                      New York, NY 10025, USA
 cz2736@columbia.edu                                          hw2786@columbia.edu

 Aritra Mitra                                              James Anderson
 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering         Department of Electrical Engineering
 NC State University                                       Columbia University
 Raleigh, NC 27695, USA                                    New York, NY 10025, USA
 amitra2@ncsu.edu                                          james.anderson@columbia.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Federated reinforcement learning (FRL) has emerged as a promising paradigm
         for reducing the sample complexity of reinforcement learning tasks by exploiting
         information from different agents. However, when each agent interacts with a po-
         tentially different environment, little to nothing is known theoretically about the
         non-asymptotic performance of FRL algorithms. The lack of such results can be
         attributed to various technical challenges and their intricate interplay: Markovian
         sampling, linear function approximation, multiple local updates to save communi-
         cation, heterogeneity in the reward functions and transition kernels of the agents’
         MDPs, and continuous state-action spaces. Moreover, in the on-policy setting, the
         behavior policies vary with time, further complicating the analysis. In response,
         we introduce FedSARSA, a novel federated on-policy reinforcement learning
         scheme, equipped with linear function approximation, to address these challenges
         and provide a comprehensive finite-time error analysis. Notably, we establish that
         FedSARSA converges to a policy that is near-optimal for all agents, with the ex-
         tent of near-optimality proportional to the level of heterogeneity. Furthermore, we
         prove that FedSARSA leverages agent collaboration to enable linear speedups as
         the number of agents increases, which holds for both fixed and adaptive step-size
         configurations.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Federated reinforcement learning (FRL) (Qi et al., 2021; Nadiger et al., 2019; Zhuo et al., 2019),
a distributed learning framework that unites the principles of reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton
& Barto, 2018) and federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017), is rapidly gaining prominence
for its wide range of real-world applications, spanning areas such as edge computing (Wang et al.,
2019), robot autonomous navigation (Liu et al., 2019), and Internet of Things (Lim et al., 2020).
This paper poses an FRL problem, where multiple agents independently explore their own envi-
ronments and collaborate to find a near-optimal universal policy accounting for their differing en-
vironmental models. FRL leverages the collaborative nature of FL to address the data efficiency
and exploration challenges of RL. Specifically, we expect linear speedups in the convergence rate
and increased overall exploration ability due to federated collaboration. We use FRL in autonomous
driving (Liang et al., 2022) as a simple example to demonstrate our motivations and associated the-
oretical challenges. In this scenario, the objective is to determine a strategy (policy) that minimizes
collision probability. In contrast to the single-agent setting, where a policy is found by letting one
vehicle interact with its environment, the federating setting coordinates multiple vehicles to inter-
act with their distinct environments—comprising different cities and traffic patterns. Despite their


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


aligned objectives, the environmental heterogeneity will produce distinct optimal strategies for each
vehicle. Our goal is to find a universal robust strategy that performs well across all environments.
Tailored for such tasks, we propose a novel algorithm, FedSARSA, integrating SARSA, a classic
on-policy temporal difference (TD) control algorithm (Rummery & Niranjan, 1994; Singh & Sut-
ton, 1996), into a federated learning framework. On one hand, we want to leverage the power of
federated collaboration to collect more comprehensive information and expedite the learning pro-
cess. On the other hand, we want to utilize the robustness and adaptability of on-policy methods.
To elaborate, within off-policy methods, such as Q-learning, agents select their actions according to
a fixed behavior policy while seeking the optimal policy. In contrast, on-policy methods, such as
SARSA, employ learned policies as behavior policies and constantly update them. By doing so, on-
policy methods tend to learn safer policies, as they collect feedback through interaction following
learned policies, and are more robust to environmental changes compared to off-policy methods (see
Sutton & Barto (2018, Chapter 6)). Additionally, when equipped with different policy improvement
operators, on-policy SARSA is more versatile and can learn a broader range of goals than off-policy
Q-learning (see Section 4 and Appendix C). Formally analyzing our federated learning algorithm
poses several multi-faceted challenges. We outline the most significant below.

• Time-varying behavior policies. In off-policy FRL with Markovian sampling (Woo et al., 2023;
  Khodadadian et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a), agents’ observations are not i.i.d.; they are gen-
  erated from a time-homogeneous ergodic Markov chain as agents follow a fixed behavior policy.
  Such an ergodic Markov chain converges rapidly to a steady-state distribution, enabling off-policy
  methods to inherit the theoretical guarantees for i.i.d. and mean-path cases (Bhandari et al., 2018;
  Wang et al., 2023a). In contrast, on-policy methods update agents’ behavior policies dynamically,
  rendering their trajectories nonstationary. Therefore, previous analyses for off-policy methods,
  whether involving Markovian sampling or not, do not apply to our setting. Specifically, it remains
  unknown if the trajectories generated by on-policy FRL methods converge, and if they do, how
  this nonstationarity affects the convergence performance.
• Environmental heterogeneity in on-policy planning. In an FRL instance, it is impractical to as-
  sume that all agents share the same environment (Khodadadian et al., 2022; Woo et al., 2023).
  In a planning task, this heterogeneity results in agents having distinct optimal policies. Thus, to
  affirm the advantages of federated collaboration, it is crucial to precisely characterize the dispari-
  ties in optimality. Only two FRL papers have considered heterogeneity: Jin et al. (2022) explored
  heterogeneity in transition dynamics without linear speedup, and Wang et al. (2023a) considered
  heterogeneity in a prediction task (policy evaluation). Beyond these studies, other research has
  addressed heterogeneity primarily within the domains of control design (Wang et al., 2023c) and
  system identification (Wang et al., 2023b). Unfortunately, neither the characterizations nor anal-
  yses of heterogeneity from the previous work apply to on-policy FRL. Specifically, heterogeneity
  in agents’ optimal policies implies heterogeneity in the behavior policies, which could lead to
  drastically different local updates across agents, negating the benefits of collaboration.
• Multiple local updates and client drift. In the federated learning framework, agents communicate
  with a central server periodically to reduce communication cost, and conduct local updates be-
  tween communication rounds. However, these local updates push agents to local solutions at the
  expense of the overall federated performance, a phenomenon known as client drift (Karimireddy
  et al., 2020). Uniquely within our setting, client drift and nonstationarity amplify each other.
• Continuous state-action spaces and linear function approximation. To better model real-world
  scenarios, we consider continuous state-action spaces and employ a linear approximation for the
  value function. Unfortunately, RL methods with linear function approximation (LFA) are known
  to exhibit less stable convergence when compared to tabular methods (Sutton & Barto, 2018;
  Gordon, 1996). Besides, the parameters associated with value function approximation no longer
  maintain an implicit magnitude bound. This concern is particularly relevant in on-policy FRL,
  where the client drift and the bias from nonstationarity both scale with the parameter magnitude.

Given these motivations and challenges, we ask

            Can an agent expedite the process of learning its own near-optimal policy by
            leveraging information from other agents with potentially different environments?
   1
       Considered i.i.d. and Markovian sampling, but only established linear speedup result for the i.i.d. case.


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Comparison of finite-time analysis for value-based FRL methods. LSP and LFA represent
linear speedup and linear function approximation under the Markovian sampling setting; Pred and
Plan represent prediction (policy evaluation) and planning (policy optimization) tasks, respectively.

                               Hetero-                    Markovian                     Behavior
        Work                              LSP     LFA                      Task
                               geneity                    Sampling                       Policy

 Doan et al. (2019)            %          %       "       %              Pred           Fixed
 Jin et al. (2022)             "          %       %       %              Plan           Fixed
 Khodadadian et al. (2022)     %          "       "       "              Pred & Plan    Fixed
 Shen et al. (2023)            %          "1      "       "              Plan           Adaptive
 Wang et al. (2023a)           "          "       "       "              Pred           Fixed
 Woo et al. (2023)             %          "       %       "              Plan           Fixed
 Our work                      "          "       "       "              Pred & Plan    Adaptive


We provide a complete non-asymptotic analysis of FedSARSA, resulting in the first positive answer
to the above question. We situate our work with respect to prior work in Table 1. A summary of our
contributions is provided below:

• Heterogeneity in FRL optimal policies. We formulate a practical FRL planning problem in which
  agents operate in heterogeneous environments, leading to heterogeneity in their optimal policies
  as agents pursue different goals. We provide an explicit bound on this heterogeneity in optimality,
  validating the benefits of collaboration (Theorem 1).
• Federated SARSA and its finite-sample complexity. We introduce the FedSARSA algorithm for
  the proposed FRL planning problem and establish a finite-time error bound achieving a state-of-
  the-art sample complexity (Theorem 2). At the time of writing, FedSARSA is the first provably
  sample-efficient on-policy algorithm for FRL problems.
• Convergence region characterization and linear speedups via collaboration. We demonstrate that
  when a constant step-size is used, federated learning enables FedSARSA to exponentially con-
  verge to a small region containing agents’ optimal policies, whose radius tightens as the number
  of agents grows (Corollary 2.1). For a linearly decaying step-size, the learning process enjoys
  linear speedups through federated collaboration: the finite-time error reduces as the number of
  agents increases (Corollary 2.2). We validate these findings via numerical simulations.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Federated reinforcement learning. A comprehensive review of FRL techniques and open prob-
lems was recently provided by Qi et al. (2021). FRL planning algorithms can be broadly catego-
rized into two groups: policy- and value-based methods. In the first category, Jin et al. (2022); Xie
& Song (2023) considered tabular methods but did not demonstrate any linear speedup. Fan et al.
(2021) considered homogeneous environments and showed a sublinear speedup property. In the
second category, Khodadadian et al. (2022); Woo et al. (2023) investigated federated Q-learning and
demonstrated linear speedup under Markovian sampling. However, these studies did not examine
the impact of environmental heterogeneity, a pivotal aspect in FRL. To bridge this gap, Wang et al.
(2023a) presented a finite time analysis of federated TD(0) that can handle environmental hetero-
geneity. To take advantage of both policy- and value-based methods, Shen et al. (2023) analyzed
distributed actor-critic algorithms, but only established the linear speedup result under i.i.d. sam-
pling. Table 1 summarizes the key features of these value-based methods, including our work. There
are also some works developed for studying the distributed version of RL algorithms: Doan et al.
(2019) and Liu & Olshevsky (2023) provided a finite-time analysis of distributed variants of TD(0);
however, their analysis is limited to the i.i.d sampling model.

SARSA with linear function approximation. Single-agent SARSA is an on-policy TD control
algorithm proposed by Rummery & Niranjan (1994) and Singh & Sutton (1996). To accommo-
date large or even continuous state-action spaces, Rummery & Niranjan (1994) proposed function


                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


approximation. We refer to SARSA with and without LFA as linear SARSA and tabular SARSA
respectively The asymptotic convergence result of tabular SARSA was first demonstrated by Singh
et al. (2000). However, linear SARSA may suffer from chattering behavior within a region (Gordon,
1996; 2000; Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996). With a smooth policy improvement strategy, Perkins &
Precup (2002) and Melo et al. (2008) established the asymptotic convergence guarantee for linear
SARSA. Recently, the finite-time analysis for linear SARSA was provided by Zou et al. (2019).

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   F EDERATED L EARNING

Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning framework designed to train models using
data from multiple clients while preserving privacy, reducing communication costs, and accommo-
dating data heterogeneity. We adopt the server-client model with periodic aggregation, akin to well-
known algorithms like FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) and FedProx (Sahu et al., 2018). Agents
(clients) perform multiple local updates (iterations of a learning algorithm) between communication
rounds with the central server. During a communication round, agents synchronize their local pa-
rameters with those aggregated by the server. However, this procedure introduces client-drift issues
(Karimireddy et al., 2020; Charles & Konečnỳ, 2021), which can hinder the efficacy of federated
training. This problem is particularly pronounced in our on-policy FRL setting, where client drift is
amplified due to the interplay with other factors.

3.2   M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESS AND E NVIRONMENTAL H ETEROGENEITY

We consider N agents that explore within the same state-action space but with potentially different
environment models. Specifically, agent i’s environment model     is characterized by a Markov deci-
sion process (MDP) denoted by M(i) = S, A, r(i) , P (i) , γ . Here, S denotes the state space, A
is the action space, r(i) : S × A → [0, R] is a bounded reward function, γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount
                                                               (i)
factor, and P (i) is the Markov transition kernel such that Pa (s, s′ ) is the probability of agent i’s
                             ′
transition from state s to s following action a. While all agents share the same state-action space,
their reward functions and state transition kernels can differ. Agents select actions based on their
policies. A policy π maps a state to a distribution over actions, π(a|s) denotes the probability of an
agent taking action a at state s.
Assumption 1 (Uniform ergodicity). For each i ∈ [N ], the Markov chain induced by any policy
π and state transition kernel P (i) is ergodic with a uniform mixing rate. In other words, for any
                                                                               (i)
MDP M(i) and candidate policy π, there exists a steady-state distribution ηπ , as well as constants
mi ≥ 1 and ρi ∈ (0, 1), such that

                                         (i)       (i)
                        sup sup Pπ St = · S0 = s − ηπ(i)               ≤ mi ρti ,
                        s∈S     π                                         TV

where ∥ · ∥TV is the total variation distance.2

Assumption 1 is a standard assumption in the RL literature needed to provide finite-time bounds
under Markovian sampling (Bhandari et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2019; Srikant & Ying, 2019).
Agents operate in their own environments and may have their own goals. We collectively refer to
the differences in the transition kernels and rewards as environmental heterogeneity. Intuitively,
collaboration among agents is advantageous when the heterogeneity is small, but can become coun-
terproductive when the heterogeneity is large. We now provide two natural definitions for measuring
environmental heterogeneity.
Definition 1 (Transition kernel heterogeneity). We capture the transition kernel heterogeneity using
the total variation induced norm:
                                      ϵp := max P (i) − P (j) TV ,
                                             i,j∈[N ]

    2
      We use the functional-analytic definition of the total variation, which is twice the quantity supA∈F |p(A)|
for any signed measure p on F.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where with a slight abuse of notation, we define
                                                            Z
           ∥P ∥TV :=      sup      ∥qP ∥TV =        sup            q(s, a)Pa (s, ·)dsda        ,
                       q∈P(S×A)                q∈P(S×A)      S×A                          TV
                        ∥q∥TV =1                ∥q∥TV =1

where P(S × A) is the set of probability measures on S × A. By the triangle inequality and the
uniform bound on rewards, R, we have ϵp ≤ 2.
Definition 2 (Reward heterogeneity). We capture the reward heterogeneity using the infinity norm:
                                                     r(i) − r(j) ∞
                                    ϵr := max                      ,
                                         i,j∈[N ]          R
where ∥r∥∞ = sups,a∈S×A |r(s, a)|. By the triangle inequality, we have ϵr ≤ 2.

3.3   VALUE F UNCTION AND SARSA

An RL planning task aims to maximize the expected return, defined as the accumulated reward of a
trajectory. For a given policy π, the expected return of a state-action pair (s, a) is captured by the
Q-value function:
                "∞                                #
                  X
                       t
 qπ (s, a) = Eπ       γ r(st , at ) S0 = s, A0 = a = r(s, a) + γEπ [qπ (S1 , A1 )|S0 = s, A0 = a],
                  t=0
                                                      |                     {z                     }
                                                                           Tπ qπ (s,a)
                                                                                                   (1)
where the expectation is taken with respect to a transition kernel that follows the policy π (except
for the initial action, which is fixed to a). For any MDP, there exists an optimal policy π∗ such that
qπ∗ (s, a) ≥ qπ (s, a) for any other policy π and state-action pair (s, a). This paper focuses on an
FRL problem where all agents aim to find a universal policy that is near-optimal for all MDPs under
a low-heterogeneity regime.
To find such an optimal policy for a single agent, SARSA updates the estimated Q-value function
based on (1) by sampling and bootstrapping. With the updated estimation of the value function,
SARSA improves the policy via a policy improvement operator. By alternating policy evaluation
and policy improvement, SARSA finds the optimal policy within the policy space. The tabular
SARSA for a single agent can be described by the following update rules:

            Q (st , at )   ← Q (st , at ) + α (r(st , at ) + γQ (st+1 , at+1 ) − Q (st , at )) ,
                                                                                                 (2)
            π(at+1 |st+1 ) ← Γ(Q(st+1 , at+1 )),
where Q is the estimated Q-value function, α is the learning step-size, and Γ is the policy improve-
ment operator. We provide further discussion on the policy improvement operator in Section 4.

3.4   L INEAR F UNCTION A PPROXIMATION AND N ONLINEAR P ROJECTED B ELLMAN
      E QUATION

When the state-action space is large or continuous, tabular methods are intractable. Therefore, we
employ a linear approximation for the Q-value function (Rummery & Niranjan, 1994). For a given
feature extractor ϕ : S × A → Rd , we approximate the Q-value function as Qθ (s, a) = ϕ(s, a)T θ,
where θ ∈ Θ ⊆ Rd is a parameter vector to be learned. Without loss of generality, we assume that
∥ϕ(s, a)∥2 ≤ 1 for every state-action pair (s, a). Linear function approximation translate the task
of finding the optimal policy to that of identifying the optimal parameter θ that solves the nonlinear
projected Bellman equation:
                                            Qθ = Ππ Tπ Qθ ,                                        (3)
where Tπ is the Bellman operator defined by the right-hand side of (1), and Ππ is the orthog-
onal projection onto the linear subspace spanned by the range of the ϕ using the inner product
⟨x, y⟩π = ES∼ηπ ,A∼π(S) [x(S, A)T y(S, A)]. Equation (3) reduces to the linear Bellman equation
used in policy evaluation when the policy π is fixed (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1996; Bhandari et al.,
2018), and to the Bellman optimality equation used in Q-learning when the policy improvement
operator is the greedy selector (Watkins & Dayan, 1992; Melo et al., 2008).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4      A LGORITHM
We now develop FedSARSA; a federated version of linear SARSA. In FedSARSA, each agent
explores its own environment and improves its policy using its observations, which we refer to as
local updating. Periodically, agents send the parameter progress to the central server, where the
parameters get aggregated and sent back to each agent. We present FedSARSA in Algorithm 1.

Local update. Locally, agent i updates its parameter using the SARSA update rule. With linear
function approximation, the Q-value function update in (2) becomes

                               (i)    (i)      (i)   (i) (i) (i)
                             θt+1 = θt + αt gt θt ; st , at ,
                                   (i)
where αt is the step-size3 and gt is defined as
 (i)                                                                  T
gt (θ; s, a) = ϕ(s, a)r(i) (s, a)+ϕ(s, a) (γϕ(s′ , a′ )−ϕ(s, a)) θ,     s′ ∼ Pa(i) (s, ·), a′ ∼ πθ(i) (·|s′ ) .
                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                          (4)
We refer to gt as a semi-gradient as it resembles a stochastic gradient but does not represent the
true gradient of any static loss function (Barnard, 1993). Also, we introduce a subscript t to the
semi-gradient to indicate that it depends on the policy πθ(i) at time step t.
                                                               t



Policy improvement. We assume that all agents use the same policy improvement operator Γ,
which returns a policy π for any Q-value function. Since we consider linearly approximated Q-
value functions, we can view the policy improvement operator as acting on the parameter space:
Γ : θ 7→ π. We denote the policy resulting from the parameter θ as πθ = Γ(θ). To ensure
the convergence of the algorithm, we need the following assumption on the policy improvement
operator’s smoothness.
Assumption 2 (Lipschitz continuous policy improvement operator). The policy improvement oper-
ator is Lipschitz continuous in TV distance with constant L:
                   ∥πθ1 (·|s) − πθ2 (·|s)∥TV ≤ L∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 ,        ∀θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ, s ∈ S.
Furthermore, L ≤ w/(Hσ), where H, σ, and w are problem constants to be defined in Appendix.

When the action space is of finite measure, Assumption 2 is equivalent to that in Zou et al. (2019).
This assumption is standard for linear SARSA (Zou et al., 2019; Perkins & Precup, 2002; Melo
et al., 2008). As shown in (De Farias & Van Roy, 2000; Perkins & Pendrith, 2002; Zhang et al.,
2022), linear SARSA with noncontinuous policy improvement may diverge.
An example policy improvement operator satisfying Assumption 2 is the softmax function with
suitable temperature parameter (Gao & Pavel, 2017). In contrast, the deterministic greedy policy
improvement employed in Q-learning is an illustrative case where Assumption 2 does not hold.
Additionally, when the policy improvement operator maps to a fixed point π, SARSA reduces to TD
learning, which evaluates the policy π. Generally, SARSA searches the optimal policy within the
policy space Γ(Θ) determined by the policy improvement operator and the parameter space.

Server side aggregation. FedSARSA adds an additional aggregation step to parallelize linear
SARSA. During this step, agents communicate with a central server by sending their parameters or
parameter progress over a given period. The central server then aggregates these local parameters
and returns the updated parameters to the agents. Intuitively, if the agents’ MDPs are similar, i.e.,
the level of heterogeneity is low, then exchanging information via the server should benefit each
agent. This is precisely the rationale behind the server-aggregation step. In general, K is selected to
strike a balance between the communication cost and the accuracy in FL.
Besides averaging, we add a projection step to ensure stability of the parameter sequence. This
technique is commonly used in the literature on stochastic approximation and RL (Zou et al., 2019;
Bhandari et al., 2018; Qiu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023a). In practice, it is anticipated that an
implicit bound on the parameters exists without requiring explicit projection.
    3
      For ease of presentation, we assume all agents share the same step-size. Our analysis handles agents using
their own step-size schedule, as long as each agent’s step-size falls within the specified range.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: FedSARSA
                            (i)
input Initial parameter θ0 = θ̄0
for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 do
    for each agent i = 1, . . . , N do in parallel
           (i)         (i)
         πt = Γ(θt )                                               // policy improvement
                                   (i) (i) (i) (i)  (i)                      (i)
         Sample observation (st , at , rt , st+1 , at+1 ) following policy πt
           (i)       (i)      (i)          (i)
         θt+1 = θt + αt gt , where gt is defined in (4)                     // local update
    if t + 1 ≡ 0 (mod      P K) then                              //  every      K iterations
                           1   N     (i)
         θ̄t+1 = ΠḠ N i=1 θt+1                                // federated aggregation
             (i)
        Set θt+1 = θ̄t+1 for each agent i ∈ [N ]


5     A NALYSIS
We begin our analysis of FedSARSA by establishing a perturbation bound on the solution to (3),
which captures the near-optimality of the solution under reward and transition heterogeneity. We
then provide a finite-time error bound of FedSARSA, which enjoys the linear speedup achieved by
the federated collaboration. Building on this, we discuss the parameter selection of our algorithm.

5.1    N EAR O PTIMALITY UNDER H ETEROGENEITY

We consider an FRL task where all agents collaborate to find a universal policy. However, due to
environmental heterogeneity, each agent has a potentially different optimal policy. Therefore, it is
essential to determine the convergence region of our algorithm, and how it relates to the optimal
parameters of the agents. To show that we find a near-optimal parameter for all agents, we need
to characterize the difference between the optimal parameters of agents. Given the operator Γ, we
             (i)
denote by θ∗ the unique solution to (3) for MDP M(i) . The next theorem bounds the distance
between agents’ optimal parameters as a function of reward- and transition kernel heterogeneity.
Theorem 1 (Perturbation bounds on SARSA fixed points). There exist positive problem dependent
constants w, H, and σ such that
                                n             o Rϵ + Hσϵ           Λ(ϵp , ϵr )
                                   (i)  (j)          r        p
                        max       θ∗ − θ∗      ≤                =:             ,
                       i,j∈[N ]             2          w               w
where ϵp and ϵr are the perturbation bounds on environmental models defined in Definitions 1 and 2.
We explicitly define the constants in Theorem 1 and show that w = O(1−γ) in Appendix I. In the next
                                                                        (i)
subsection, we demonstrate that there exists a parameter θ∗ such that ∥θ∗ −θ∗ ∥ ≤ Λ(ϵp , ϵr )/w, and
Algorithm 1 converges to a neighborhood of θ∗ whose radius is also of O(Λ(ϵp , ϵr )/(1−γ)). Since
Λ(ϵp , ϵr ) = O(ϵp + ϵr ), when the environmental heterogeneity is small, these results guarantee that
θ∗ is near-optimal for all agents.
Theorem 1 is the first perturbation bound on nonlinear projected Bellman fixed points. Wang et al.
(2023a) established similar perturbation bounds for linear projected Bellman fixed points using the
perturbation theory of linear equations. However, it is crucial to note that their approach does not
extend to our setting where (3) is nonlinear.

5.2    F INITE -T IME E RROR AND L INEAR S PEEDUP

We now provide the main theorem of the paper, which bounds the mean squared error of Algorithm 1
recursively, and directly gives several finite-time error bounds.
                                                (i)
Theorem 2 (One-step progress). Let {θt } be the parameters returned by Algorithm 1 and
        PN (i)
θ̄t = N1 i=1 θt . Then, there exist positive problem dependent constants w, C1 , C2 , C3 , C4 , and a
                                   (i)
parameter θ∗ such that maxi∈[N ] ∥θ∗ − θ∗ ∥ ≤ Λ(ϵp, ϵr )/w, and for any t ∈ N, it holds that
                   2                             2
    E θ̄t+1 − θ∗       ≤ (1 − αt w)E θ̄t − θ∗         + αt C1 Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr ) + αt2 C2 /N + αt3 C3 + αt4 C4 . (5)


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Explicit definitions of the constants are provided in Appendix J.
On the right-hand side of (5), the first term is a contractive term that inherits its contractivity from
the projected Bellman operator; the second term accounts for heterogeneity; the third term captures
the effect of noise where the variance gets scaled down by a factor of N (linear speedup) due to
collaboration among agents; the last two terms represent higher-order terms, which are negligible,
compared to other terms. In the following two corollaries, we study the effects of using constant and
decaying step-sizes in the above bound.
Corollary 2.1 (Finite-time error bound for constant step-size). With a constant step-size αt ≡ α0 ≤
w/(2120(2K + 8 + ln(m/(ρw)))), for any T ∈ N, we have

               2                           2   1           6                      C2
           (i)       −α0 wT           (i)                        2                       2         3
E θ̄T − θ∗       ≤ 4e          θ0 − θ∗       +      C1 +        Λ (ϵp , ϵr ) + α0    + α0 C3 + α0 C4 .
                                               w           w                      N
Corollary 2.2 (Finite-time error bound for decaying step-size). With a linearly decaying step-size
αt = 4/(w(1 + t + a)), where a > 0 is to guarantee that α0 ≤ min{1/(8K), w/64}, there exists a
convex combination θeT of {θ̄t }Tt=0 such that
                2                                          2
                                                                                                     2

         (i)     H2                   K 2 +τ 5     τ    Λ (ϵp ,ϵr )           H2              1   Λ (ϵp ,ϵr )
E θeT − θ∗   = (1−γ)2 ·O             (1−γ)2 T 2 + N T +    H2             = (1−γ) 2 ·O
                                                                                     e
                                                                                             NT +    H2             .

We now discuss the implications of the above theoretical guarantees.
Convergence region. From Corollary 2.1, with a constant step-size α, FedSARSA exponentially
converges to a ball around the optimal parameter θi∗ of each agent. The radius of this ball is governed
by two objects: (i) the level of environmental heterogeneity; (ii) the inherent noise in our model. In
the absence of heterogeneity, the above guarantee is precisely what one obtains for stochastic ap-
proximation algorithms with a constant step-size (Zou et al., 2019; Srikant & Ying, 2019; Bhandari
et al., 2018). The presence of heterogeneity manifests itself in the O(Λ(ϵp , ϵr )/(1−γ)) = O(ϵp +ϵr )
term in the convergence region radius. Since the optimal parameters of the agents may not be iden-
tical (under heterogeneity), such a term is generally unavoidable.
Linear speedup. Turning our attention to Corollary 2.2 (where we use a decaying step-size), let
us first consider the homogeneous case where ϵp = ϵr = 0. When T ≥ N , the O(1/(N T )) rate we
obtain in this case is the best one can hope for statistically: with T data samples per agent and N
agents, one can reduce the variance of our noise model by at most N T . Thus, for a homogeneous
setting, our rate is optimal, and clearly demonstrates an N -fold linear speedup over the single-agent
sample-complexity of O(1/T ) in Zou et al. (2019). In this context, our work provides the first such
bound for a federated on-policy RL algorithm, and complements results of a similar flavor for the
off-policy setting in Khodadadian et al. (2022). When the agents’ MDPs differ, via collaboration,
each agent is still able to converge at the expedited rate of O(1/N T ) to a ball of radius O(ϵp + ϵr )
around the optimal parameter of each agent. The implication of this result is simple: by participating
in federation, each agent can quickly (i.e., with an N -fold speedup) find an O(ϵp + ϵr )-approximate
solution of its optimal parameter; using such an approximate solution as an initial condition, the
agent can then fine-tune (personalize) - based on its own data - to converge to its own optimal
parameter exactly (in mean-squared sense). This is the first result of its kind for federated planning,
and complements the plethora of analogous results in federated optimization (Sahu et al., 2018;
Khaled et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Koloskova et al., 2020; Woodworth et al., 2020; Pathak &
Wainwright, 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Mitra et al., 2021; Mishchenko et al., 2022). Arriving at the
above result, however, poses significant challenges relative to prior art. We now provide insights
into these challenges and our strategies to overcome them.

5.3   P ROOF S KETCH : E RROR D ECOMPOSITION

Our main approach of proving Theorem 2 is to leverage the contraction property of the Bellman
equation (3) to identify a primary “descent direction.” Algorithm 1 then updates the parameters
along this direction with multi-sourced stochastic bias. We provide an informal mean squared error
decomposition (formalized in Appendix I.1 ) to illustrate this idea:
                     2
      E θ̄t+1 − θ∗       ≤ recursion + descent direction + gradient heterogeneity + client drift
                           + gradient progress + mixing + backtracking + gradient variance.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Some of these terms commonly appears in an FRL analysis: the descent direction is given by the
contraction property of the Bellman equation (3) when the policy improvement operator is suffi-
ciently smooth (Appendix I.2); the client drift represents the deviation of agents’ local parameters
from the central parameter, which is controlled by the step-size and synchronization period (Ap-
pendix I.4); the mixing property (Assumption 1) allows a stationary trajectory to rapidly reach to a
steady distribution (Appendix I.6). We highlight some unique terms in our analysis.
Gradient heterogeneity. This term accounts for the local update heterogeneity, which scales with
the environmental heterogeneity. The effect of time-varying policies coupled with multiple local
updates accentuates the effect of such heterogeneity. Thus, particular care is needed to ensure that
the bias introduced by heterogeneity does not compound over iterations (Appendix I.3).
Backtracking. FedSARSA possesses nonstationary transition kernels. To deal with this challenge
and use the mixing property of stationary MDPs, we virtually backtrack a period τ : starting at time
                                (i)
step t−τ , we fix the policy Γ(θt−τ ) for agent i, and consider a subsequent virtual trajectory following
this fixed policy. The divergence between the updates computed on real and virtual observations is
controlled by the step-size αt and backtracking period τ (Appendix I.7).
Gradient progress. Note that the steady distribution in the mixing term corresponds to an old policy.
Since the backtracking period is small, the discrepancy (progress) between this old policy and the
current one is small (Appendix I.5).
Gradient variance. While one can directly use the projection radius to bound the semi-gradient vari-
ance, such an approach would fall short of establishing the desired linear speedup effect. To achieve
the latter, we need a more refined argument that shows how one can obtain a “variance-reduction”
effect by combining data generated from non-identical time-varying Markov chains (Appendix I.8).


6   S IMULATIONS

We create a finite state space of size |S| = 100, an action space of |A| = 100, a feature space of
dimension d = 25, and set γ = 0.2 and R = 10. The actions determine the transition matrices by
shifting the columns of a reference matrix. The synchronization period is set to K = 10, and the
step-size of α0 = 0.01. For the full experiment setup, please refer to Appendix C. In Figure 1, we
plot the mean squared error averaged over ten runs for different heterogeneity levels and numbers
of agents. The simulation results are consistent with Corollary 2.1 and demonstrate the robustness
of our method towards environmental heterogeneity. Additional simulations, including federated
TD(0) and on-policy federated Q-learning covered by our algorithm, can be found in Appendix C.


         (a) ϵp = ϵr = 0                    (b) ϵp = ϵr = 1                     (c) ϵp = ϵr = 2

                 Figure 1: Performance of FedSARSA under Markovian sampling.



7   C ONCLUSION

We proposed a straightforward yet powerful on-policy federated reinforcement learning method:
FedSARSA. Our finite-time analysis of FedSARSA provides the first theoretically conformation
of the statement: an agent can expedite the process of learning its own near-optimal policy by
leveraging information from other agents with potentially different environments.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
JA is partially supported by Columbia Data Science Institute and NSF grants ECCS 2144634 &
2231350.

R EFERENCES
Etienne Barnard. Temporal-difference methods and Markov models. IEEE Transactions on Systems,
  Man, and Cybernetics, 23(2):357–365, 1993.
Dimitri Bertsekas and John N. Tsitsiklis. Neuro-Dynamic Programming. Athena Scientific, 1996.
Jalaj Bhandari, Daniel Russo, and Raghav Singal. A finite time analysis of temporal difference
   learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1691–1692.
   PMLR, 2018.
Léon Bottou, Frank E. Curtis, and Jorge Nocedal. Optimization methods for large-scale machine
   learning. SIAM review, 60(2):223–311, 2018.
Zachary Charles and Jakub Konečnỳ. Convergence and accuracy trade-offs in federated learning
  and meta-learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2575–
  2583. PMLR, 2021.
Daniela Pucci De Farias and Benjamin Van Roy. On the existence of fixed points for approximate
  value iteration and temporal-difference learning. Journal of Optimization theory and Applica-
  tions, 105:589–608, 2000.
Thinh Doan, Siva Maguluri, and Justin Romberg. Finite-time analysis of distributed TD(0) with
  linear function approximation on multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1626–1635. PMLR, 2019.
Xiaofeng Fan, Yining Ma, Zhongxiang Dai, Wei Jing, Cheston Tan, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low.
  Fault-tolerant federated reinforcement learning with theoretical guarantee. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:1007–1021, 2021.
Bolin Gao and Lacra Pavel. On the properties of the softmax function with application in game
  theory and reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00805, 2017.
Geoffrey J. Gordon. Chattering in SARSA(λ). CMU Learning Lab Technical Report, 1996.
Geoffrey J. Gordon. Reinforcement learning with function approximation converges to a region.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 13, 2000.
Hao Jin, Yang Peng, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. Federated reinforcement
  learning with environment heterogeneity. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 18–37. PMLR, 2022.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5132–5143. PMLR, 2020.
Ahmed Khaled, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter Richtárik. First analysis of local GD on hetero-
  geneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.04715, 2019.
Sajad Khodadadian, Pranay Sharma, Gauri Joshi, and Siva Theja Maguluri. Federated reinforcement
  learning: Linear speedup under Markovian sampling. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 10997–11057. PMLR, 2022.
Anastasia Koloskova, Nicolas Loizou, Sadra Boreiri, Martin Jaggi, and Sebastian Stich. A unified
  theory of decentralized SGD with changing topology and local updates. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 5381–5393. PMLR, 2020.
Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of
  FedAvg on non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02189, 2019.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xinle Liang, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, Ming Liu, and Qiang Yang. Federated transfer reinforcement
  learning for autonomous driving. In Federated and Transfer Learning, pp. 357–371. Springer,
  2022.
Hyun-Kyo Lim, Ju-Bong Kim, Joo-Seong Heo, and Youn-Hee Han. Federated reinforcement learn-
  ing for training control policies on multiple IoT devices. Sensors, 20(5):1359, 2020.
Boyi Liu, Lujia Wang, and Ming Liu. Lifelong federated reinforcement learning: A learning ar-
  chitecture for navigation in cloud robotic systems. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 4(4):
  4555–4562, 2019.
Rui Liu and Alex Olshevsky. Distributed TD(0) with almost no communication. IEEE Control
  Systems Letters, 2023.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
Francisco S Melo, Sean P Meyn, and M Isabel Ribeiro. An analysis of reinforcement learning
  with function approximation. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine
  learning, pp. 664–671, 2008.
Sean P Meyn and Richard L Tweedie. Markov chains and stochastic stability. Springer Science &
  Business Media, 2012.
Konstantin Mishchenko, Grigory Malinovsky, Sebastian Stich, and Peter Richtárik. Proxskip: Yes!
  local gradient steps provably lead to communication acceleration! finally! In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 15750–15769. PMLR, 2022.
Aritra Mitra, Rayana Jaafar, George J Pappas, and Hamed Hassani. Linear convergence in federated
  learning: Tackling client heterogeneity and sparse gradients. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:14606–14619, 2021.
A Yu Mitrophanov. Sensitivity and convergence of uniformly ergodic markov chains. Journal of
  Applied Probability, 42(4):1003–1014, 2005.
Chetan Nadiger, Anil Kumar, and Sherine Abdelhak. Federated reinforcement learning for fast
  personalization. In 2019 IEEE Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Knowledge Engineering (AIKE), pp. 123–127. IEEE, 2019.
Reese Pathak and Martin J Wainwright. FedSplit: An algorithmic framework for fast federated
  optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.05238, 2020.
Theodore Perkins and Doina Precup. A convergent form of approximate policy iteration. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 15, 2002.
Theodore J Perkins and Mark D Pendrith. On the existence of fixed points for Q-learning and
  SARSA in partially observable domains. In ICML, pp. 490–497, 2002.
Jiaju Qi, Qihao Zhou, Lei Lei, and Kan Zheng. Federated reinforcement learning: Techniques,
   applications, and open challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.11887, 2021.
Shuang Qiu, Zhuoran Yang, Jieping Ye, and Zhaoran Wang. On finite-time convergence of actor-
  critic algorithm. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory, 2(2):652–664, 2021.
Guannan Qu and Adam Wierman. Finite-time analysis of asynchronous stochastic approximation
  and Q-learning. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3185–3205. PMLR, 2020.
Gavin A Rummery and Mahesan Niranjan. On-line Q-learning using connectionist systems, vol-
  ume 37. University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering Cambridge, UK, 1994.
Anit Kumar Sahu, Tian Li, Maziar Sanjabi, Manzil Zaheer, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  On the convergence of federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.06127, 3, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Han Shen, Kaiqing Zhang, Mingyi Hong, and Tianyi Chen. Towards understanding asynchronous
  advantage actor-critic: Convergence and linear speedup. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
  2023.
Satinder Singh, Tommi Jaakkola, Michael L Littman, and Csaba Szepesvári. Convergence results for
  single-step on-policy reinforcement-learning algorithms. Machine learning, 38:287–308, 2000.
Satinder P Singh and Richard S Sutton. Reinforcement learning with replacing eligibility traces.
  Machine learning, 22(1):123–158, 1996.
Rayadurgam Srikant and Lei Ying. Finite-time error bounds for linear stochastic approximation
  andtd learning. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2803–2830. PMLR, 2019.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
John Tsitsiklis and Benjamin Van Roy. Analysis of temporal-diffference learning with function
  approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 9, 1996.
Han Wang, Aritra Mitra, Hamed Hassani, George J Pappas, and James Anderson. Federated tem-
  poral difference learning with linear function approximation under environmental heterogeneity.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02212, 2023a.
Han Wang, Leonardo F Toso, and James Anderson. FedSysID: A federated approach to sample-
  efficient system identification. In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, pp. 1308–
  1320. PMLR, 2023b.
Han Wang, Leonardo F Toso, Aritra Mitra, and James Anderson. Model-free learning with het-
  erogeneous dynamical systems: A federated LQR approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11743,
  2023c.
Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H Vincent Poor. Tackling the objective
   inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization. Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Xiaofei Wang, Yiwen Han, Chenyang Wang, Qiyang Zhao, Xu Chen, and Min Chen. In-edge AI:
  Intelligentizing mobile edge computing, caching and communication by federated learning. Ieee
  Network, 33(5):156–165, 2019.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8:279–292, 1992.
Jiin Woo, Gauri Joshi, and Yuejie Chi. The blessing of heterogeneity in federated q-learning: Lin-
   ear speedup and beyond. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 37157–37216.
   PMLR, 2023.
Blake E Woodworth, Kumar Kshitij Patel, and Nati Srebro. Minibatch vs local SGD for heteroge-
  neous distributed learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6281–6292,
  2020.
Zhijie Xie and Shenghui Song. FedKL: Tackling data heterogeneity in federated reinforcement
  learning by penalizing KL divergence. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 41
  (4):1227–1242, 2023.
Fuzhen Zhang. Matrix Theory: Basic Results and Techniques. Springer, 2011.
Shangtong Zhang, Remi Tachet, and Romain Laroche. On the chattering of SARSA with linear
  function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06828, 2022.
Hankz Hankui Zhuo, Wenfeng Feng, Yufeng Lin, Qian Xu, and Qiang Yang. Federated deep rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08277, 2019.
Shaofeng Zou, Tengyu Xu, and Yingbin Liang. Finite-sample analysis for sarsa with linear function
  approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Organization of Appendix                                                                     14

     B Finite-Time Results Comparison                                                               14

     C Additional Simulations                                                                       14
       C.1 Additional Simulations for FedSARSA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          14
       C.2 Simulations for Federated TD(0) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        15
       C.3 Simulations for On-Policy Federated Q-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         16

     D Central MDP                                                                                  17

     E Notation                                                                                     19

     F Constants                                                                                    20

     G Preliminary Lemmas                                                                           21

     H Proof of Theorem 1                                                                           24

     I   Key Lemmas                                                                                 26
         I.1 Error Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      26
         I.2 Descent Direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    26
         I.3 Gradient Heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
         I.4 Client Drift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
         I.5 Gradient Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    29
         I.6 Mixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
         I.7 Backtracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33
         I.8 Gradient Variance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    35

     J   Proof of Theorem 2                                                                         38

     K Proof of Corrolaries 2.1 and 2.2                                                             41

     L Constant Dependencies                                                                        42

     M Tabular FedSARSA                                                                             44


                                                    13
        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         A       O RGANIZATION OF A PPENDIX
        The appendix is organized as follows. First, we present an additional comparison of our results
        with other finite-time results in Appendix B, and additional simulation results in Appendix C. In
        Appendices D and E, we introduce the concept of central MDP and some notation that will assist
        our analysis. In Appendix F, to aid readability, we list all the constants that appear in the paper
        for readers’ convenience. In Appendix G, we provide several preliminary lemmas that will be used
        throughout the analysis. Before presenting lemmas for Theorem 2, we first prove Theorem 1 in Ap-
        pendix H, for it will be used by later lemmas. In Appendix I, we first decompose the mean squared
        error and then present seven lemmas, each bounding one term in the decomposition. Then, we
        provide the proof of Theorem 2 and Corollaries 2.1 and 2.2 in Appendix J and Appendix K, respec-
        tively. To provide insights into our results, we discuss the dependencies of constants in Appendix L.
        Finally, we reduce FedSARSA to the tabular case in Appendix M, demonstrating the flexibility and
        efficiency of our algorithm.

         B       F INITE -T IME R ESULTS C OMPARISON
        A comparison of finite-time results on temporal difference methods is provided in Table 2.

        Table 2: Comparison of finite-time results. Results with green background are first provided by our
        work; results with blue background are covered by our work. “Linear” indicates the usage of linear
        function approximation, and “Hetero” indicates the presence of environmental heterogeneity. All
        constants are defined in Section 5 and Appendix I. We show the squared ℓ2 error for linear settings
        and squared ℓ∞ error for tabular settings. Asymptotic notations are omitted for simplicity.

                                                      Federated                                              Single-Agent
                                 Linear                                       Tabular
                           Hetero           Homog                    Hetero                 Homog        Linear       Tabular
                       2           2            2                               2             2             2
               H            Λ   †    H       ‡      SA             Λ     **      S        ‡   H      ¶      SA     **
TD Learning (1−γ) 2 N T + (1−γ)   (1−γ)2 N T   λ2 (1−γ)4 N T + λ2 (1−γ)2    λ5 (1−γ)9 N T   (1−γ)2 T   λ2 (1−γ)4 T
                                              H2      ‡       1           Λ2   §             S2       ‡   H2     ¶      SA     ||
Q-Learning                   –             (1−γ)2 N T      (1−γ)6 T 2 + (1−γ)4          λ5 (1−γ)9 N T   (1−γ)2 T     λ(1−γ)5 T
                    H2          Λ2   *    H2      *      SA             Λ2    **      SA       **   H2     #      SA     **
  SARSA          (1−γ)2 N T + (1−γ)2   (1−γ)2 N T   λ2 (1−γ)4 N T + λ2 (1−γ)2    λ2 (1−γ)4 N T    (1−γ)2 T   λ2 (1−γ)4 T
          †                         ‡                            §                     ¶
               (Wang et al., 2023a)   (Khodadadian et al., 2022)   (Jin et al., 2022)    (Bhandari et al., 2018)
          ||                                 #                           *                    **
               (Qu & Wierman, 2020)            (Zou et al., 2019)          Corollary 2.2         Appendix M


         C       A DDITIONAL S IMULATIONS
         C.1       A DDITIONAL S IMULATIONS FOR F ED SARSA

        We first restate the simulation setup in more detail. We index a finite state space by S = [100] and
        an action space by A = [100], where the actions determine the transition matrices by shifting the
        columns of a reference matrix P0 :
                                           Pa = circ shift(P0 , columns = a),
        where circ shift denotes a circular shift operator. We construct the feature extractor as
                                          ϕ(s, a) = e(s mod d1 )·d2 +a mod d2 ∈ Rd1 ×d2 ,
        where ei is the indicator vector with the i-th entry being 1 and the rest being 0. We set d1 = 5 and
        d2 = 5. For the policy improvement operator, we employ the softmax function with a temperature
        of 100:
                                                      exp(θT ϕ(s, a)/100)
                                      πθ (a|s) = P              T      ′
                                                                                .
                                                    a′ ∈A exp(θ ϕ(s, a )/100)
        Other parameters are set as follows: the reward cap R = 10, the discount factor γ = 0.2, the
        synchronization period K = 10, and the step-size α0 = 0.01.


                                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To construct heterogeneous MDPs, we first generate a nominal MDP M1 and obtain the remaining
MDPs by adding the perturbations to M1 . Unlike in FedTD (Wang et al., 2023a), where the optimal
parameters can be obtained by solving the linear projected Bellman equation directly, here we get
                       (1)
a reference parameter θref by running a single-agent linear SARSA on M1 with decaying step-
size. As suggested in Corollary 2.2, the reference parameter converges to the optimal parameter
corresponding to M1 . Then, we calculate the mean squared error with respect to the reference
                         2
                   (1)
parameter: θ̄t − θref . All of our simulations are averaged over ten runs and all graphs are plotted
                      2
with 95% confidence region.
In Figure 1, both kernel heterogeneity and reward heterogeneity are set at the same level. In Fig-
ure 2, we fix the kernel heterogeneity as 1.0 and vary the reward heterogeneity. In contrast, we fix
the reward heterogeneity as zero and vary the kernel heterogeneity in Figure 3. Again, these results
affirm the robustness of our method towards environmental heterogeneity. Furthermore, they seem-
ingly suggest that the algorithm is more sensitive to reward heterogeneity than kernel heterogeneity.
However, it is important to note that ϵp and ϵr represent upper bounds and may be much larger than
the actual heterogeneity level.
Further exploring the effect of heterogeneity on federated collaboration, Figures 4 and 5 illustrate
the effect of different reward and kernel heterogeneity levels on the performance of FedSARSA
respectively. Generally, higher levels of heterogeneity result in larger mean squared error, which
aligns with our theoretical results in Section 5.


           (a) ϵr = 0                        (b) ϵr = 0.1                       (c) ϵr = 0.2


          (d) ϵr = 0.5                        (e) ϵr = 1                         (f) ϵr = 2

Figure 2: Performance of FedSARSA under Markovian sampling for varying reward heterogeneity
and numbers of agents with fixed kernel heterogeneity (ϵp = 1).


C.2   S IMULATIONS FOR F EDERATED TD(0)

As discussed in Section 4, FedSARSA reduces to federated TD(0) (Wang et al., 2023a) when
the policy improvement operator maps any parameter to a fixed policy π. This corresponds to a
fixed transition kernel. Therefore, we conduct simulations for federated TD(0) to demonstrate the
adaptability of FedSARSA. We inherit the simulation setup from the previous subsection (Ap-
pendix C.1), which matches the setup in Wang et al. (2023a). We fix the behavior policy by fix the
transition matrix as the reference matrix P0 . The results are presented in Figure 6, which are similar
to the results in Section 6, again validating our theoretical results.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a) ϵp = 0                      (b) ϵp = 0.1                      (c) ϵp = 0.2


          (d) ϵp = 0.5                      (e) ϵp = 1                        (f) ϵp = 2

Figure 3: Performance of FedSARSA under Markovian sampling for varying kernel heterogeneity
and numbers of agents with fixed reward heterogeneity (ϵr = 1).


      (a) N = 5, ϵp = 1.0              (b) N = 10, ϵp = 1.0              (c) N = 20, ϵp = 1.0


      (d) N = 5, ϵp = 2.0              (e) N = 10, ϵp = 2.0              (f) N = 20, ϵp = 2.0

         Figure 4: Effect of the reward heterogeneity on the performance of FedSARSA.



C.3   S IMULATIONS FOR O N -P OLICY F EDERATED Q-L EARNING

When equipped with a greedy policy improvement operator, FedSARSA reduces to on-policy fed-
erated Q-Learning. Specifically, we employ the greedy policy improvement operator:

                             πθ (a|s) = 1{a = argmax θT ϕ(s, a′ )},
                                                 a′ ∈A


where 1 is the indicator function. For the other part of the simulation setup, we inherit the setup
from the previous subsection (Appendix C.1). The results are presented in Figure 7, which resemble
the results in Section 6 and Appendix C.2.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) N = 5, ϵr = 1.0               (b) N = 10, ϵp = 1.0                  (c) ϵp = 0.2


      (d) N = 20, ϵr = 1.0              (e) N = 5, ϵr = 2.0               (f) N = 10, ϵr = 2.0

         Figure 5: Effect of the kernel heterogeneity on the performance of FedSARSA.


         (a) ϵp = ϵr = 0                 (b) ϵp = ϵr = 0.1                 (c) ϵp = ϵr = 0.2


        (d) ϵp = ϵr = 0.5                 (e) ϵp = ϵr = 1                   (f) ϵp = ϵr = 2

Figure 6: Performance of FedSARSA with a fixed-point policy improvement operator, covering
federated TD(0).



D    C ENTRAL MDP

                                                                   PN
To facilitate our analysis, we introduce a virtual MDP: M̄ := N1 i=1 M(i) . Specifically, M̄ =
                                 PN                 PN
(S, A, r̄, P̄ , γ), where r̄ = N1 i=1 r(i) , P̄ = N1 i=1 P (i) . We refer to this virtual MDP as the
central MDP. The following proposition shows that M̄ is indistinguishable from the collection of
actual MDPs and also satisfies Assumption 1.

Proposition 1. If MDPs {M(i) } are ergodic (aperiodic and irreducible) under a fixed policy π, the
central MDP M̄ is also ergodic under π.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) ϵp = ϵr = 0                  (b) ϵp = ϵr = 0.1                 (c) ϵp = ϵr = 0.2


        (d) ϵp = ϵr = 0.5                  (e) ϵp = ϵr = 1                   (f) ϵp = ϵr = 2

Figure 7: Performance of FedSARSA with a greedy policy improvement operator, covering on-
policy federated Q-learning.


Proof. Suppose π is given. We first show that M is also aperiodic. If not, by the definition of
aperiodicity (Meyn & Tweedie, 2012, Page 121), there exists s ∈ S such that
                                ¯ := gcd{n : P̄ n (s, s) > 0} > 1,
                                d(s)

where gcd returns the greatest common divisor and we omit the subscript π of P̄π since we consider
                                                                        ¯
a fixed policy. The above inequality indicates that, for any n ∈ N \ {k d(s)}k∈N , it holds that

                                   N
                                           ! n
                                1 X (i)                    1        n
                   n
             0 = P̄ (s, s) =           P       (s, s) ≥ n P (i) (s, s), ∀i ∈ [N ].               (6)
                               N i=1                      N

Now since M(i) is aperiodic, d(i) (s) := gcd{n : (P (i) )n (s, s) > 0} = 1. Thus there exists
               ¯
n ∈ N \ {k d(s)}    k∈N such that (P
                                       (i) n                                 ¯
                                          ) (s, s) > 0 (otherwise d(i) (s) ≥ d(s)), which contradicts
                                         ¯
to (6). Therefore, we conclude that d(s) = 1 for any s ∈ S, and thus M̄ is aperiodic. We now
show that M̄ is irreducible given {M(i) } are irreducible (Meyn & Tweedie, 2012, Page 93). For
any A ⊂ B(S) with positive measure, where B(S) is the Borel σ-field on S, we have min{n :
(P (i) )n (s, A) > 0} < +∞ for any s ∈ S and i ∈ [N ]. Then again by (6), we get
                                                                   n
                                                          1
              min{n : P̄ n (s, A) > 0} ≤ min min n : n P (i) (s, A) > 0 < +∞.
                                          i∈[N ]         N

Therefore, M̄ is irreducible.


When the state-action space is finite, Proposition 1 covers Wang et al. (2023a, Proposition 1).
By Proposition 1, we can confidently regard M̄ as the MDP of a virtual agent, which does not
exhibit any distinctive properties in comparison to the actual agents. Therefore, we denote M(0) :=
M̄ and define the extended number set [N̄ ] := [N ] ∪ {0} = {0, 1, . . . , N }. When we drop the
superscript (i), it should be clear from the context if we are talking about the central MDP M̄ or
an arbitrary MDP M(i) . Clearly, the extended MDP set {M(i) }i∈[N̄ ] still satisfies Assumption 1
and Definitions 1 and 2, and thus Theorem 1. Now we can specify the special parameter θ∗ in
Theorem 2: it is the unique solution to (3) for M̄. In other words, Theorem 2 asserts that the
algorithm converges to the central optimal parameter.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    N OTATION
Before presenting lemmas and proofs of our main theorems, we introduce some notation that will
aid in our analysis. We introduce a notation for the unprojected central parameter:
                                     N
                               1 X   (i)      (i)

                  θ̆t+1 =            θt + αt gt ,                       when t + 1 ≡ 0               (mod K).
                               N i=1
       (i)
Then, θt+1 = θ̄t+1 = ΠḠ (θ̆t+1 ) when t+1 ≡ 0 (mod K). It’s easy to verify that for any ∥θ∥ ≤ Ḡ,
we have
                                       ∥θ̄t − θ∥ ≤ ∥θ̆t − θ∥.                                  (7)

Then we define some notations on the MDPs. Note that all these definitions apply to the extended
MDP set {M(i) }i∈[N̄ ] that includes the central MDP.
Definition 3 (Steady distributions). Assumption 1 guarantees the existence of a steady state distri-
                                                  (i)
bution for any MDP and policy π. We denote ηθ as the steady state distribution with respect to
         (i)
MDP M and policy πθ , i.e.,
                                         (i)
                                     ηθ (s) := lim Pπ(i)
                                                      θ
                                                         (St = s|S0 = s0 ).
                                                      t→∞

Additionally, given a policy πθ , the steady state-action distribution is defined as
                                                (i)               (i)
                                               µθ (s, a) := ηθ (s) · πθ (a|s).
Then, the two-step steady distribution is defined as
                               (i)                          (i)
                            φθ (s, a, s′ , a′ ) := µθ (s, a)Pa(i) (s, s′ )πθ (a′ |s′ ).
                         (i)
For a local parameter θt , we simplify the above notations as follows:
                                (i)   (i)               (i)   (i)                   (i)   (i)
                               ηt := η (i) ,           µt := µ (i) ,               φt := φ (i) .
                                                θt                      θt                      θt


We are now ready to provide the precise definitions of the semi-gradients discussed in Section 5.
Definition 4 (Semi-gradients). As indicated by (4), a semi-gradient is a function of both the param-
eter θ and the observation tuple O = (s, a, s′ , a′ ), while the observation tuple is dependent on the
local Markovian trajectory. Therefore, the general form of a semi-gradient is

    (i)       (i)
   gt−τ θ; Ot        := ϕ s(i)  (i)
                           t , at
                                              (i) (i)             (i)  (i)              (i) (i)
                                        r(i) st , at + γϕT st+1 , at+1 θ − ϕT st , at θ ,

         (i)        (i) (i) (i)     (i)
where Ot = st , at , st+1 , at+1 is the observation of agent i at time step t, and the subscript
t−τ indicates that the trajectory after time step t−τ follows a fixed policy πθ(i) , i.e.,
                                                                                                         t−τ

                                           (i)    (i)               (i)
                                          at−τ , at−τ +1 , . . . , at+1 ∼ πθ(i)             .
                                                                                      t−τ

When τ = 0, the semi-gradient corresponds to an actual SARSA trajectory, and we omit the sub-
script and the observation argument, i.e.,

                                                   (i)   (i)
                                     g (i) (θ) := gt θ; Ot .

When τ > 0, the semi-gradient corresponds a virtual trajectory, and we use Õt in place of Ot to
indicate it is a virtual observation at the current time step.
We add a bar to denote the mean-path semi-gradients, i.e.,
                     h           i          h                                               i
    (i)                 (i)
  ḡt−τ (θ) := Eφ(i) gt−τ (θ, O) = Eφ(i) ϕ(s, a)(r(i) (s, a) + γϕT (s′ , a′ )θ − ϕT (s, a)θ) ,
                   t−τ                                t−τ

where the expectation is taken over the two-step observation steady distribution:
                                                                             (i)      (i)
                                         O = (s, a, s′ , a′ ) ∼ φt−τ := φ (i) .
                                                                                      θt−τ



                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For mean-path semi-gradients, the randomness of the observation is eliminated, and the parameter θ
is the only argument, and we can substitute the subscript t−τ with a general parameter θ′ ; then we
define                           h                                                   i
                  (i)
                ḡθ′ (θ) := Eφ(i) ϕ(s, a)(r(i) (s, a) + γϕT (s′ , a′ )θ − ϕT (s, a)θ) .
                                θ′


We omit the superscript (i) when referring to the central MDP M̄. For instance,
               ḡt−τ (θ) := Eφt−τ ϕ(s, a)(r̄(s, a) + γϕT (s′ , a′ )θ − ϕT (s, a)θ) .



Finally, for notational simplicity, we use bold symbols to denote the average semi-gradients, e.g.,
                                                           N
                                                     1 X (i)   (i)
                                     gt−τ (θt ) =         g    θ     .
                                                     N i=1 t−τ t

The above notations will be used in combination, e.g.,
                                        N                 N
                                     1 X (i)   (i)     1 X (i)   (i)
                         ḡ(θt ) =         ḡ θt     =      ḡ  θt .
                                     N i=1             N i=1 t

We can further decompose semi-gradients into TD operators.

                                              (i)     (i)
Definition 5 (TD operators). A semi-gradient gt−τ θ, Ot     can be decomposed into the following
two two operators:
                          (i)          (i)          (i)        (i)       (i)   (i)
                         gt−τ θ, Ot              = At−τ Ot           θ + bt−τ Ot     .
where

     (i)      (i)        (i) (i)          (i)   (i)      (i) (i)
 At−τ Ot
                   = ϕ st , at    γϕT st+1 , at+1 − ϕT st , at     ,
                                                                                          (i)   (i)
                                                                                         at , at+1 ∼ πθ(i) .
 b(i) O(i)
                        (i) (i)       (i) (i)
                    = ϕ st , at r(i) st , at ,
                                                                                                         t−τ
    t−τ     t

Similar to Definition 4, we can define other TD operators for each semi-gradient, e.g., the mean-path
TD operators:                        
                                      Ā(i)
                                         θ    = Eφ(i) [A(i) (O)],
                                                           θ

                                        b̄(i)      = Eµ(i) [b(i) (O)].
                                             θ             θ


We summarize the notations defined in this section and other notations used in our analysis in Ta-
ble 3.

F    C ONSTANTS

We first introduce two important constants that serve as base constants throughout the paper. The
first one is the upper bound of the norm of the central parameter, denoted by G ≥ ∥θ̄∥. For this
                                                                                                (i)
bound to hold, we require the projection radius Ḡ to be large enough such that θ∗                    ≤ Ḡ for
i ∈ [N̄ ]. The explicit expression for G will be given in Corollary I.5.3. Then, we define
                                             H = R + (1 + γ)G.                                             (8)
The constant H can be viewed as the scale of the problem, analogous to |S||A| for the tabular
setting that will be discussed in Appendix M. For local parameters, we define a similar function
h(θ) := R + (1 + γ)∥θ∥.
We summarized the constants that appear in our analysis in Table 4. Notice that τ, α0 , and αt in
Table 4 refer to the constants in the case with a linearly decaying step-size. For the case with a
constant size, these constants are fixed and specified in Corollary 2.1.


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Table 3: Notation

         Notation             Definition
         [N ], [N̄ ]          The set of N numbers and the set of N + 1 numbers including 0
        M(i) , M̄             Markov decision processes
         S, A, Θ              State space, action space, and parameter space
     r(i) , r̄, P (i) , P̄    Reward functions and transition kernels
      (i)       (i)     (i)
     St , Ut , Ot             Agent i’s state, action, and observation random variable at time step t
           s, a, o            Instances of the state, action, and observation
             π, Γ             A policy and the policy improvement operator
          ∥ · ∥TV             Total variation distance and its induced norm for transition kernels
             q, Q             True Q-value function and estimated Q-value function
             ϕ, θ             Feature map and feature weight (parameter)
         Ππ , ΠḠ             Orthogonal projection operator
              Tπ              Bellman operator
           (i) (i)
         π∗ , θ∗              Optimal policies and optimal parameters
       (i)     (i)     (i)
     ηθ , µθ , φθ             Steady distributions
               g              Semi-gradient
          A, b, Z             Temporal difference operators
               h              h(θ) := R + (1 + γ)∥θ∥
           Ωt , ωt            Client drift
              Ft              Filtration containing all randomness prior to time step t


G    P RELIMINARY L EMMAS

In this section, we present two preliminary lemmas that will be used throughout the analysis.
Lemma G.1 (Steady distribution differences). For the same MDP, the TV distance between the
steady distributions with regard to two different policies is bounded as follows:
                                   ∥ηθ1 − ηθ2 ∥TV ≤ Lσ ′ ∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 ,
                                  ∥µθ1 − µθ2 ∥TV ≤ L(1 + σ ′ ) ∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 ,
                                  ∥φθ1 − φθ2 ∥TV ≤ L(2 + σ) ∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 ,
where L is the Lipschitz constant of the policy improvement operator specified in Assumption 2 and
σ ′ is a constant determined by m and ρ specified in Assumption 1. Letting σ := σ ′ + 2, all three
TV distances above are bounded by Lσ∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 . Next, for a fixed parameter θ, the TV distance
between the steady distributions with regard to two MDPs is bounded as follows:
                                            (i)      (j)
                                           ηθ − ηθ              ≤ σ ′ ϵp ,
                                                           TV
                                            (i)      (j)
                                           µθ − µθ              ≤ σ ′ ϵp ,
                                                           TV
                                            (i)      (j)
                                           φθ − φθ              ≤ (σ ′ + 1)ϵp .
                                                           TV

By the above inequalities, for different MDPs and different parameters, we have
                                  (i)       (j)
                                 µθ(i) − µθ(j)         ≤ σ ′ ϵp + Lσ∥θ(i) − θ(j) ∥2 .
                                                  TV


Proof. For the same MDP, by (Mitrophanov, 2005, Corollary 3.1), we get
                                     ∥ηθ1 − ηθ2 ∥TV ≤ σ ′ ∥Pθ1 − Pθ2 ∥TV ,


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Table 4: Constants

    Notation    Meaning                                 Reference                     Range or Order
       N        Number of agents                        Section 3.2                            N
       R        Reward cap                              Section 3.2                        (0, +∞)
      S, A      Measures of the state space             Section 3.2                        (0, +∞]
                and action space
      γ         Discount factor                         Section 3.2                          (0, 1)
     mi , m     Markov chain mixing constant            Assumption 1                       [1, +∞)
                                                        and Lemma G.1
      ρi , ρ    Markov chain mixing rate                Assumption 1                        (0, 1)
                                                        and Lemma G.1
      σ, σ ′    Steady distribution perturba-           Lemma G.1                   O(log m/(1 − ρ))
                tion constant
        Ḡ      Algorithm projection radius             Algorithm 1                      (0, +∞)
        G       Parameter norm upper bound              Corollary I.5.3                 O(Ḡ + R)
        H       Problem scale                           Equation (8)                    O(Ḡ + R)
        L       Lipschitz constant for the pol-         Assumption 2                   [0, w/(Hσ)]
                icy improvement operator
        K       Local update period                     Section 4                             N
      ϵp , ϵr   Environmental heterogeneity             Definitions 1 and 2                 [0, 2]
                ratio
       Λ        Environmental heterogeneity             Theorem 1                      O(H(ϵp + ϵr ))
     λ(i) , λ   Exploration constant                    Equation (18)                       (0, 1)
     wi , w     Convergence constant                    Equation (19)                [(1 − γ)λ/2, 1/2)
       τ        Backtracking period                     Lemma I.1                         O(log T )
       α0       Initial step-size                       Section 4                 (0, min{1/8K, w/64}]
       αt       General step-size                       Section 4                          O(1/t)
     Cdrift     Client drift constant                   Lemma I.4                         O(KH)
     Cprog      Parameter progress constant             Lemma I.5                          O(Hτ )
     Cback      Backtracking constant                   Lemma I.7                         O(τ 2 w)
      Cvar      Gradient variance constant              Lemma I.8                       O(H 2 w2 τ 4 ))
       β        Young’s inequality constant             Appendix J                        (0, w/7)
     Hdrift     Another drift constant                  Appendix J                         O(H)
      Cα        Step-size constant                      Appendix J                          O(1)
      C1        First-order constant                    Equation (50)                  O((1 − γ)−1 )
      C2        Second-order constant                   Equation (50)                     O(H 2 τ )
      C3        Third-order constant                    Equation (50)                    O(H 2 wτ 4 )
      C4        Fourth-order constant                   Equation (50)                   O(H 2 w2 τ 5 )
       B        Square of the convergence re-           Corollary 2.1                 see Corollary 2.1
                gion radius for constant step-
                size



where Pθ (s, s′ ) =       Pa (s, s′ )πθ (a|s)da, and
                      R
                      A
                                                                     Z
                 ∥Pθ ∥TV =        sup      ∥qPθ ∥TV =       sup          q(s)Pθ (s, ·)ds        .
                                ∥q∥TV =1                ∥q∥TV =1     S                     TV


And the constant σ ′ is defined by
                                                            mρn̂
                                              σ ′ = n̂ +         ,                                        (9)
                                                            1−ρ

where n̂ = logρ m−1 , m := maxi∈[N ] mi , and ρ := maxi∈[N ] ρi with mi , ρi specified in As-


sumption 1. Note that in the above inequalities, we actually should use σi′ defined by mi and ρi ; but
σi′ is bounded by σ ′ for all i ∈ [N ], so we use this possibly looser bound for notational simplicity.


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, by Assumption 2, we have
                             Z Z
   ∥Pθ1 − Pθ2 ∥TV = sup          q(s)(Pθ1 (s, s′ ) − Pθ2 (s, s′ ))ds′ ds
                             ∥q∥TV =1      S     S
                                           Z   Z
                         =     sup                       q(s)(Pa (s, s′ )πθ1 (a|s) − Pa (s, s′ )πθ2 (a|s))dads′ ds
                             ∥q∥TV =1      S     S×A
                                           Z
                         ≤     sup                    |q(s)| Pa (s, s′ ) |πθ1 (a|s) − πθ2 (a|s)| dads′ ds
                             ∥q∥TV =1      S 2 ×A
                                           Z
                         =     sup                   |q(s)| |πθ1 (a|s) − πθ2 (a|s)| dads
                             ∥q∥TV =1      S×A
                                           Z
                         =     sup             |q(s)| ∥πθ1 (·|s) − πθ2 (·|s)∥TV ds
                             ∥q∥TV =1      S
                                                              Z
                         ≤ L∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2               sup          |q(s)| ds
                                                ∥q∥TV =1      S

                         = L∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 .
Therefore, we get
                                   ∥ηθ1 − ηθ2 ∥TV ≤ Lσ ′ ∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 .
Next, for the state-action distribution, we have
                    Z
∥µθ1 − µθ2 ∥TV =           |ηθ1 (s)πθ1 (a|s) − ηθ2 (s)πθ2 (a|s)| dsda
                      S×A
                    Z                                              Z
                  ≤        ηθ1 (s) |πθ1 (a|s) − πθ2 (a|s)| dsda +      |ηθ1 (s) − ηθ2 (s)| πθ2 (a|s)dads
                         S×A                                                             S×A
                    ≤ L∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 + ∥ηθ1 − ηθ2 ∥TV
                    ≤ L(1 + σ ′ )∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 .
Similarly, we have
                                     ∥φθ1 − φθ2 ∥TV ≤ L(2 + σ ′ )∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 .
Also by (Mitrophanov, 2005, Corollary 3.1), we get
                                    (i)        (j)                      (i)        (j)
                                   ηθ − ηθ                  ≤ σ ′ ∥Pθ − Pθ ∥TV ≤ σ ′ ϵp ,
                                                      TV
where ϵp is defined in Definition 1. Then, for the state-action distribution, we have
                   (i)       (j)                (i)               (j)                    (i)   (j)
                µθ − µθ                 = ηθ · πθ − ηθ · πθ                        = ηθ − ηθ              ≤ σ ′ ϵp .
                                   TV                                         TV                     TV
And similarly, we have
     (i)     (j)
   φθ − φθ
               TV
  Z
          (i)                                           (j)
=        µθ (s, a)πθ (a|s)Pa(i) (s, s′ )πθ (a′ |s′ ) − µθ (s, a)πθ (a|s)Pa(j) (s, s′ )πθ (a′ |s′ ) dsds′ dada′
    2  2
  ZS ×A
          (i)                                           (j)
≤        µθ (s, a)πθ (a|s)Pa(i) (s, s′ )πθ (a′ |s′ ) − µθ (s, a)πθ (a|s)Pa(i) (s, s′ )πθ (a′ |s′ ) dsds′ dada′
    2
   S ×A2
    Z
              (j)                                           (j)
  +        µθ (s, a)πθ (a|s)Pa(i) (s, s′ )πθ (a′ |s′ ) − µθ (s, a)πθ (a|s)Pa(j) (s, s′ )πθ (a′ |s′ ) dsds′ dada′
      S 2 ×A2
     (i)  (j)
≤   µθ − µθ              + ∥P (i) − P (j) ∥TV
                   TV
≤(σ ′ + 1)ϵp ≤ σϵp

Finally, by the triangle inequality, we get
                                     (i)         (j)
                                   µθ(i) − µθ(j)              ≤ σ ′ ϵp + Lσ∥θ(i) − θ(j) ∥2 .
                                                         TV


                                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly, we can bound the differences between TD operators defined in Definition 5.
Lemma G.2 (TD operator differences). For the same MDP, the difference between the mean-path
TD operators with regard to different parameters is bounded as follows:
                          (
                               Āθ1 − Āθ2   ≤ (1 + γ)Lσ ∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 ,
                                       b̄θ1 − b̄θ2          ≤ RLσ ∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 .
Next, for a fixed parameter θ, the difference between the mean-path TD operators with regard to
different MDPs is bounded as follows:
                               
                                Āθ(i) − Ā(j)
                               
                                             θ     ≤ (1 + γ)σϵp ,

                                        b̄(i)
                                                (j)
                                           θ − b̄θ                 ≤ R(ϵr + σϵp ).
Then, by the triangle inequality, we get
                   
                    Ā(i)         (j)
                   
                         θ (i)
                               − Āθ(j)  ≤ (1 + γ)σ L θ(i) − θ(j) 2 + ϵp ,

                     b̄(i)
                                 (j)
                              − b̄θ(j)               ≤ R(ϵr + σϵp ) + RLσ θ(i) − θ(j) 2 .
                        θ (i)


Proof. For the same MDP, by Definition 5, we have
                  Z
 Āθ1 − Āθ2 =          ϕ(s, a)(γϕT (s′ , a′ ) − ϕT (a, s))(dφθ1 (s, a, s′ , a′ ) − dφθ2 (s, a, s′ , a′ ))
                     S 2 ×A2
                ≤(1 + γ) ∥φθ1 − φθ2 ∥TV
                ≤(1 + γ)Lσ ∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 ,
where the last inequality comes from Lemma G.1. Similarly, we have
                                  Z
                   b̄θ1 − b̄θ2 =       ϕ(s, a)r(s, a)(dµθ1 (s, a) − dµθ2 (s, a))
                                            S×A
                                      ≤R ∥µθ1 − µθ2 ∥TV
                                      ≤RLσ ∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 .

Then for the same parameter θ, we have
                  Z
   (i)    (j)                                                   (i)                    (j)
 Āθ − Āθ =              ϕ(s, a)(γϕT (s′ , a′ ) − ϕT (a, s))(dφθ (s, a, s′ , a′ ) − dφθ (s, a, s′ , a′ ))
                      S 2 ×A2
                                 (i)        (j)
                ≤(1 + γ) φθ − φθ
                                                    TV
                ≤(1 + γ)σϵp ,
where the last inequality comes from Lemma G.1. Similarly, we have
                  Z
   (i)   (j)                                     (i)                   (j)
 b̄θ − b̄θ =             ϕ(s, a) r(i) (s, a)dµθ (s, a) − r(j) (s, a)dµθ (s, a)
                 Z S×A                                         Z
                                                     (i)                           (i)          (j)
              ≤         r(i) (s, a) − r(j) (s, a) dµθ (s, a) +       r(j) (s, a) dµθ (s, a) − dµθ (s, a)
                  S×A                                                       S×A
              ≤Rϵr + Rσ ′ ϵp ,
where the last inequality comes from Definition 2 and Lemma G.1.

H    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Theorem 1. For any i, j ∈ [N̄ ], we have
                                (j)       (i)            1                  Λ(ϵp , ϵr )
                            θ∗ − θ∗                 ≤       (Rϵr + Hσϵp ) ≤             ,
                                                2        wj                    w
where w := mini∈[N̄ ] wi ; wi is defined in Lemma I.2 and Λ(ϵp , ϵr ) is defined in Lemma I.3.


                                                              24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. First, we formulate the Bellman optimal equation in terms of TD operators defined in Defi-
nition 5:
                                        (i) (i)   (i)
                                      Ā∗ θ∗ + b̄∗ = 0,
for any i ∈ [N̄ ], where
                                               (i)    (i)                 (i)    (i)
                                             Ā∗ := Ā (i) ,            b̄∗ := b̄ (i) .
                                                             θ∗                     θ∗

Then for any i, j ∈ [N̄ ], we have

                            (j)    (i)   (i) (j)   (j) (i)   (i) (j)
                          Ā∗ − Ā∗ θ∗ + Ā∗ θ∗ − θ∗ = b̄∗ − b̄∗ .

                                                                (j)                           (j)
By Tsitsiklis & Van Roy (1996, Theorem 2), Ā∗ is negative definite Therefore, Ā∗ is non-singular,
and we get
                                        −1
                 (j)   (i)         (j)          (i)     (j)   (i)     (i)    (j)
                θ∗ − θ∗     ≤ Ā∗             Ā∗ − Ā∗ θ∗ + b̄∗ − b̄∗              .
                             2                                                                  2

And we have
                                                    −1
                                             (j)              −1      (j)
                                           Ā∗              =σmin   Ā∗                             (10)
                                                                    1
                                                            =                                       (11)
                                                                       (j)
                                                                λmax Ā∗
                                                                            1
                                                            ≤                                       (12)
                                                                         (j)
                                                                −ℜλmax Ā∗
                                                                                1
                                                            ≤                                       (13)
                                                                            (j)
                                                                −λmax sym Ā∗
                                                                 1
                                                            =       ,                               (14)
                                                                2wj
where (10) uses the spectrum norm equality and σmin returns the smallest singular value of a matrix;
                                    (j)
(11) and (12) use the fact that Ā∗ is negative definite; (13) is by (Zhang, 2011, Theorem 10.28);
and lastly, (14) is the definition of wj (see Lemma I.2).
                                                                      (i)
Therefore, letting G be large enough to contain {θ∗ }i∈[N̄ ] , we get

                      (j)     (i)      1   (i)        (j)            (i) (j)

                     θ∗ − θ∗        ≤        A∗ − A∗ G + b∗ − b∗               .
                                  2   2wj
By Lemma G.2, we get
  (j)  (i)      1
                                       (i)   (j)

                                                                            (i)  (j)

 θ∗ − θ∗     ≤       (1 + γ)σG ϵp + L θ∗ − θ∗         + R(ϵr + σϵp ) + RLσ θ∗ − θ∗
           2   2wj                                2                                  2
                1                        (i)   (j)

             ≤       Rϵr + Hσϵp + LHσ θ∗ − θ∗           .
               2wj                                  2

We require that LHσ ≤ wj (the same restriction (20) in Lemma I.2); then we get
                      (j)        (i)               1                  wj   (i)  (j)
                     θ∗ − θ∗                ≤         (Rϵr + Hσϵp ) +     θ∗ − θ∗     ,
                                       2          2wj                 2wj           2

which gives
                            (j)             (i)            1                  Λ(ϵp , ϵr )
                            θ∗ − θ∗                    ≤      (Rϵr + Hσϵp ) ≤             ,
                                                   2       wj                    w
where w := mini∈[N̄ ] wi and Λ(ϵp , ϵr ) := Rϵr + Hσϵp (the same definition in Lemma I.3).



                                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I     K EY L EMMAS

In this section, we first decompose the mean squared error and then present seven lemmas, each
bounding one term in the decomposition.

I.1   E RROR D ECOMPOSITION

Lemma I.1 (Error decomposition). The one-step mean squared error can be decomposed recur-
sively as follows:
                    2                      2            2
    E θ̄t+1 − θ∗    ≤ E θ̆t+1 − θ∗ = E θ̄t − θ∗

      + 2αt E θ̄t − θ∗ , ḡ θ̄t − ḡ (θ∗ )                            (descent direction)
             N
        2αt X D                                    E
                 E θ̄t − θ∗ , ḡ (i) θ̄t − ḡ θ̄t

      +                                                               (gradient heterogeneity)
         N i=1
                N
          2αt X D
                                      (i)                E
      +          E θ̄t − θ∗ , ḡ (i) θt   − ḡ (i) θ̄t                (client drift)
           N i=1
                N
          2αt X D               (i)

                                     (i)
                                                    E
                                                   (i)
      +          E θ̄t − θ∗ , ḡt−τ θt   − ḡ (i) θt                  (gradient progress)
           N i=1
                N
          2αt X D              (i)

                                     (i)  (i)

                                                    (i)
                                                           E
                                                         (i)
      +          E θ̄t − θ∗ , gt−τ θt , Õt     − ḡt−τ θt            (mixing)
           N i=1
                N
          2αt X D              (i)

                                     (i) (i)

                                                  (i)

                                                        (i)  (i)
                                                                  E
      +          E θ̄t − θ∗ , gt θt , Ot       − gt−τ θt , Õt        (backtracking)
           N i=1
                    N              2
                1 X (i)   (i)
      + αt2 E        g   θt            .                              (gradient variance)
                N i=1 t

One can verify the above decomposition given ḡ(θ∗ ) = 0.

I.2   D ESCENT D IRECTION

Lemma I.2 (Descent direction). There exist positive constants {wi }i∈[N̄ ] such that for any ∥θ∥ ≤ G,
we have
              D                                    E               2
                      (i)                      (i)             (i)
                θ − θ∗ , ḡ (i) (θ) − ḡ (i) (θ∗ ) ≤ −wi θ − θ∗      , ∀i ∈ [N̄ ].


Proof. We drop the subscript (i) in this lemma since the following derivation holds for all MDPs.
We first denote ∆θ = θ − θ∗ . Then, we have
        ⟨θ − θ∗ , ḡ(θ) − ḡ(θ∗ )⟩ =∆θT Āθ θ + b̄θ − Āθ∗ θ∗ + b̄θ∗


                                   =∆θT Āθ∗ ∆θ + ∆θT Āθ − Āθ∗ θ + ∆θT (b̄θ − b̄θ∗ )


                                 ≤∆θT Āθ∗ ∆θ + ∥∆θ∥ Āθ − Āθ∗ ∥θ∥ + ∥∆θ∥ b̄θ − b̄θ∗
                                 ≤∆θT Āθ∗ ∆θ + (1 + γ)Lσ∥θ∥∥∆θ∥2 + RLσ∥∆θ∥2                     (15)
                                           T
                                =∆θ (Āθ∗ + Lσ(R + (1 + γ)∥θ∥)I)∆θ
                                ≤∆θT Āθ∗ + LσH · I ∆θ

                                                                                                 (16)
                                =:∆θT A
                                      eθ ∆θ,
                                               ∗


where (15) uses Lemma G.2, and (16) uses the fact that ∥θ∥ ≤ G and H := R + (1 + γ)G. By
(Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1996, Theorem 2), Āθ∗ is negative definite in the sense that x∗ Ax < 0


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for any vector x ∈ Rd . Specifically, for any nonzero x ∈ Rd , we denote u = xT ϕ(S, A) and
u′ = xT ϕ(S ′ , A′ ). Then, for any x ̸= 0, by Definition 5, we have
                                                      γ
xT Āθ x = Eφθ γuu′ − u2 = γE[uu′ ]−E[u2 ] ≤             E[u2 ] + E[u′2 ] −E[u2 ] = (γ −1)E[u2 ] < 0,

                                                      2
                                                                                                 (17)
                                                                                             (i)
where we use the fact that E[u2 ] = E[u′2 ] under a steady distribution. Let Φθ                    :=
Eµ(i) [ϕ(S, A)ϕT (S, A)] ≻ 0. We define
   θ

                                                (i)
                                λ(i) := λmin Φ (i) , λ := min λ(i) .                             (18)
                                                θ∗                  i∈[N̄ ]

By (17), we have
                         1                    1                   γ−1
                                      (i)                   (i)
              −wi :=       λmax sym Ā (i)   ≤ (γ − 1)λmin Φ (i) =    λ(i) .                      (19)
                         2            θ∗      2             θ∗     2
where sym(A) := 12 (A + A∗ ) maps general matrices to Hermitian matrices. Due to the positive
                   (i)
definiteness of Φ (i) , We know wi > 0 for any i ∈ [N̄ ]. By Zhang (2011, Theorem 10.21) and the
                   θ∗
linearity of the sym function, we know

     λmax sym A      e(i)
                       (i)
                                            (i)
                              ≤ λmax sym Ā (i)    + λmax (sym(LσH · I)) = −2wi + LσH.
                    θ∗                         θ∗

Let w = mini∈[N̄ ] {wi }. Then, we can choose L to be small enough such that
                                                       w
                                               L≤        ,                                        (20)
                                                      σH
which gives
                                      −wi ≥ λmax sym Ae(i)
                                                        (i)    .
                                                               θ∗

Therefore, for any i ∈ [N̄ ], we have
 D                                   E                             2                2
        (i)                      (i)             e(i)          (i)              (i)
  θ − θ∗ , ḡ (i) (θ) − ḡ (i) (θ∗ ) ≤ λmax sym A  (i)    θ − θ∗     ≤ −wi θ − θ∗     .           (21)
                                                          θ∗



Remark 1 (Convergence constant). Equation (21) mirrors the result of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) (Bottou et al., 2018), with w being analogous to the Lipschitz constant of a function’s gradi-
ent. Therefore, similar to SGD, w controls the convergence rate of our algorithm.
Remark 2 (Exploration constant). The value of w depends on λ, a constant that reflects the explo-
ration difficulty of the environment. We can see this by considering a simple tabular setting, where
the feature map ϕ is simply the indicator function (see Appendix M for detailed definitions). Then
Eµ [ϕ(S, A)ϕT (S, A)] reduces to diag{µ(s, a)}(s,a)∈S×A . In this case, the minimal eigenvalue of
Φ is min(s,a)∈S×A µ(s, a), i.e., the probability of visiting the least probable state-action pair under
the steady distribution.
We say an environment is hard to explore if some state-action pairs have a very small probability
of being visited under the steady distribution, then λ is small. Conversely, λ is large when the
environment is easy to explore. Intuitively, an environment that is hard to explore requires more
samples to learn an optimal policy.
In the context of LFA, the value of λ, and consequently w, is determined by the conditions of both
the MDPs and the feature map ϕ. If the environments in the feature space are easy to explore under
the MDPs, λ and w will take on larger values, and the algorithm converges faster.

I.3   G RADIENT H ETEROGENEITY

Lemma I.3 (Gradient heterogeneity). For ∥θ∥ ≤ G, we have
                                       N
                                    1 X (i)
                          ḡ(θ) −         ḡ (θ) ≤ Hσϵp + Rϵr =: Λ(ϵp , ϵr )
                                    N i=1


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Directly applying the decomposition in Definition 5 and Lemma G.2 gives
                            N                               N
                         1 X (i)                         1 X (i)        (i)
                 ḡ(θ) −       ḡ (θ) = (Āθ θ + b̄θ ) −      (Ā θ + b̄θ )
                         N i=1                           N i=1 θ
                                                        N
                                                     1 X           (i)          (i)

                                                 ≤         b̄θ − b̄θ + ∥Āθ − Āθ ∥∥θ∥
                                                     N i=1
                                                 ≤σϵp (R + (1 + γ)∥θ∥) + Rϵr ,



I.4   C LIENT D RIFT

Before bounding the gradient progress, we first bound the client drift.
Lemma I.4 (Client drift). If ∥θ̄t ∥ ≤ G holds for all t ∈ N, then
                       N                        2
                  1 X (i) (i)                                        2 2
                        ḡ (θt ) − ḡ (i) (θ̄t ) ≤ αt−k
                                                    2
                                                        (1 + γ + σLH) Cdrift ,
                  N i=1

where k is the smallest integer such that t − k ≡ 0 (mod K), and
                                                  2
                                                 Cdrift = 4K 2 H 2 .

Proof. Similar to (15) in the proof of Lemma I.2, we have
                        (i)                                                  (i)
               ḡ (i) (θt ) − ḡ (i) (θ̄t ) ≤ 1 + γ + Lσ R + (1 + γ)∥θ̄t ∥   θt − θ̄t                            (22)

Then, since ∥θ̄t ∥ ≤ G, we have
               N                          2                     N          2
            1 X (i) (i)                                   2  1 X (i)
                  ḡ (θt ) − ḡ (i) (θ̄t ) ≤ (1 + γ + σLH) ·       θt − θ̄t .                                    (23)
            N i=1                                            N i=1
                                    2
               PN       (i)
Let Ωt := N1     i=1   θt − θ̄t         . We then need to bound Ωt . First, if t ≡ 0 (mod K), we have
Ωt = 0. Now suppose t ̸≡ 0 (mod K). Let k be the smallest integer such that t − k ≡ 0
(mod K). Then we know that there is no aggregation step between time step t − k and t, and
           PN (i)
θ̄t−l = 1/N i=1 θt−l for 0 ≤ l ≤ k. Therefore, we have

                           2                               k                                                 2
                (i)                  (i)                                      (i)   (i)
                                                           X
               θt − θ̄t        =    θt−k − θ̄t−k +                αt−l       gt−l (θt−l ) − gt−l (θt−l )
                                                            l=1
                                           k                                            2
                                                     (i)     (i)
                                           X
                                   2
                               ≤ kαt−k             gt−l (θt−l ) − gt−l (θt−l )              ,
                                           l=1
                   PN (i) (i)
where gt (θt ) = N1 i=1 gt (θt ), and we choose α to be non-increasing. Since for a random
vector X, Var(X) ≤ E∥X∥2 , we have
                           k   N                                                    2
                   2
                           X 1 X             (i)      (i)
            Ωt ≤ kαt−k                      gt−l (θt−l ) − gt−l (θt−l )
                                   N i=1
                           l=1
                           k   N                              2
                   2
                           X 1 X             (i)      (i)
               ≤ kαt−k                      gt−l (θt−l )
                                   N i=1
                           l=1
                           k    N
                                                                 2                2

                   2
                           X 1 X      (i)   (i)      (i)             (i)
               ≤ kαt−k             2 gt−l (θt−l ) − gt−l (θ̄t−l ) + gt−l (θ̄t−l )
                             N i=1
                           l=1



                                                             28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we also used Jensen’s inequality. By the definition of the Markovian semi-gradients (see
Definition 4), they are linear and Lipschitz continuous with the Lipschitz constant bounded by
   (i)
∥At−l ∥ ≤ 1 + γ. However, it is worth emphasizing that the mean-path semi-gradients are non-linear
and non-Lipschitz continuous (unless ∥θ̄t ∥ is bounded; see (22)). Given the Lipschitz continuity, we
have
                                  k        N                           2

                              2
                                 X    1 X              2    (i)               2
                   Ωt ≤ 2kαt−k                  (1 + γ) θt−l − θ̄t−l + H
                                      N i=1
                                 l=1
                                                      k
                                                                !
                                                      X
                              2        2            2
                       = 2kαt−k kH + (1 + γ)              Ωt−l .                                 (24)
                                                                     l=1

Recursively applying (24) gives
                                          k
                                                        !                                                              k
                                                                                                                                   !
                                          X                                                                            X
       2                2             2                          2
Ωt ≤2kαt−k       kH + (1 + γ)                   Ωt−l        + 2kαt−k (1 + γ)2 · 2(k − 1)αt−k
                                                                                         2             2
                                                                                                    kH + (1 + γ)   2
                                                                                                                             (Ωt−l )
                                          l=2                                                                          l=2
                                                                         k
                                                                                      !
                                                                         X
          2                  2                      2                2

      ≤2kαt−k   1 + 8(k − 1)αt−k                kH + (1 + γ)                   Ωt−l
                                                                         l=2
                k
                Y
          2                         2
                                                    kH 2 + (1 + γ)2 Ωt−k

      ≤2kαt−k          1 + 8(k − j)αt−k
                j=1
          2            2
                                 k
      ≤2kαt−k   1 + 8kαt−k           · kH 2 ,
where we use the fact that Ωt−k = 0. To continue, we impose a constraint on the initial step-size by
requiring 4Kα0 ≤ 1, which gives 16k 2 αt−k
                                        2
                                            ≤ 1. Then, we have
                                 k
               2
                                 X                                         8k 2 αt−k
                                                                                 2
       (1 + 8kαt−k )k ≤ 1 +               k l (8kαt−k
                                                  2
                                                      )l ≤ 1 +                     2   ≤ 1 + 16k 2 αt−k
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                        ≤ 2.   (25)
                                                                         1 − 8k 2 αt−k
                                  l=1

Therefore, we get
                      Ωt ≤ 2k 2 H 2 αt−k
                                     2
                                         (1 + 16k 2 αt−k
                                                     2
                                                         ) ≤ 4k 2 H 2 αt−k
                                                                       2      2
                                                                           ≤ αt−k  2
                                                                                  Cdrift .                     (26)
Plugging (26) back into (23) gives the final result.


Corollary I.4.1. For future reference, we extract two bounds on the client drift from the proof of
Lemma I.4:
                                     2     2
                              Ωt ≤ αt−k  Cdrift , ωt ≤ αt−k Cdrift ,
                 N      (i)
where ωt := N1 i=1 ∥θt − θ̄t ∥.
               P


I.5    G RADIENT P ROGRESS

To bound the gradient progress, we first need to bound the parameter progress. Instead of directly
bounding the client parameter progress, we bound the central parameter progress, which then gives
the client parameter progress combining Lemma I.4.
Lemma I.5 (Central parameter progress). If θ̄l ≤ G for any l ≤ t, then we have
                                              θ̄t − θ̄t−τ ≤ αsK Cprog (τ ),
where s is the largest integer such that sK ≤ t − τ and
                             Cprog (τ ) = 2(τ + 2K)(H + 2α0 Cdrift ) = O(τ ).

Proof. Bounding the central parameter progress is harder than bounding the client parameter
progress since
                         ∥θ̄t − θ̄t−1 ∥ ̸≤ αt−1 (R + (1 + γ)∥θ̄t−1 ∥).


                                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore we need to introduce the client drift, and then bound the parameter progress using Lemma
I.4. First, for any t, we have
                                       N
                                  αt−1 X (i)   (i)
∥θ̄t ∥ ≤ ∥θ̆t ∥ = θ̄t−1 +                g    θ
                                   N i=1 t−1 t−1
                                       N
                                  αt−1 X   (i)   (i)
                                                                   (i)

                                                                          (i)

                                                                                            (i)

              = θ̄t−1 +                   A     Ot−1 θ̄t−1 + A(i) Ot−1 θt−1 − θ̄t−1 + b(i) Ot−1
                                   N i=1
              ≤ (1 + αt−1 (1 + γ))∥θ̄t−1 ∥ + αt−1 (R + 2ωt−1 ),                                   (27)
where ωt−1 is defined in Corollary I.4.1. Let k be the smallest positive integer such that t − k ≡ 0
(mod K) (if t ≡ 0 (mod K), then k = K). Recursively applying (27) gives
                            t−1
                            Y                           k−1
                                                        X
            ∥θ̄t ∥ ≤               (1 + 2αl ) θ̄t−k +         (1 + 2αt−j )j αt−j−1 (R + 2ωt−1 )
                           l=t−k                        j=0

                                                                            (1 + 2αt−k )k − 1
                     ≤(1 + 2αt−k )k θ̄t−k + αt−k (R + 2αt−k Cdrift )                              (28)
                                                                                 2αt−k
                     ≤(1 + 4kαt−k ) θ̄t−k           + 2kαt−k (R + 2αt−k Cdrift )                  (29)
                     ≤2∥θ̄t−k ∥ + 2kαt−k (R + 2αt−k Cdrift ),                                     (30)
where (28) uses Corollary I.4.1 and we require α to be non-increasing; and in (29) and (30), we
require that 4α0 K ≤ 1, which gives (1 + 2αt−k )k ≤ 1 + 4kαt−k with the similar reasoning in (25).
Now we are ready to bound any central parameter progress between two aggregation steps. Since
t − k ≡ 0 (mod K), we have ∥θ̄t−k ∥ ≤ Ḡ. Then by (7), we get
                                             t−1
                                             X
     ∥θ̄t − θ̄t−k ∥ ≤ θ̆t − θ̄t−k ≤                 ∥θ̄l+1 − θ̄l ∥
                                            l=t−k
                         t−1
                    (27) X
                     ≤             αl R + (1 + γ)∥θ̄l ∥ + 2ωl
                           l=t−k
                    (30)
                     ≤ kαt−k (R + 2(1 + γ)∥θ̄t−k ∥ + 4kαt−k (R + 2αt−k Cdrift ) + 2αt−k Cdrift )

                     ≤2kαt−k R + (1 + γ)∥θ̄t−k ∥ + 2αt−k Cdrift ,                                (31)
where we use the fact that γ < 1 and 4kαt−k ≤ 1.
Finally, we need to bound the central parameter progress for general time period τ . For any t >
τ > 1, let s be the largest integer such that sK ≤ t − τ . And let s′ be the largest integer such that
s′ K ≤ t. Then we have
                    ′
                   sX −s
∥θ̄t − θ̄t−τ ∥ ≤           ∥θ̄(s+j)K − θ̄(s+j−1)K ∥ + ∥θ̄t − θ̄s′ K ∥ + ∥θ̄t−τ − θ̄sK ∥
                   j=1
            (31)
             ≤ 2(τ + 2K)αsK (R + 2αsK Cdrift )
                             ′                                                              
                                −s
                               sX
               + 2(1 + γ)αsK      K∥θ̄(s+j−1)K ∥ + (t − s′ K)∥θ̄s′ K ∥ + (t − τ − sK)∥θ̄sK ∥
                                           j=1

             ≤2αsK (τ + 2K)(R + 2αsK Cdrift ) + 2αsK (τ + 2K)(1 + γ)G
             ≤2αsK (τ + 2K) (R + (1 + γ)G + 2αsK Cdrift )
             ≤αsK Cprog (τ ),                                                                     (32)
where Cprog (τ ) := 2(τ + 2K)(H + 2α0 Cdrift ) = O(τ ).



                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary I.5.1 (Client parameter progress). If θ̄l ≤ G holds for all l ≤ t, we also have
                                                         (i)          (i)
                                                      θt − θt−τ ≤ αsK Cprog (τ ),
where s is the largest integer such that sK ≤ t − τ .

                                                                                                (i)             (i)
Proof. If t ≡ 0 (mod K) and t − τ ≡ 0 (mod K), then θt = θ̄t and θt−τ = θ̄t−τ , and the result
directly follows Lemma I.5. Without loss of generality, we assume t ̸≡ 0 (mod K) and t − τ ̸≡ 0
(mod K). Let s be the largest integer such that sK < t − τ . And let s′ be the largest integer such
that s′ K < t. Similar to (32), we have
                      (i)          (i)                                              (i)                   (i)
                     θt − θt−τ ≤∥θ̄s′ K − θ̄sK ∥ + θt − θ̄s′ K + θt−τ − θ̄sK .
By Lemma I.5, we have
                                     θ̄s′ K − θ̄sK ≤ αsK Cprog (s′ K − sK − 2K),
where we subtract 2K to offset the addition of 2K in Lemma I.5 for general t and τ .
Then to bound the client parameter progress after a synchronization, we first notice that when t ̸≡ 0
(mod K), we have
                                               (i)        (i)                             (i)
                                           θt − θt−1 ≤ 2αt−1 θt−1 + αt−1 R.
Similar to (27)-(30), we have
                        (i)                                           (i)
                       θt         ≤(1 + 2αt−1 ) θt                            + αt−1 R
                                         t−1
                                         Y                                                 k−1
                                                                                           X
                                  ≤              (1 + 2αl ) θ̄t−k + R                            (1 + 2αt−j )j αt−j−1
                                        l=t−k                                              j=0

                                  ≤2 ∥θ̄t−k ∥ + kαt−k R ,
where k is the smallest integer such that t − k ≡ 0 (mod K). Then, we get
                                                          t−1
                            (i)          (i)                            (i)         (i)
                                                          X
                        θt − θt−k ≤                                    θl+1 − θl
                                                         l=t−k
                                                          k−1
                                                                              (i)
                                                          X
                                                     ≤            αl (1 + γ) θl   +R
                                                         l=t−k

                                                     ≤kαt−k 2(1 + γ) ∥θ̄t−k ∥ + kαt−k R + R

                                                     ≤2kαt−k R + (1 + γ)∥θ̄t−k ∥ ,
where we use the fact that 4kαt−k ≤ 1. Therefore, we have
                                   (i)
                                  θt − θs′ K ≤ 2(t − s′ K)αs′ K H ≤ 2αsK KH,
                                  (i)
                                  θt−τ − θsK ≤ 2(t − τ − sK)αsK H ≤ 2αsK KH.
Putting all together gives
               (i)          (i)
             θt − θt−τ ≤ αsK (Cprog (s′ K − sK − 2K) + 4KH) ≤ αsK Cprog (τ ).



With the above corollary, we are ready to bound the gradient progress.
Corollary I.5.2 (Graident progress). If θ̄l ≤ G holds for all l ≤ t, then for any θ, we have
                                          (i)                   (i)
                                         ḡt−τ (θ) − ḡt (θ) ≤ Lσh(θ)αsK Cprog (τ ),
where s is the largest integer such that sK ≤ t − τ .


                                                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof.

  (i)             (i)            (i)         (i)            (i)          (i)                          (i)    (i)
 ḡt−τ (θ) − ḡt (θ) =        Āt−τ − Āt              θ + b̄t−τ − b̄t         ≤ Lσ (R + (1 + γ)∥θ∥) θt−τ − θt     ,
where the inequality uses Lemma G.2. Then we get the desired result by plugging in Corollary I.5.1.


The third corollary of Lemma I.5 is the expression of G, which was stated as an assumption in
previous lemmas.
Corollary I.5.3 (Parameter bound). Given the explicit projection ΠḠ , for any t ∈ N, we have
                                         2(2Ḡ + R)        2(2Ḡ + R)
                            θ̄t ≤ G :=         2   2
                                                        ≤               .
                                       1 − 16α0 K γ           1−γ

Proof. For any t ∈ N, by (30) in Lemma I.5, we have

                               θ̄t ≤ 2 Ḡ + Kα0 (R + 2α0 Cdrift ) .
Plugging the expression of Cdrift in Lemma I.4 into the above inequality gives the recursive defini-
tion:
                       G = 2(Ḡ + α0 K(R + 2α0 · 2K(R + (1 + γ)G))).
Note that we require 4Kα0 ≤ 1 in Lemma I.5. Thus, we have
                                 G ≤ 2Ḡ + R + 8α02 K 2 (1 + γ)G,
which gives
                                             2(2Ḡ + R)
                                       G≤                  .
                                           1 − 16α02 K 2 γ
Therefore, we let G := 2(2Ḡ + R)/(1 − 16α02 K 2 γ); and then, we have
                                  θ̄t ≤ 2Ḡ + R + 8α02 K 2 (1 + γ)G ≤ G.


I.6     M IXING

Unlike stationary MDPs in TD(0) and off-policy Q-learning, the mixing process in our algorithm is
                                                                 (i)
a virtual process. After backtracking, we fixed the policy as Γ(θt−τ ), which then introduces a virtual
                                (i)     (i)   (i)   (i)   (i)
stationary MDP. We denote Õt = (S̃t , Ũt , S̃t+1 , Ũt+1 ) the observation of this virtual MDP at
time step t.
Lemma I.6 (Mixing). Let Ft−τ denote the filtration containing all preceding randomness up to
time step t − τ . For any deterministic θ conditioned on Ft−τ —such as a constant parameter or a
parameter determined by Ft−τ —we have
                            h                                 i
                               (i)     (i)      (i)
                          E gt−τ (θ, Õt ) − ḡt−τ (θ) Ft−τ ≤ mi ρτi h (θ)

Proof. We define a new TD operator:

                          (i)       (i)       (i)        (i)       (i)
                        Zt−τ θ, Õt       := gt−τ   θ, Õt     − ḡt−τ (θ) .
Then, we have
     h                        i
        (i)        (i)
   E Zt−τ θ, Õt         Ft−τ
     h                        i
       (i)        (i)              (i)
= E gt−τ θ, Õt          Ft−τ − ḡt−τ (θ)
   Z
                                                                 (i)   (i)          (i)
=           ϕ(s, a) r(i) (s, a) + γϕT (s′ , a′ )θ − ϕT (s, a)θ Pt−τ Õt = O Ft−τ − φt−τ (O) dO
        S 2 ×A2
                           (i)         (i)                         (i)
≤ (R + (1 + γ) ∥θ∥) · Pt−τ (S̃t = · Ft−τ ) − ηt−τ
                                                                          TV
≤mi ρτi (R + (1 + γ) ∥θ∥) ,
where the last inequality is by Assumption 1.



                                                              32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I.7   BACKTRACKING

Lemma I.7 (Backtracking). If ∥θ̄l ∥ ≤ G for all l ≤ t, then for any deterministic θ conditioned on
Ft−τ , we have
                 h                                      i
                   (i)     (i)       (i)     (i)
               E gt (θ, Ot ) − gt−τ (θ, Õt ) Ft−τ ≤ αsK Cback (τ )h (θ) ,

where
                                        Cback (τ ) = τ LCprog (τ ) = O(τ 2 ).

Proof. First, we have
                 h                                 i
                   (i)   (i)    (i)       (i)
               E gt (θ, Ot ) − gt−τ (θ, Õt ) Ft−τ
                                            (i)   (i)                    (i)     (i)
             ≤ (R + (1 + γ) ∥θ∥) P (i) (Ot = · | Ft−τ ) − P (i) (Õt = · | Ft−τ )                        .
                                           θt                            θt−τ
                                                                                                    TV

For a specific client, for notation simplicity, we omit the superscript (i) and denote Pθt by Pt . Let
O = (s, a, s′ , a′ ); then we have
                         Z
Pt (Ot = O|Ft−τ ) =           Pt (St = s, Ut = a, St+1 = s′ , Ut+1 = a′ , θt−1 = θ, θt = θ′ |Ft−τ )dθdθ′
                           Θ2
                         Z
                       =      Pt (St = s|Ft−τ ) · Pt (θt−1 = θ|Ft−τ , St = s)
                             Θ2
                                · Pt (Ut = a|Ft−τ , St = s, θt−1 = θ)
                                · Pt (St+1 = s′ |Ft−τ , St = s, θt−1 = θ, at = a)
                                · Pt (θt = θ′ |Ft−τ , St = s, θt−1 = θ, Ut = a, St+1 = s′ )
                                · Pt (Ut+1 = a′ |Ft−τ , St = s, θt−1 = θ, Ut = a, St+1 = s′ , θt = θ′ )dθdθ′
                            Z
                        =         Pt (St = s|θt−τ , St−τ ) · Pt (θt−1 = θ|θt−τ , St−τ , St = s) · πθ (a|s)
                             Θ2
                            · Pa (s, s′ ) · Pt (θt = θ′ |θt−τ , St−τ , θt−1 = θ, St = s, Ut = a) · πθ′ (a′ |s′ )dθdθ′ ,
where we use that fact that Ut is dependent on θt−1 instead of θt ; and when θt−1 is determined, θt
is not dependent on St+1 . Notice that for any (s, s′ , a) ∈ S 2 × A, we have
     Z
          Pt (θt−1 = θ|Ft−τ , St = s) · Pt (θt = θ′ |Ft−τ , θt−1 = θ, St = s, Ut = a)dθdθ′ = 1.
        Θ2

Thus, for Pt−τ (Õ|Ft−τ ), we have a similar expression:
                        Z
Pt−τ (Õt = O|Ft−τ ) =       Pt−τ (S̃t = s, Ũt = a, S̃t+1 = s′ , Ũt+1 = a′ |Ft−τ ) · Pt (θt−1 = θ|Ft−τ , St = s)
                                  Θ2
                              · Pt (θt = θ′ |Ft−τ , θt−1 = θ, St = s, Ut = a)dθdθ′
                              Z
                            =       Pt−τ (S̃t = s|θt−τ , St−τ ) · πθt−τ (a|s) · Pa (s, s′ ) · πθt−τ (a′ |s′ )
                                  Θ2
                                · Pt (θt−1 = θ|θt−τ , St−τ , St = s) · Pt (θt = θ′ |θt−τ , St−τ , θt−1 = θ, St = s, Ut = a)dθdθ′

Therefore, we decompose the observation distribution discrepancy as follows:
                                           Z
 Pt (Ot |Ft−τ ) − Pt−τ (Õt |Ft−τ )    ≤         Pt (Ot = O|Ft−τ )−Qt (O) + Qt (O)−Pt−τ (Õt = O|Ft−τ ) dO,
                                    TV
                                          2   2
                                         S ×A
                                                |            {z            } |          {z             }
                                                                           S1                                   S2

where
             Z
Ql (O) :=          Pt−τ (S̃l = s|θt−τ , St−τ ) · πθt−τ (a|s) · Pa (s, s′ ) · πθ′ (a′ |s′ )
              Θ2
             · Pl (θl−1 = θ|θt−τ , St−τ , Sl = s) · Pl (θl = θ′ |θt−τ , St−τ , θl−1 = θ, Sl = s, Ul = a)dθdθ′ .

                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For S1 , we have
  Z
            Pt−τ (Õt = O|Ft−τ ) − Qt (O) dO
     2    2
  ZS ×A
≤              Pt−τ (S̃t = s|θt−τ , St−τ )πθt−τ (a|s)Pa (s, s′ )Pt (θt−1 = θ|θt−τ , St−τ , St = s)
      S 2 ×A2 ×Θ2
    · Pt (θt = θ′ |θt−τ , St−τ , θt−1 = θ, St = s, Ut = a)   πθt−τ (a′ |s′ ) − πθ′ (a′ |s′ ) dOdθdθ′
    Z
=                Pt−τ (S̃t = s|θt−τ , St−τ )πθt−τ (a|s)Pa (s, s′ )Pt (θt−1 = θ|θt−τ , St−τ , St = s)
     S 2 ×A×Θ2
    · Pt (θt = θ′ |θt−τ , St−τ , θt−1 = θ, St = s, Ut = a) · πθt−τ (·|s′ ) − πθ′ (·|s′ ) TV dsds′ dadθdθ′ .

By the Lipschitzness of the policy improvement operator (see Assumption 2), we know
                           sup πθt−τ (·|s′ ) − πθ′ (·|s′ ) TV ≤ L ∥θt−τ − θ′ ∥ .
                           s′ ∈S

Then for any θ′ ∈ Θ for which Pt (θt = ·|Ft−τ ) has non-zero density, meaning that θ′ is reachable
at time step t, Corollary I.5.1 implies
                                         (i)
                                        θt−τ − θ′ ≤ αsK Cprog (τ ),

where s is the largest integer such that sK ≤ t − τ .
Therefore, we have
                Z
                                Pt−τ (Õt = O|Ft−τ ) − Qt (O) dO ≤ αsK LCprog (τ ).
                      S 2 ×A2


For S2 , we have
  Z
            |Pt (Ot = O|Ft−τ ) − Qt (O)| dO
    S 2 ×A2
  Z
≤                Pt (θt−1 = θ|θt−τ , St−τ , St = s)Pt (θt = θ′ |θt−τ , St−τ , St = s, Ut = a, θt−1 = θ)πθ′ (a′ |s′ )Pa (s, s′ )
     S 2 ×A2 ×Θ2

  · Pt−τ (S̃t = s|θt−τ , St−τ )πθt−τ (a|s) − Pt (St = s|θt−τ , St−τ )πθ (a|s) dOdθdθ′
  Z
=           Pt (θt−1 = θ|θt−τ , St−τ , St = s)
     S×A×Θ

  · Pt−τ (S̃t = s|θt−τ , St−τ )πθt−τ (a|s) − Pt (St = s|θt−τ , St−τ )πθ (a|s) dsdadθ
  Z
≤           Pt (θt−1 = θ|θt−τ , St−τ , St = s)
   S×A×Θ

  · Pt−τ (S̃t = s|θt−τ , St−τ )πθt−τ (a|s) − Pt−τ (S̃t = s|θt−τ , St−τ )πθ (a|s)

  + Pt−τ (S̃t = s|θt−τ , St−τ )πθ (a|s) − Pt (St = s|θt−τ , St−τ )πθ (a|s) dsdadθ

≤ sup ∥πt−τ (·|s) − πθ (·|s)∥TV + Pt−τ (S̃t = ·|Ft−τ ) − Pt (St = ·|Ft−τ )
    s∈S                                                                              TV

≤αsK LCprog (τ − 1) + Pt−τ (S̃t = ·|Ft−τ ) − Pt (St = ·|Ft−τ )                 .
                                                                          TV

Substituting S1 and S2 with the above bounds gives
                                                                                                           τ
                                                                                                           X
 Pt (Ot |Ft−τ ) − Pt−τ (Õt |Ft−τ )         ≤ Pt−τ (S̃t = ·|Ft−τ ) − Pt (St = ·|Ft−τ )           +αsK L            Cprog (l).
                                       TV                                                   TV
                                                                                                          l=τ −1
                                                                                                          (33)


                                                     34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Applying a similar decomposition as S1 and S2 , we can obtain an analogous bound to (33) for the
state distribution discrepancy:

                Pt−τ (S̃t = ·|Ft−τ ) − Pt (St = ·|Ft−τ )
                                                                  TV

            ≤ Pt−τ (S̃t−1 = ·|Ft−τ ) − Pt−1 (St−1 = ·|Ft−τ )                     + αsK LCprog (τ − 2)
                                                                           TV
                                                                                      τ
                                                                                      X −2
            ≤ Pt−τ (S̃t−τ = ·|Ft−τ ) − Pt−τ (St−τ = ·|Ft−τ )                      +          αsK LCprog (l)
                                                                            TV
                                                                                      l=1
            ≤(τ − 2)αsK LCprog (τ ).
Putting this bound back into (33) gives

                          Pt (Ot |Ft−τ ) − Pt−τ (Õt |Ft−τ )           ≤τ asK LCprog (τ ).
                                                                  TV


Finally, we get
           h                                i
             (i)   (i)    (i)       (i)
         E gt (θ, Ot ) − gt−τ (θ, Õt ) Ft−τ ≤τ αsK LCprog (τ ) (R + (1 + γ) ∥θ∥) .


I.8   G RADIENT VARIANCE

Lemma I.8 (Gradient variance).
                                  Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr )                                 32H 2

               2               2                      2                2 2τ 2
   E ∥gt (θt )∥ ≤ 64 E θ̄t − θ∗ +                 + αsK Cvar (τ ) + 4m  ρ  H  +       ,
                                      w2                                         N
where
             Cvar (τ ) = 4 4(3 + H 2 L2 σ 2 )Cdrift
                                              2
                                                    + 4H 2 L2 σ 2 Cprog
                                                                   2
                                                                        (τ ) + H 2 Cback
                                                                                    2

                                                                                         (τ ) .

Proof. Similar to Lemma I.1, we first decompose the gradient variance and establish the linear
speedups for the backtracking and mixing terms.
                 2                          2
        ∥gt (θt )∥ = ∥gt (θt ) − ḡ(θ∗ )∥                                                                     (34)
                     = gt (θt ) − gt (θ∗ , Ot ) + gt (θ∗ , Ot ) − gt−τ (θ∗ , Õt )
                                                                                       2
                         +gt−τ (θ∗ , Õt ) − ḡt−τ (θ∗ ) + ḡt−τ (θ∗ ) − ḡ(θ∗ )                              (35)
                            N
                                                                                                         !
                         4 X                          2                     2
                                  (i)  (i)    (i)  (i)      (i)  (i)     (i)
                     ≤           gt θt     − gt θ∗      + ḡt−τ θ∗ − ḡ θ∗
                         N i=1 |           {z          } |           {z      }
                                                 G1                            G2 , gradient progress
                                                                   2                                2
                         + 4 gt (θ∗ , Ot ) − gt−τ θ∗ , Õt           +4 gt−τ θ∗ , Õt − ḡt−τ (θ∗ ) ,
                            |                {z                    }   |             {z             }
                                        G3 , backtracking                                  G4 , mixing

                                            PN           (i)
where (34) uses the fact that ḡ(θ∗ ) = N1 i=1 ḡ (i) θ∗       = 0; and in (35), we denote

                      N    (i)   (i)  (i)
gt−τ (θ∗ , Õt ) = N1 i=1 gt−τ θ∗ , Õt , and the same notation applies to other semi-gradients.
                     P

                                                (i)
By the Lipschitzness of semi-gradient gt , G1 is bounded by
                                 2                     2
           (i)  (i)      (i)  (i)          (i)     (i)
          gt θt      − gt θ∗         ≤4 θt − θ∗

                                                         2  2          2
                                               (i)              (i)
                                     ≤12 θt − θ̄t + θ̄t − θ∗ + θ∗ − θ∗     .


                                                            35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Lemma G.1, G2 is bounded by
                   2                                                                 2
   (i)  (i)      (i)                   (i)    (i)    (i)
 ḡt−τ θ∗ − ḡ θ∗       ≤ R + (1 + γ) θ∗     µt−τ − µ∗
                                                                               TV
                                                              2
                                  2   2 2      (i)    (i)
                             ≤H L σ           θt−τ − θ∗

                                                                  2                   2                2                   2
                                                   (i)                                                               (i)
                             ≤4H 2 L2 σ 2         θt−τ − θ̄t−τ        + θ̄t−τ − θ̄t       + θ̄t − θ∗       + θ∗ − θ∗               .

Now we are left with G3 and G4 . However, we only have the bound of their first moment by Lemma
I.7 and I.6. We first note that for a set of functions {gi }Ni=1 such that ∥gi ∥∞ ≤ a and independent
random variables {xi }Ni=1 such that ∥Egi (xi )∥ ≤ b, we have
                                   *      N               N
                                                                     +
                                      1  X             1 X
                  E∥g(x)∥2 =E                gi (xi ),       gi (xi )
                                     N i=1             N i=1
                                      N
                                   1 X                 1 X
                              =     2
                                        E∥gi (xi )∥2 + 2   ⟨Egi (xi ), Egj (xj )⟩
                                  N i=1               N
                                                                      i̸=j
                                                N
                                              N X
                                  a2   1      X
                              ≤      + 2        ∥Egi (xi )∥∥Egj (xj )∥
                                  N   N i=1 j=1
                                  a2
                              ≤      + b2 .                                                                   (36)
                                  N
By (36) and Lemma I.7, the expectation of G3 is bounded by
                                                           4H 2
                                               2
                                                                   2   2
             E gt (θ∗ , Ot ) − gt−τ θ∗ , Õt      Ft−τ ≤        + αsK Cback H 2.                              (37)
                                                            N

By (36) and Lemma I.6, the expectation of G4 is bounded by
                                                                      4H 2

                                2                            2
E gt−τ θ∗ , Õt − ḡt−τ (θ∗ )      Ft−τ = E Zt−τ (θ∗ , Õt )   Ft−τ ≤      + m2 ρ2τ H 2 .
                                                                       N
Combining all together with Lemma I.4, I.5, and Theorem 1, we get
                                                                                  Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr )
                                              h                  i
            2
                                   2 2 2                2              2    2
E ∥gt (θt )∥ |Ft−τ ≤4 4(3 + H L σ ) E θ̄t − θ∗ |Ft−τ + αsK Cdrift +
                                                                                      w2
                                                    2

                                                 8H
                       +4H 2 L2 σ 2 αsK
                                     2    2               2    2
                                                                   + m2 ρ2τ H 2

                                        Cprog +       + αsK Cback
                                                  N
                          h                     i Λ2 (ϵ , ϵ )                                    32H 2
                                         2              p r          2            2 2τ 2
                    ≤64 E θ̄t − θ∗ |Ft−τ +                       + α sK  Cvar + 4m ρ   H     +         ,
                                                       w2                                         N
where we use the fact that LHσ ≤ w ≤ 1 required by (20), and
                  Cvar = 4 4(3 + H 2 L2 σ 2 )Cdrift
                                              2
                                                    + 4H 2 L2 σ 2 Cprog
                                                                   2
                                                                        + H 2 Cback
                                                                               2

                                                                                      .
Finally, we get
                                                       Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr )                            32H 2

                                                    2
E∥gt (θt )∥2 = E E ∥gt (θt )∥2 |Ft−τ ≤ 64 E θ̄t − θ∗ +                   2
                                                                            Cvar +4m2 ρ2τ H 2 +

                                                             2
                                                                       +αsK                           .
                                                           w                                     N



Recall that Lemma I.5 bounds the central parameter progress, which gives a naive bound of the
mean square central parameter progress E∥θ̄t − θ̄t−τ ∥2 ≤ αsK  2    2
                                                                  Cprog (τ ) for any τ ≤ t, where
s is the largest integer such that sK ≤ t − τ . However, with the help of Lemma I.8, we can
derive a tighter bound of the mean square central parameter progress, which is essential for proving
Theorem 2 later.


                                                         36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary I.8.1 (Mean square central parameter progress). For any τ ≤ t, we have

                         2                         2                    2
            E θ̄t − θ̄t−τ ≤ 4(τ + K)(τ + 3K)αsK         64E θ̄sK − θ∗ + V (τ ) ,

where s is the largest integer such that sK ≤ t − τ and
                                 64Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr )     2                 2 2τ 2   32H 2
                     V (τ ) :=                   + αsK C var (τ ) + 4m  ρ  H  +
                                     w2                                          N
is part of the gradient variance bound in Lemma I.8.

Proof. Recall in Lemma I.5, we utilize a naive bound of ∥gt (θt )∥ by (R + (1 + γ)∥θ̄t ∥ + 2ωl ); the
key difference in this proof is that we will bound E∥gt (θt )∥2 using Lemma I.8. Therefore, similar
to (32), let s and s′ be the largest integer such that sK ≤ t − τ and s′ K ≤ t respectively. Then we
have
                                                       ′
                                                                                                            
                                                       sX −s
E∥θ̄t − θ̄t−τ ∥2 ≤(s′ − s + 2) E∥θ̄t − θ̄s′ K ∥2 +          E∥θ̄(s+j)K − θ̄(s+j−1)K ∥2 + E∥θ̄t−τ − θ̄sK ∥2 
                                                                     j=1
                                                                  ′
                                                                                                                         
                                                                  sX −s
                  ≤(s′ − s + 2) E∥θ̆t − θ̄s′ K ∥2 +                       E∥θ̆(s+j)K − θ̄(s+j−1)K ∥2 + E∥θ̆t−τ − θ̄sK ∥2 
                                                                     j=1
                                              t−1
                                              X
                  ≤2(s′ − s + 2)K                   αl2 E∥gl (θl )∥2
                                             l=sK
                                             t−1
                                             X
                             2
                  ≤2(τ + 3K)αsK                     E∥gl (θl )∥2 .
                                             l=sK

By Lemma I.8, we get
                                                                t−1
                                                                X
              E∥θ̄t − θ̄t−τ ∥2 ≤ 2(τ + 3K)αsK
                                           2
                                                                       64E∥θ̄l − θ∗ ∥2 + V (l − sK) .

                                                                                                                  (38)
                                                               l=sK

Then, similar to (30), we want to bound E∥θ̄l − θ∗ ∥2 by E∥θ̄sK − θ∗ ∥2 for sK < l ≤ t − 1. We
have
              2                      2
 E θ̄l − θ∗       ≤ E θ̆l − θ∗
                  = E∥θ̄l−1 − θ∗ + αl−1 gl−1 (θl−1 ) ∥2
                                         2                                          2
                  = E∥θ̄l−1 − θ∗             + 2αl−1 E θ̄l−1 − θ∗ , gl−1 (θl−1 ) + αl−1 E gl−1 (θl−1 ) ∥2
                                                         2                                         2
                  ≤ (1 + αl−1 ) E θ̄l−1 − θ∗                 + αl−1 (1 + αl−1 ) E ∥gl−1 (θl−1 )∥                  (39)
                                                                            2
                  ≤ (1 + αl−1 ) (1 + 64αl−1 ) E∥θ̄l−1 − θ∗ ∥ + αl−1 (1 + αl−1 ) V (l − 1 − sK), (40)
where (39) uses Young’s inequality and (40) uses Lemma I.8. We require 64αsK ≤ 1, which gives
(1 + αl−1 )(1 + 64αl−1 ) ≤ (1 + 66αl−1 ). Recursively applying (40) gives
                                                                                              l−1−sK
              2                      l−sK
                                                                                                X
 E θ̄l − θ∗       ≤ (1 + 66αsK )               E∥θ̄sK − θ∗ ∥2 + αsK (1 + αsK ) V (τ )                  (1 + 66αsK )j ,
                                                                                                j=0

where we use the fact that V is monotonically increasing. We further requires that 132(τ +K)αsK ≤
1. Then, similar to (25), we get
                                 2
                  E θ̄l − θ∗         ≤ 2E∥θ̄sK − θ∗ ∥2 + 2αsK (1 + αsK ) (τ + K)V (τ ).                           (41)


                                                                37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining (38) and (41) gives
                                        t−1
                                        X
E∥θ̄t − θ̄t−τ ∥2 ≤2(τ + 3K)αsK
                            2
                                               128E∥θ̄sK − θ∗ ∥2 + 128αsK (1 + αsK ) (τ + K)V (τ ) + V (τ )


                                        l=sK
                                        t−1
                           2
                                        X                                 128 133
                ≤2(τ + 3K)αsK                      128E∥θ̄sK − θ∗ ∥2 +         ·  + 1 V (τ )                                       (42)
                                                                          132 132
                                        l=sK
                                  2
                                                      64E∥θ̄sK − θ∗ ∥2 + V (τ ) ,

                ≤4(τ + K)(τ + 3K)αsK
where (42) uses our requirement that αt−τ ≤ (τ + K)αsK ≤ 1/132.

J    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
Theorem 2. If θ̄l ≤ G holds for all l ≤ t, then
                    2                                          2                                          C2
     E θ̄t+1 − θ∗       ≤ (1 − αt w)E θ̄t − θ∗                     + αt C1 Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr ) + αt2               + αt3 C3 + αt4 C4 ,
                                                                                                          N
where C1 , C2 , C3 , C4 are constants defined in (50).

Proof. We need to pre-process the results from Lemmas I.3 to I.7 before plugging them back into
Lemma I.1. Throughout this proof, let s and s′ be the largest integers such
                                                                            that sK ≤ t − τ and
 ′                                                         1     2    1 2
s K ≤ t. First, for Lemma I.3, by Young’s inequality ab ≤ 2 βa + β b , for any positive β, we
have            *                                    +
                              N
                          1 X (i)                                    2    Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr )
            2E θ̄t − θ∗ ,        ḡ   θ̄t − ḡ θ̄t     ≤ βE θ̄t − θ∗ +                  .  (43)
                          N i=1                                               β

Similarly, for Lemma I.4 and I.5.2, we have
    *              N
                                                  +
                1 X   (i) (i)         (i)

                                                                2 1
 2E θ̄t − θ∗ ,          ḡ (θt ) − ḡ (θ̄t )        ≤βE θ̄t − θ∗ + αs2′ K (1 + γ + σLH)2 Cdrift2
                                                                                                    ,
                N i=1                                             β
                                                                                                 (44)
      N
   1 X D                 (i)   (i)            (i)
                                                  E
                                                                2 1 2
         2E θ̄t − θ∗ , ḡt−τ (θt ) − ḡ (i) (θt ) ≤βE θ̄t − θ∗ + αsK       2
                                                                         Cprog L2 σ 2 Eh2 (θt ) ,
  N i=1                                                           β
                                                                                                 (45)

                      N           (i)
where h2 (θt ) = N1 i=1 h2 θt , and
                    P

              Eh2 (θt ) = 2H 2 + 2(1 + γ)2 E [Ωt ] ≤ 2H 2 + 8αs2′ K Cdrift
                                                                     2        2
                                                                           ≤ Hdrift ,
                          p
                               2      2 2
where we define Hdrift := 2H + 8α0 Cdrift .
Then, for Lemma I.6, we have
      N
  1 X D                (i)

                            (i)     (i)
                                           E
                                         (i)
         E θ̄t − θ∗ , gt−τ θt   − ḡt−τ θt
  N i=1
     N                                                      N
 1 X D                  (i)

                               (i)      (i)
                                               E
                                                (i)      1 X D                 (i)

                                                                                    (i)     (i)
                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                 (i)
=      E θ̄t − θ̄t−τ , gt−τ θt      − ḡt−τ θt        +        E θ̄t−τ − θ∗ , gt−τ θt   − ḡt−τ θt
 N i=1                                                   N i=1
   "    N
                                                                  #
     1 X hD                  (i)

                                    (i)       (i)
                                                       E
                                                     (i)
                                                                i
≤E         E θ̄t − θ̄t−τ , gt−τ θt        − ḡt−τ θt       Ft−τ
     N i=1
 |                               {z                               }
                                    H1
       "    N
                                                                                                  #
       1    X                       h
                                         (i)

                                                    (i)

                                                                  (i)

                                                                             (i)
                                                                                              i
    +E       θ̄t−τ − θ∗         E       gt−τ       θt         − ḡt−τ       θt         Ft−τ           .
       N i=1
     |                                    {z                                                      }
                                          H2


                                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           (i)       (i)                            (i)
For H1 , since both gt−τ and ḡt−τ are independent of θt conditioned on Ft−τ , Lemma I.5 and I.6
give
                 "     N
                                                                                            #
                    1 XD                            h
                                                      (i)

                                                              (i)        (i)

                                                                                (i)
                                                                                         iE
          H1 =E            E[θ̄t − θ̄t−τ | Ft−τ ], E gt−τ θt         − ḡt−τ θt     Ft−τ
                   N i=1
                 "     N
                                                                                 #
                    1 X                               h
                                                          (i)

                                                                  (i)
                                                                              i
             ≤E            E[θ̄t − θ̄t−τ | Ft−τ ] E Zt−τ θt              Ft−τ
                   N i=1
                 ≤αsK Cprog · mρτ Eh(θt )                                                              (46)
                 ≤αsK mρτ Cprog Hdrift .
Similarly, for H2 , we have
                      "                          N
                                                                                              #
                                      1 X     h
                                                (i)

                                                      (i)     (i)

                                                                   (i)
                                                                            i
                  H2 =E θ̄t−τ − θ∗          E gt−τ θt     − ḡt−τ θt   Ft−τ
                                     N i=1
                           τ
                     ≤E mρ Eh (θt ) θ̄t−τ − θ̄t + θ̄t − θ∗
                     ≤mρτ Hdrift E θ̄t − θ∗ + αsK Cprog


                       1              2   1 2 2τ 2
                     ≤    βE θ̄t − θ∗ + m ρ Hdrift + αsK mρτ Cprog Hdrift .
                       2                  β
Substituting H1 and H2 with the above bounds gives
     N
1 X     D
                     (i)

                          (i)     (i)
                                         E
                                       (i)               2                                1
      2E θ̄t − θ∗ , gt−τ θt   − ḡt−τ θt   ≤ βE θ̄t − θ∗ +mρτ Hdrift                          τ
                                                                                            mρ Hdrift + 4αsK Cprog .
N i=1                                                                                     β
                                                                                                     (47)
                                                                                (i)     (i)
For Lemma I.7, the trick we applied in (46) is no longer valid because gt and θt are correlated.
             (i)
Notice that θt−τ is deterministic given Ft−τ , we first apply the following decomposition:
         N
    1 X D                (i) (i)  (i)    (i)   (i)   (i)
                                                         E
          2E θ̄t − θ∗ , gt (θt , Ot ) − gt−τ (θt , Õt )
    N i=1
       N
     1 X    D
                         (i) (i)  (i)    (i) (i)    (i)

                                                            (i)  (i)     (i)    (i)   (i)   (i)
                                                                                                 E
=         2E θ̄t − θ∗ , gt (θt , Ot ) − gt (θt−τ , Ot ) + gt−τ (θt−τ , Õt ) − gt−τ (θt , Õt )
    N i=1
    |                                            {z                                              }
                                                               H3
             N
         1   X     D
                                  (i) (i)    (i)    (i)   (i)     (i)
                                                                      E
    +            2E θ̄t−τ − θ∗ , gt (θt−τ , Ot ) − gt−τ (θt−τ , Õt )
        N i=1
        |                                  {z                             }
                                           H4
           N
         1 X D                  (i) (i)    (i)    (i)   (i)     (i)
                                                                    E
    +         2E θ̄t − θ̄t−τ , gt (θt−τ , Ot ) − gt−τ (θt−τ , Õt ) .
        N i=1
        |                           {z                              }
                                           H5
                                                 (i)     (i)
By the Lipschitzness of semi-gradient gt and gt−τ and Corollary I.5.1, we have
                      N
               1 X h                  (i)  (i)
                                               i                 4 2
          H3 ≤       2E θ̄t − θ∗ · 4 θt − θt−τ ≤ βE∥θ̄t − θ∗ ∥2 + αsK  2
                                                                      Cprog (τ ).
               N i=1                                             β
By Lemma I.7, we have
                       N
                  2 X h               h
                                        (i) (i)    (i)    (i)   (i)     (i)
                                                                                                  ii
             H4 ≤       E θ̄t−τ − θ∗ E gt (θt−τ , Ot ) − gt−τ (θt−τ , Õt )               Ft−τ
                  N i=1
                                 2         1                      2    2
                 ≤βE θ̄t − θ∗        +       (αsK Cback Eh(θt−τ )) + 2αsK Cprog Cback Eh(θt−τ ).
                                           β

                                                         39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, for H5 , by Young’s inequality, we have
                    τ + 2K
       H5 ≤                         E∥θ̄t − θ̄t−τ ∥2
             αsK (τ + K)(τ + 3K)
                αsK (τ + K)(τ + 3K) h h                                                  ii
             +                          E E ∥gt (θt−τ , Ot ) − gt−τ (θt−τ , Õt )∥2 Ft−τ .
                       τ + 2K
Since θt−τ is deterministic given Ft−τ , we can apply a similar argument to (37) here, which gives
                                                                     4H 2

                (τ + 2K)                        2                             2     2       2
   H5 ≤                          E∥θ̄t − θ̄t−τ ∥ + αsK (τ + 2K)           + αsK Cback (τ )H .
         αsK (τ + K)(τ + 3K)                                          N
By Corollary I.8.1 and Lemma I.5, we get
                                                     4H 2

                                       2                       2   2
H5 ≤αsK (τ + 2K) 256E θ̄sK − θ∗ + 4V (τ ) +                + αsK Cback  (τ )H 2
                                                      N

                                              2                                 2
   ≤αsK (τ + 2K) 256(1 + 1/32)E θ̄t − θ∗ + 256(1 + 32)E θ̄sK − θ̄t
                                  4H 2    2   2

                      + 4V (τ ) +      + αsK Cback (τ )H 2
                                   N
                                                                         4H 2

                                     2        2     2                              2   2
   ≤αsK (τ + 2K) 264E θ̄t − θ∗ + 8448αsK         Cprog  (τ ) + 4V (τ ) +        + αsK Cback (τ )H 2
                                                                           N
We further require that 132αsK (τ + 2K) ≤ β. Then, plugging H3 , H4 , H5 , and V (τ ) back gives
      N
   1 X D                (i) (i)  (i)    (i)   (i)   (i)
                                                        E
         2E θ̄t − θ∗ , gt (θt , Ot ) − gt−τ (θt , Õt )
   N i=1
                    1 2                                                2βΛ2
 ≤4βE∥θ̄t − θ∗ ∥2 + αsK   2
                        4Cprog                           2
                               + 2βCprog Cback Hdrift + Cback  2
                                                              Hdrift  +
                    β                                                    w2
                                                                              132H 2

                        2   2       2
  + αsK (τ + 2K) 8448αsK  Cprog + 4αsK Cvar + 16m2 ρ2τ H 2 + αsK
                                                               2      2
                                                                   Cback H2 +          .
                                                                                N
                                                                                     (48)

Putting Equations (43) to (45), (47) and (48) and Lemmas I.2 and I.8 back into Lemma I.1, we get
                 2                    2
 E θ̄t+1 − θ∗        ≤ E θ̆t+1 − θ∗
                          2                    2
≤(1 − 2αt w) θ̄t − θ∗ + 8αt βE θ̄t − θ∗
         2
         Λ (ϵp , ϵr ) 2βΛ2 (ϵp , ϵr )       1                              1 2
  + αt                +        2
                                        + αs2′ K (1 + γ + σLH)2 Cdrift
                                                                    2
                                                                         + αsK     2
                                                                                 Cprog L2 Hdrift
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                 σ2
            β                w              β                              β

       τ          1     τ                            1 2        2                              2     2

  + mρ Hdrift        mρ Hdrift + 4αsK Cprog + αsK            4Cprog + 2βCprog Cback Hdrift + Cback  Hdrift
                  β                                  β
                                                                                      132H 2

                            2    2            2             2 2τ 2      2   2     2
  + αsK (τ + 2K) 8448αsK Cprog +4αsK Cvar + 16m ρ H + αsK Cback H +
                                                                                         N
                                  2                                            2

                          2     Λ   (ϵ  ,
                                       p rϵ )                              32H
  + αt2 64 E θ̄t − θ∗ +                            2
                                                + αsK Cvar + 4m2 ρ2τ H 2 +         .
                                     w2                                      N

Note that τ is a virtual time range that we backtrack, and we have not determined it yet. Now we
require it to be large enough such that mρτ ≤ αt . We also do not want τ to be too large. Thus, we
fix
                             τ = ⌈(log αt − log m)/ log ρ⌉ ≍ log αt−1 .                       (49)
                                                                P∞
We also require that the decay rate of αt is non-increasing and t=0 αt = +∞. Then, there exists
T1 > 0 such that for any t ≥ T1 , it holds that

                                                  log αt − log m          t
                        sK ≥ t − τ − K = t −                       −K ≥ .
                                                       log ρ              2

                                                   40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The requirement on the step-size also gives lim supt→∞ αt/2 /αt < +∞. Then, there exists
Cα′ , Cα > 0 such that for any t ≥ 0, we have
                                  αsK                  αt/2
                                       ≤ Cα′ · lim sup      = Cα .
                                   αt            t→∞    αt
Thus, after some rearrangement, we get
                 2
  E θ̄t+1 − θ∗
                                            2                               H2
≤(1 − 2αt w + 8αt β + 64αt2 )E θ̄t − θ∗ + 4αt2 (33Cα (τ + 2K) + 8)
                                                                             N
              1
  + αt3 Cα2      (1 + γ + σLH)2 Cdrift
                                     2        2
                                                   L2 Hdrift
                                                       2
                                                             σ 2 + Hdrift
                                                                    2          2                              2     2

                                           + Cprog                        + 4Cprog  + 2βCprog Cback Hdrift + Cback Hdrift
              β

  + 4Cprog Hdrift + αt4 Cα3 ((τ + 2K)(8448Cprog  2
                                                      + 4Cvar + 16H 2 + Cback2
                                                                                  H 2 ) + Cvar + 4H 2 )

          1     2β + 64αt
  + αt       +              Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr ).
          β        w2
Now we let β and α0 small enough such that
                                           8β + 64α0 ≤ w.
Then we get the final form
                    2                           2                           C2
    E θ̄t+1 − θ∗ ≤ (1 − αt w)E θ̄t − θ∗ + αt C1 Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr ) + αt2              + αt3 C3 + αt4 C4 ,
                                                                             N
where
 C1 =β −1 + (2β + 64α0 )w−2 ,
 C2 =4(33Cα (τ + 2K) + 8)H 2 ,

           1
 C3 =Cα2     (1+γ +σLH)2 Cdrift
                             2     2
                                        L2 Hdrift
                                            2
                                                  σ 2 + Hdrift
                                                         2         2        2     2

                                + Cprog                        + 5Cprog + 2Cback Hdrift   (50)
           β

     + 4Cprog Hdrift
 C4 =Cα3 ((τ + 2K)(8448Cprog
                        2
                             + 4Cvar + 16H 2 + Cback
                                                2
                                                     H 2 ) + Cvar + 4H 2 ).



K    P ROOF OF C ORROLARIES 2.1 AND 2.2
In this section, we provide the proofs of Corollaries 2.1 and 2.2. Combining with the constant
dependencies discussed in Appendix L, we get the final results presented in Section 5.
Corollary 2.1. With a constant step-size αt ≡ α0 ≤ w/(2120(2K + 8 + ln(m/(ρw)))), for any
T ∈ N, we have
                                              2                          2
                                        (i)                        (i)
                               E θ̄T − θ∗         ≤ 4e−α0 wT θ0 − θ∗         + B,
where B is the squared convergence region radius defined by

                        1          6                      C2
                  B :=       C1 +      Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr ) + α0    + α02 C3 + α03 C4 .
                       w           w                      N

Proof. Let θ∗ be the central optimal parameter. By Theorem 2, for any T ∈ N, we have
                                                            T −1
                                                      6Λ2 X                                        6Λ2

           2              T            2
E∥θ̄T −θ∗ ∥ ≤ (1−α0 w) E∥θ0 −θ∗ ∥ +α0 w B − 2                    (1−α0 w)t ≤ e−α0 wT ∥θ0 −θ∗ ∥2 +B− 2 ,
                                                       w    t=0
                                                                                                   w
                                                           −α0 w
                                                                     P∞             t           −1
where the last inequality uses the fact that (1 − α0 w) ≤ e       and t=0 (1 − α0 w) = (α0 w) .
Then by Theorem 1, we get
                 (i)
                       2                          Λ2                    (i)       6Λ2 6Λ2
       E θ̄ − θ∗           ≤ 2E∥θ̄ − θ∗ ∥2 + 2      2
                                                      ≤ 4e−α0 wT ∥θ0 − θ∗ ∥2 + B − 2 + 2 .
                                                  w                               w   w



                                                       41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary 2.2. With a linearly decaying step-size αt = 4/(w(1 + t + a)), where a > 0 is to
guarantee that α0 ≤ min{1/(8K), w/64}, there exists a convex combination θeT of {θ̄t }Tt=0 such
that
                     (i) 2    1       C4     C3 log T    C2         2
            E θeT − θ∗     ≤ O             +          +       + C1 Λ  (ϵ  ,
                                                                         p rϵ )  .
                              w     w3 T 2     w2 T 2   wN T
                                 PT               2
Proof. Let ct = a + t and C =     t=0 ct ≥ (T + 1) /2. We define
                                                   T
                                                1 X
                                          θeT =       ct θ̄t ,
                                                C t=0
                                  T
which is a convex combination of θ̄t t=0 . Then, by Jensen’s inequality, we have

                                           2          T
                                                   1 X                2
                             E θeT − θ∗        ≤         ct E θ̄t − θ∗ .                      (51)
                                                   C t=0

Let θ∗ be the central optimal parameter. By Theorem 2, we have

          1             2       1     1              2     1              2
            E θ̄t − θ∗ ≤           −      E θ̄t − θ∗ −        E θ̄t+1 − θ∗ + B(αt ),
          2                    αt w 2                    αt w
where B(α) = (C1 Λ2 + αC2 /N + α2 C3 + α3 C4 )/w. Recall our choice of the step-size αt =
4/(w(a + t + 1)); then we have 1/(αt w) = (a + t + 1)/4. Plugging this back into (51) gives
           2       T
               1 X         a+t−1            2   a+t+1                 2
E θeT −θ∗ ≤           ct         E θ̄t −θ∗ −            E θ̄t+1 −θ∗ + 2B(αt )
              C t=0          2                     2
                     T
                  1 X                               2                                 2

             =          (a + t − 1)(a + t)E θ̄t − θ∗ − (a + t)(a + t + 1)E θ̄t+1 − θ∗
                 2C t=0
                                    T                   T                         T
                  2C1 Λ2     8C2 X a + t          32C3 X     a+t            128C4 X     a+t
                 +       +                     +                       +
                    w      CN w2 t=0 a + t + 1    Cw3 t=0 (a + t + 1)2       Cw4 t=0 (a + t + 1)3
                1                     2                                    2

             ≤      a(a − 1) θ̄0 − θ∗ − (a + T )(a + T + 1)E θ̄T +1 − θ∗
               2C
                                               T                  T
                  2C1 Λ2   8C2 (T + 1) 32C3 X 1           128C4 X        1
               +         +              +               +
                    w         CN w2       Cw3 t=0 t + 1    Cw4 t=0 (t + 1)2
                             2
              a2 ∥θ0 − θ∗ ∥   2C1 Λ2     8C2    32C3            256C4
             ≤              +        + 2      + 3 2 O(log(T )) + 4 2
                   T2           w       w NT    w T             w T
                  2
                                                   C1 Λ 2

                  a       C4    C3 log T     C2
             =O     2
                      + 4 2+       3  2
                                         + 2     +          .
                  T     w T      w T       w NT      w
Then by Theorem 1 and the fact that 1/w ≲ C1 (see Appendix L) and a ≲ K/w2 , we get
                                      Λ2
                                                2
                                                                                 C1 Λ 2

               2                 2              K + C4      C3 log T    C2
           (i)
  E θT −θ∗
      e          ≤ 2E θT −θ∗ + 2 2 = O
                       e                                 +           + 2      +           .
                                      w           w4 T 2     w3 T 2    w NT        w


L    C ONSTANT D EPENDENCIES
In this section, we establish explicit dependencies between the constants. We begin by introducing
problem constants that are independent of other parameters: the reward cap R > 0, discount factor
γ ∈ (0, 1), projection radius Ḡ > 0,1 local update period K, and kernel-related constants, m ≥
1, ρ ∈ (0, 1), and λ := mini∈[N̄ ] λ(i) ∈ (0, 1]. Throughout this paper, we use asymptotic notation


                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as R, Ḡ, K, m → ∞ and γ, ρ → 1. We also use the nonasymptotic notation a ≲ b and b ≳ a to
indicate that there exists C ≥ 0 such that a ≤ Cb, and a ≍ b to indicate that both a ≲ b and b ≳ a
hold.
We first give the dependencies of σ ′ defined in (9). By its definition, we have σ ′ ≥ 0, and

                             log m         1       log m + 1           log m
                       σ′ ≤           +         ≤              =O              ,
                            − log ρ 1 − ρ             1−ρ              1−ρ
where the asymptotic notation holds as ρ → 1 and m → ∞. We also get σ = σ ′ +2 = O(log m/(1−
ρ)). We will now use σ as a base constant.
w is an important MDP constant and plays a critical role in the convergence rate. By its defini-
tion (19), we get w ≤ 1/2 and
                                                 1−γ            1−γ
                            w = min wi ≥             min λ(i) =     λ,
                                  i∈[N̄ ]         2 i∈[N̄ ]      2
which gives
                                            w−1 = O((1 − γ)−1 ).

We then consider G and H. By Corollary I.5.3, we get

                                   2(2Ḡ + R)                    Ḡ + R
                               G=                 =O                          .
                                  1 − 16α02 K 2 γ                 1−γ
When γ is√near 1, the above bound is undesirable. Thus, when γ is large, we can further require
4α0 K < 0.5, which gives G ≤ 4(2Ḡ + R). Without loss of generality, we have
                                                G ≍ Ḡ + R
And by the definition of H, we get
                                   H = R + (1 + γ)G ≍ Ḡ + R.
We now use H as a base constant and replace Ḡ + R with H for simplicity. H can be viewed as the
scale of the problem. If we choose Ḡ according to (Zou et al., 2019), then H = O(R/(1 − γ)).
By (20), we get the dependencies of the policy improvement operator’s Lipschitz constant L:
                                                  w
                                            L≤       .
                                                 σH

We now address the constants in Appendix I. By Lemma I.4, we directly have
                                             Cdrift = O (KH) .
We now consider α0 . There are two requirements on α0 throughout the proof: 4Kα0 < 1 in
Lemmas I.4 and I.5, and 64α0 ≤ w in Appendix J. Combining these conditions gives

                                       1 w
                                                ≲ min K −1 , w .

                           α0 ≤ min      ,
                                      4K 64
Therefore, Cprog in Lemma I.5 has the following dependencies:
                    Cprog = O((τ + K)(H + K −1 · KH)) = O((τ + K)H).
And Cback in Lemma I.7 has the following dependencies:
                                   Cback = O(τ 2 LH) = O(τ 2 w).
Then, Cvar in Lemma I.8 is controlled by
                          2
                Cvar = O(Cdrift + w2 Cprog
                                      2
                                           + H 2 Cback
                                                  2
                                                       ) = O(H 2 (K 2 + w2 τ 4 )).
   1
     One can choose Ḡ = R/w as suggested in Zou et al. (2019). Here, we make it a pre-defined algorithm
constant.


                                                    43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, we give the dependencies of constants in Appendix J. By definition, we have
                                Hdrift = O(H + α0 Cdrift ) = O(H).
By the requirement of β, we have
                                                β ≍ w.
And we have Cα = O(1). Therefore, we get
                              C1 = O(w−1 ) = O((1 − γ)−1 ),
                              C2 = O(H 2 (τ + K)),
                              C3 = O H 2 (w−1 (τ 2 + K 2 ) + wτ 4 ) ,


                              C4 = O(H 2 (τ + K)(τ 2 + K 2 + w2 τ 4 )).

Finally, we give the dependencies of constants in Corollaries 2.1 and 2.2. In Corollary 2.1, we
choose a constant step-size αt = α0 . There are two requirements on αt throughout the proof:
132(τ + K)αsK ≤ 1 in Corollary I.8.1 and 132αsK (τ + 2K) ≤ β in Appendix J. A concrete
condition satisfying these requirements is α0 ≤ w/(2120 (2K + ln(2120m)/(ρw))).   Furthermore,
if we choose a small enough initial step size such that α0−1 ≍ τ ≳ max K, w−1 , then C2 , C3 ,

and C4 becomes
 C2 = O(H 2 τ ) = O(H
                  e 2 ), C3 = O(H 2 wτ 4 ) = O(H
                                             e 2 w), C4 = O(H 2 w2 τ 5 ) = O(H
                                                                           e 2 w2 ), (52)

where O e omits the logarithmic dependencies on τ . Then the convergence region radius in Corol-
lary 2.1 becomes
                             α0 H 2 τ     Λ2                        α0 H 2        Λ2

                 2 2 4                                     2 2
      B = O α0 H τ +                  +             = O α0 H +
                                                      e                      +
                            N (1 − γ) (1 − γ)2                    N (1 − γ) (1 − γ)2

With the linearly decaying step-size in Corollary 2.2, (49) gives
                                               τ ≍ log T
as the total number of iterations T → ∞. And the requirements on αt in previous discussion
automatically hold for large enough t. Omitting the logarithmic dependencies on T , C2 , C3 , and C4
in this case are the same as (52). Therefore, the finite-time error bound in Corollary 2.2 becomes
                      H2
                                   5
                                                 Λ2 (ϵp , ϵr )        H2                   2

              2                    τ      τ
E θeT − θ∗ =                 · O      +       +                  =          · e 1 + Λ (ϵp , ϵr ) .
                                                                              O
                   (1 − γ)2        T2    NT          H2            (1 − γ)2       NT         H2

M     TABULAR F ED SARSA

In this section, we reduce our algorithm and analysis to the tabular setting. Recall that S and A are
the measures of the state space S and action space A, respectively. For the tabular setting, S and
A are the numbers of states and actions. Then, we choose the feature map to be an indicator vector
function, i.e.,
                    ϕ : S × A → RSA , [ϕ(s, a)](s′ ,a′ ) 7→ 1{(s′ , a′ ) = (s, a)},
where we treat ϕ(s, a) as a vector and use a two-dimensional index such that [ϕ(s, a)](s′ ,a′ ) is the
(s′ , a′ )-th element of ϕ(s, a); 1 is the indicator function. Using this feature map, the parameter θ is
indeed the estimated value function table:
                                   Qθ (s, a) = ϕT (s, a)θ = [θ](s,a)
Therefore, the local update rule in Algorithm 1 reduces to the tabular SARSA update rule (2).
We now show a natural bound G for ∥θ∥2 without an explicit projection. First, the true value function
(1) is bounded by
                                           ∞
                                          X           R
                            |qπ (s, a)| ≤     γtR =         =: G∞ .
                                          t=0
                                                    1−γ


                                                   44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Suppose current estimated value function satisfies that |Qt (s, a)| ≤ G∞ for any state-action pair,
then we have
                   |Qt+1 (s, a)| =|Qt (s, a) + α(r(s, a) + γQt (s′ , a′ ) − Qs,a )|
                                 =|(1 − α)Qt (s, a) + αγQt (s′ , a′ ) + αr(s, a)|
                                 ≤(1 − α)G∞ + αγG∞ + αR
                                                     R
                                 =(1 − α + αγ)            + αR
                                                   1−γ
                                      R
                                 =          = G∞ .
                                    1−γ
Therefore, if the bound holds for the initial estimated value function, it holds for all sequential, local
or central, estimated value functions. However, G∞ is a upper bound for ∥θ∥∞ . For 2-norm, we
have                                                     √
                                         √                 SAR
                               ∥θ∥2 ≤ SA∥θ∥∞ ≤                   =: G,
                                                          1−γ
which further gives
                                                    √       !
                                                      SAR
                                         H=O                   .
                                                     1−γ
Also, for tabular FedSARSA, Remark 2 tells us that

                                  −1               1
                                 w =O                     ,
                                               λ(1 − γ)
λ is the probability of visiting the least probable state-action pair under the steady distribution of the
optimal policy across all agents. Then, Corollary 2.2 can be translated into the following corollary.
Corollary 2.3 (Finite-time error bound for tabular FedSARSA with decaying step-size). With
a linearly decaying step-size αt = 4/(w(1 + t + a)), where a > 0 is to guarantee that
α0 ≤ min{1/(8K), w/64}, there exists a convex combination θeT of {θ̄t }Tt=0 such that
                                             SAR2             SAR2

                (i) 2         1                                               2
       E θT − θ∗ 2 ≤ 2
          e                         ·O
                                     e                   +                + Λ (ϵp , ϵr ) .
                         λ (1 − γ)2      λ2 (1 − γ)4 T 2   (1 − γ)2 N T
where the asymptotic notation suppresses the logarithmic factors. Since ∥θ∥∞ ≤ ∥θ∥2 , we also get
the finite-time error bound under the infinity norm.


                                                   45
