Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A Stitch in Time Saves Nine: D ETECTING AND M ITIGAT-
ING H ALLUCINATIONS OF LLM S BY ACTIVELY VALI -
DATING L OW-C ONFIDENCE G ENERATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Recently developed large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable suc-
         cess in generating fluent and coherent text. However, these models often tend to
         ‘hallucinate’ which critically hampers their reliability. In this work, we address
         this crucial problem and propose an approach that actively detects and mitigates
         factual hallucinations during the generation process. Specifically, we first identify
         the candidates of potential hallucination leveraging the model’s logit output val-
         ues, check their correctness through a validation procedure, mitigate the detected
         hallucinations via prompting, and then continue with the generation process. This
         active intervention also facilitates in preventing the propagation of hallucinations
         in the LLM’s output. Through extensive experiments with GPT-3.5 (text-davinci-
         003) on the ‘article generation task’, we first demonstrate the individual efficacy
         of our detection and mitigation techniques. Specifically, we achieve a detection re-
         call of ∼ 88% and successfully mitigate 57.6% of the correctly detected hallucina-
         tions. Importantly, our mitigation technique does not introduce new hallucinations
         even in the case of incorrectly detected hallucinations, i.e., false positives. Then,
         we show that the proposed active detection and mitigation approach successfully
         reduces GPT-3.5’s hallucinations from 47.5% to 14.5%. We further demonstrate
         the effectiveness and wide applicability of our approach through additional exper-
         iments with different types of questions (multi-hop and false premise) and with
         another LLM from a different model family (Vicuna). In summary, our work con-
         tributes to improving the reliability and trustworthiness of LLMs, a crucial step en
         route to enabling their widespread adoption in real-world applications.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Hallucination in the context of language models refers to the generation of text or responses that
seem syntactically sound, fluent, and natural but are factually incorrect, nonsensical, or unfaithful
to the provided source input Maynez et al. (2020); Holtzman et al. (2020); Ji et al. (2023); Koehn
& Knowles (2017). These hallucinations can lead to serious consequences such as spreading of
misinformation and violation of privacy. This critically hampers models’ reliability and limits their
widespread adoption in real-world applications. Thus, in this work, we focus on addressing the
crucial problem pertaining to LLMs’ hallucinations.
We propose to actively ‘detect’ and ‘mitigate’ hallucinations during the generation process. This is
crucial as we show that when a sentence generated by a model is hallucinated, that increases the
chances of hallucination in the subsequently generated sentences of the model, i.e., hallucinations
often propagates in the model’s output. This can be attributed to the autoregressive nature of the
LLMs and discrepancy between the training and inference time decoding. Specifically, during the
training time, the model is encouraged to predict the next token conditioned on the ground-truth
prefix sequences. However, at inference time, the model generates the next token conditioned on the
historical sequences previously generated by itself. Thus, actively detecting and mitigating halluci-
nations during the generation process also facilitates in preventing the propagation of hallucinations
in the subsequent generation. We divide our approach into two stages: Detection and Mitigation.
Figure 1 illustrates the key steps of our approach. In order to address the complex task of detecting
and mitigating hallucinations, we break it down into multiple simpler steps.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          Write an article on Rick Mahler


                                                        Model
                                                                                                        Append the repaired sentence
   1. Entity Extraction                                                                                  to the prompt and continue
   2. Keyword Extraction          Rick Mahler was a Major League Baseball pitcher who                   generating the next sentence
   3. Instructing Model                   was born in 1953 in Jupiter, Florida.

   1. Average                                                Detect and Mitigate Hallucinations
   2. Minimum
   3. Normalized

                                Identify Key Concepts         Major League Baseball   pitcher               1953        Jupiter, Florida
   1. QG Model
   2. Instructing Model
                           Calculate Model’s Uncertainty      Major League Baseball     pitcher             1953        Jupiter, Florida


                           {
   Question Types:
   1. Yes/No
   2. Wh                             Validation
                                                                       Was Rick Mahler                  Was Rick Mahler born in
                               Create Validation Question
   1. Self-Inquiry                                                      born in 1953 ?                     Jupiter, Florida ?
   2. Web Search
                               Find Relevant Knowledge                  LM                                L LM
   Leveraging
   Knowledge                Answer Validation Question                       Yes                                   No

   Repair by
   Instructing              Fix Hallucinated Sentence           Rick Mahler was a Major League Baseball pitcher who
   the Model               (using retrieved knowledge)                   was born in 1953 in Austin, Texas.



Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed active detection and mitigation approach. Different tech-
niques for each step are mentioned on the left with the preferred one highlighted in red.


In the hallucination detection stage, we first identify the candidates of potential hallucination, i.e.,
the key ‘concepts’ of the generated sentence. Next, leveraging the logit output values of the model,
we calculate model’s ‘uncertainty’ on the identified concepts. We demonstrate that this uncertainty
score provides a signal for hallucination. However, we note
that this is an additional signal and not a necessary require-
                                                                     60         lower is better
ment for our approach. Then, we check the correctness of the
‘uncertain’ concepts through a validation procedure to detect               47.5
hallucinations. This is followed by hallucination mitiga-
                                                                     50
                                                                                      % Hallucination


tion where we ‘repair’ the sentence via prompting using the          40
retrieved knowledge as evidence. We conduct a systematic
and wide study exploring multiple techniques for each step           30
of the approach. Interestingly, we show that simply instruct-
ing the LLM does fairly well on these steps.                         20                     14.5
In our experimental setup, we prompt the model to write               10
about specific topics from diverse domains such as Sports,
Politics, Music, etc. Then, we annotate the correctness of the         0 GPT-3.5           Active Detection
first five generated sentences for each topic. We first high-            (text-davinci-003) and Mitigation
light the two findings that motivate our approach, i.e., the
phenomenon of propagation of hallucination in the model’s Figure 2: Comparing % hallucina-
output and the utility of logit output values in detecting hal- tion in the output of GPT-3.5 with
lucinations. Then, we show the individual efficacy of our de- our active detection and mitigation
tection and mitigation techniques. Specifically, we achieve a approach on ‘article generation task’.
detection recall of ∼ 88% and successfully mitigate 57.6%
of the correctly detected hallucinations. Importantly, our
mitigation technique does not introduce new hallucinations even in the case of incorrectly detected
hallucinations, i.e., false positives. Then, we show that the proposed active detection and mitiga-
tion approach successfully reduces GPT-3.5 (text-davinci-003) hallucinations from 47.5% to 14.5%
(Figure 2). To demonstrate the effectiveness and wide applicability of our approach in addressing
hallucinations, we further present three additional studies: (1) Efficacy with another LLM (Vicuna
fine-tuned on LLaMA-2) from a different model family, (2) Adapting the approach to answer Multi-
hop questions, and (3) Assessing it on False premise questions.


                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     A PPROACH
As motivated in Section 1, we propose to iteratively generate sentences and actively detect and
mitigate hallucinations during the generation process. This is crucial to prevent the propagation of
hallucination in the model’s output. As shown in Figure 1, we break down the complex task into
detection and mitigation stages which are further broken down into simpler steps to achieve better
performance. In Section 2.1, we detail the hallucination detection steps, viz., identifying the candi-
dates of potential hallucination (2.1.1), calculating model’s uncertainty on the concepts (2.1.2), and
checking the correctness by creating validation query (2.1.3), finding relevant knowledge (2.1.4),
and verifying the information (2.1.5). We describe various techniques to achieve the objective of
each step and indicate the preferred technique with (*). In Section 2.2, we detail our mitiga-
tion approach where we ‘repair’ the hallucinated sentence by removing/substituting the hallucinated
information and incorporating the correct information from the retrieved knowledge. We can also
utilize this knowledge as context for subsequent generation. Table 3 shows the instructional prompts
and Appendix B provides all the supporting details of all steps of the approach.

2.1     H ALLUCINATION D ETECTION

2.1.1    I DENTIFY K EY C ONCEPTS
We start by identifying the candidates of potential hallucination, i.e., the important concepts from the
generated sentence. We identify these concepts because validating the correctness of the entire sen-
tence at once is infeasible as a sentence often contains multiple different facets all of which can not
be validated at once. In contrast, individually validating correctness corresponding to the concepts
provides opportunities for accurately detecting hallucinations. Note that a concept is essentially a
span of text consisting of one or more tokens. We study the following techniques for this step:
Entity Extraction: Entities are typically important parts of a sentence, thus, we explore using an
off-the-shelf entity extraction model to identify the concepts. A limitation of this method is that a
concept need not necessarily be an entity.
Keyword Extraction: Addressing the limitation of the entity extraction method and additionally
identify the non-entity concepts, we explore using an off-the-shelf keyword extraction model.
*Instructing the Model*: Since state-of-the-art LLMs perform remarkably well on a wide range
of tasks, in this technique, we directly instruct the model to identify the important concepts from the
generated sentence. We specify the instructional prompt in Table 3 and further details in B.1.
Table 4 (B.1) illustrates examples of concepts identified using the three techniques. It shows that the
entity extraction model often misses many important concepts while the keyword extraction model
identifies a number of insignificant concepts also. In contrast, the instruction technique successfully
identifies all the important concepts. Moreover, it doesn’t require calling a task-specific tool (entity
or keyword extraction model). Thus, we regard it as our preferred technique for this step.

2.1.2    C ALCULATE M ODEL’ S U NCERTAINTY
GPT-3 and several other SOTA models also provide logit values in their output. Thus, we study if
these values can be utilized to detect hallucinations. Consider a concept consisting of n tokens and
having the maximum softmax probabilities as p1 , p2 , p3 , ..., pn for the n token positions respectively.
We study three different techniques for calculating a probability score for a concept:
Average of Probabilities (AVG [p1 , p2 , ..., pn ]) , Normalized Product of Probabilities ([p1 × p2 ×
... × pn ]1/n ) and , *Minimum of Probabilites* (MIN [p1 , p2 , ..., pn ]) . Here, ‘MIN’ is our preferred
technique as the others may average out the effect of model’s uncertainty on the tokens while low
probability in even one token of a concept provides sufficient evidence of the model being uncertain
in its generation. For e.g., if the model is uncertain about name of the USA president then its
uncertainty on the first token (‘Joe’) would be high but on the next token (‘Biden’) would be very low
as token ‘Joe’ is frequently followed by token ‘Biden’ in raw text. Thus, Averaging or Normalizing
the probabilities will have a limited capability to capture this signal in comparison to Minimum.
In 3.1.2, we show that this score (especially ‘MIN’) indeed provides a signal for hallucination, i.e.,
the more uncertain the model is on a concept (low probability score), the more likely it is to


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


be hallucinating about that concept. Figure 13 compares the performance of the three probability
calculation techniques. Thus, we utilize this signal and check for hallucinations with respect to the
uncertain concepts using our validation procedure (2.1.3-2.1.5).
In the absence of logit output values (for models that do not provide these values in their prediction
response), all or some heuristically selected concepts (depending on the computational and latency
budget of the system) can be passed to the validation stage for detecting hallucinations.

2.1.3    C REATE VALIDATION Q UESTION
Our validation procedure for a concept starts with creation of a question that tests the correctness
of the information (in the generated sentence) pertaining to the concept. We study creating Yes/No
Questions as illustrated in Table 5 using Question Generation Tool and *Instructing the Model*.
In instruction technique, we directly prompt the model to create a validation question checking the
correctness of the information about the selected concept. Similar to the concept identification step,
it is our preferred technique as it does not require calling a task-specific tool. We note that instead
of Yes/No questions, Wh-questions can also be used for validation. We prefer Yes/No questions as
it is relatively easier to verify their answers. We explore Wh-questions for a study in Section 4.2.

2.1.4    F IND R ELEVANT K NOWLEDGE
We explore two ways of retrieving the relevant knowledge to answer the validation question.
*Web Search*: Web search provides several benefits such as generality, wide coverage, and infor-
mation freshness. We use Bing search API for retrieving the knowledge. However, we note that any
other search API or knowledge corpus can also be utilized for this purpose.
Self-Inquiry: Here, we leverage the parametric knowledge of the LLM and directly prompt it to
answer the validation question. Though it does not require external knowledge, it has drawbacks
such as lack of a reliable strategy to extract the parametric knowledge and knowledge staleness.
Note that our proposed approach has several benefits pertaining to retrieval: (a) it does not retrieve
knowledge when it is not required, i.e., when the model is already sufficiently confident (since we
show that it is less likely to hallucinate in such scenarios), (b) it individually retrieves knowledge
pertinent to the concept(s) on which the calculated probability score is low thus providing it sufficient
and relevant context for accurate validation and mitigation (Section 2.2).

2.1.5    A NSWER VALIDATION Q UESTION
Now, we prompt the model to answer the validation question leveraging the retrieved knowledge as
context and verify its response. If the validation procedure succeeds for all the uncertain concepts
then we continue generating the next sentence; otherwise, we interrupt the generation and mitigate
the potential hallucination in the sentence before continuing the subsequent generation.
Order of Validation of Concepts: Validation of different concepts can be done in a sequence (in
ascending order of their calculated probability score) or in parallel. However, running this in parallel
would require starting multiple threads which may not be supported by all machines. Thus, in this
work, we study only the sequential validation strategy but note that it can be made more efficient by
running it in parallel. We regard this sequential validation as a greedy exiting strategy as we proceed
to the mitigation stage on detection of the first hallucinated concept.

2.2     H ALLUCINATION M ITIGATION

For mitigating hallucination in the generated sentence, we instruct the model to repair the gener-
ated sentence by removing/substituting the hallucinated information and incorporating the correct
information using the retrieved knowledge as evidence (Table 3 shows the instructional prompt).
We note that the result of our validation procedure is contingent on the retrieved knowledge and
the model’s ability to leverage that knowledge in answering the validation question. In Section 3.2,
we show that our approach performs well on this task and achieves a high recall demonstrating
its efficacy at detecting hallucinations. Moreover, we show that our mitigation approach does not
introduce new hallucinations even in the case of incorrectly detected hallucinations (false positives).


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In B.3, we elaborate on our design decisions such as benefit of “active” approach over the
“posthoc” approach, impact on inference cost, and justification of procedural methodology.

3     E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
We first highlight the two findings that motivate our approach (in 3.1.1 and 3.1.2). Then, we show
the individual efficacy of our detection and mitigation techniques in 3.2. Finally, in 3.3, we show
the effectiveness of our proposed active detection and mitigation approach.
Data and Annotation: In our experimental setup, we prompt the LLM to write about a given topic.
We use topics from diverse domains as shown in Figure 3. In each domain, we include different
kinds of topics; for instance, Sports includes sportsper-
sons, teams, and games; Music includes musicians,                                 15%
songs, music labels, and bands; Politics includes politi-       19%
cians, political parties, and elections, etc. We use a to-


                                                                                             ers
                                                                          Spo
tal of 150 topics in our data. For selecting the names                                       4%


                                                                                            Oth
                                                                                        u re


                                                                            rts
of people, we randomly sample from the top 20% of
                                                                                  ra t
longest articles in WikiBio dataset Lebret et al. (2016)                      Lite Arts         5%
as done in Manakul et al. (2023). Similarly, we sample     13% Music            Science
from the longest Wikipedia articles for the other topics.                       Ser            5%
This is done to avoid obscure or ambiguous topics.
                                                                                    v i c es


                                                                          ics


                                                                                            His
                                                                                Film & TV
                                                                           it
                                                                                                      7%


                                                                       Pol



                                                                                               tory
For each topic, we give the following input prompt to
the model (text-davinci-003 and Vicuna-13B): ‘Write                  11%
                                                                                           9%
an article about <topic>’. Then, we (the au-
thors) annotate the correctness of the first five sen-                           11%
tences generated by the model. For this annotation, we
look at search results from the web to find the relevant Figure 3: Distribution of instances across
knowledge that either supports or contradicts the infor- different domains in our topic set.
mation in the sentence. In some cases, multiple web
searches were required to check the correctness of dif-
ferent facets of a sentence. Furthermore, in a small number of cases, we could not find information
supporting or contradicting the information in the generated sentence, we marked it as a case of
extrinsic hallucination. We opt for this expert annotation strategy because despite the annotation
task being a simple binary classification task, it requires considerable effort to check the correctness
which can not reliably be collected via crowdsourcing. In addition to the sentence-level annotation,
we also annotate correctness at concept-level (detailed in 3.1.2). We will release both sentence and
concept-level annotations to facilitate a systematic future research in this direction.

3.1     M OTIVATING F INDINGS

3.1.1    P ROPAGATION OF H ALLUCINATION I N THE M ODEL’ S O UTPUT
Since we consider five sequentially generated sentences generated by the model for each topic, we
investigate the relationship between ‘hallucination in a generated sentence’ and ‘hallucination in
any previously generated sentences’ for an input. Since there are two binary variables, there exist
four possibilities in this relationship, represented by YY, NY, YN, and NN in Figure 4. The figure
demonstrates this relationship for sentences 2, 3, 4, and 5 (since no previously generated sentence
for sentence 1) aggregated over all the topics in our dataset. Observations are as follows:
(a) YY > NY: Cases YY and NY correspond to the scenario when there is a previous hallucination.
It can be observed that YY is considerably greater than NY implying that when there is hallucination
in the previously generated sentences, a sentence is more often hallucinated.
(b) YY > YN: In YY and YN, the generated sentence is hallucinated. Here, YY is greater than
YN implying that a generated sentence is hallucinated more when there is hallucination in the
previously generated sentences as compared to when there is no hallucination in the previously
generated sentences.
(c) NN > YN: When there is no hallucination in the previously generated sentences, a generated
sentence is more likely to be correct, i.e., it is less often hallucinated.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(d) NN > NY: A generated sentence is ‘correct’ more when there is no previous hallucination as
compared to when there is a previous hallucination.
This shows that hallucination in a sentence                                               YY   NY   YN    NN
increases the chances of hallucinations in the
                                                           Sentence Hallucinated
subsequently generated sentences, i.e., hallu-                                            ✓    ✗    ✓     ✗
cination often propagates and thus actively                Previous Hallucination         ✓    ✓    ✗     ✗
detecting and mitigating them can fix the
current hallucination and also prevent its
propagation in the model’s output.

3.1.2 L OGIT O UTPUT VALUES
P ROVIDE A S IGNAL FOR H ALLUCINATION
To study the relationship between logit val-
ues and hallucination, we annotate correct-
ness at concept-level also (in addition to
sentence-level annotations described earlier).
Specifically, for each identified concept, we
mark whether the information about it in
                                                         Sentence 2 Sentence 3 Sentence 4 Sentence 5
the generated sentence is hallucinated or
not. Table 7 shows examples of both sen- Figure 4: Demonstrating relationship between ‘hal-
tence and concept-level annotations. Fig- lucination in a generated sentence’ and ‘hallucina-
ure 5 shows the trend of hallucination tion in previously generated sentences’. Bars YY,
with our calculated probability scores. For NY, YN, and NN correspond to four possibilities.
sentence-level, we use the minimum across
tokens of all its identified concepts as the
probability score, and for concept-level, we
use the minimum across the concept’s tokens as the probability score. The figure shows that as the
probability score increases (or uncertainty decreases), the tendency to hallucinate decreases.
This shows that the probability values can be utilized as a signal for hallucination, i.e., the low prob-
ability concepts can be considered as candidates of potential hallucination and their correctness in
the sentence can be validated for detecting hallucinations.
We compare efficacy of
different probability cal-   80                                          70
culation techniques at de-   75
                                                          Sentence-level                            Concept-level
                                                          Hallucination  65                         Hallucination
tecting hallucinations (in   70                                          60
                                % Hallucination


                                                                        % Hallucination


Appendix G) and show         65                                          55
that the ‘Minimum’ tech-                                                 50
                             60
nique achieves the highest                                               45
                             55
area under the Precision-                                                40
Recall curve.      In Ap-    50                                          35
pendix G, we also demon-     45                                          30
                                  0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0           0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
strate the benefit of iden-           Probability Score of Sentence             Probability Score of Concept
                                       (Minimum across tokens of                 (Minimum across tokens of
tifying concepts for the                all concepts of sentence)                       the concept)
detection task and show
that the probabilities of Figure 5: Trend of hallucination with the calculated probability score
the concept tokens pro- (Minimum technique) at both the sentence and concept levels. As the
vide a stronger signal for score increases, the tendency to hallucinate decreases.
hallucination as compared
to all tokens.

3.2   H ALLUCINATION D ETECTION AND M ITIGATION P ERFORMANCE

Detection: In Table 1a and 1b, we compare the detection performance of self-inquiry and web
search techniques at both sentence and concept-levels. For sentence-level results, we predict the
sentence to be hallucinated if the validation procedure fails for any identified concept. Note that in
these results, we do not leverage the uncertainty score to select concepts for validation, instead we
validate all the identified concepts. We study the relationship of recall with probability thresholds in

                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Figure 11 (Appendix). The tables show that
web-search technique achieves considerably                               (a) Sentence level
                                                                                Hallucinated    Not Hallucinated
high recall and precision in detecting the hal-       Technique      Accuracy
                                                                                Prec.   Rec.    Prec.     Rec.
lucinations. Here, we emphasize on the high           Self-Inquiry      0.62    59.89   63.76   65.23    61.42
‘recall’ as we show that our mitigation ap-           Web-Search        0.681   61.82   85.96   80.39    52.03
proach does not introduce new hallucinations
                                                                         (b) Concept level
even in the case of incorrectly detected hallu-
                                                                                Hallucinated    Not Hallucinated
cinations, i.e., false positives.                     Technique      Accuracy
                                                                                Prec.   Rec.    Prec.     Rec.
                                                      Self-Inquiry 0.65  47.96 45.85 73.37  74.98
Mitigation: On sentences where our valida-            Web-Search   0.75  58.17 87.68 91.69  68.30
tion procedure (using Web search) reports hal-
lucinations, we apply our mitigation technique. Table 1: Hallucination detection performance
We note that a sentence that is reported as hal- of self-inquiry and web-search techniques. It also
lucination can either be actually hallucinated shows separate precision and recall on both hallu-
(true positive) or not hallucinated (false posi- cinated and non-hallucinated instances.
tive). Table 2 shows the result of our method.
It successfully mitigates the hallucination on
57.6% of the correctly detected hallucinations (True Positives). Furthermore, it achieves this at min-
imal ‘deterioration’ (3.06%), i.e., it incorrectly converts a minimal 3.06% of the non-hallucinated
instances to sentences having incorrect information (hallucinated).
Analyzing Mitigation Failures: Table 8 and 9 (in Appendix)
show examples where our mitigation technique successfully mit-
                                                                     Is Hallucinated?
igates and fails to mitigate the hallucinations, respectively. We Before      After     Percentage
observe that in many of the failure cases, our technique fixes
some hallucinated content of the sentences but fails to fix ALL       ✓       ✗          40.81%
the hallucinated content from them. Examples 1 and 2 in Table         ✓       ✓         30.04%
9 correspond to this type of failure. Furthermore, in some of the      ✗      ✗          28.26%
failure cases, our technique results in a sentence that is no longer   ✗      ✓          0.89%
hallucinated but is not completely related to the topic. For in-
stance, the fourth example in Table 9 about the topic ‘Harry S. Table 2: Results after modifying
Kennedy’; the model generates “Harry S. Kennedy was ... 35th the reported hallucinations.
President ...” which is wrong and our mitigation technique mod-
ifies it to “John F. Kennedy was ...” which is factually correct but
not related to the topic ‘Harry S. Kennedy’. This happens because the output of the mitigation step is
contingent on the information in the retrieved knowledge. We present further analysis in Appendix.

3.3   ACTIVE D ETECTION AND M ITIGATION P ERFORMANCE

The two findings in 3.1 motivate our approach in which we actively detect hallucinations leveraging
the logit values and mitigate them during the generation process which further helps in preventing
their propagation. Specifically, we iteratively generate sentences and when our detection method
reports hallucination (by validating uncertain concepts), we repair the sentence using our mitigation
method and then continue generating the next sentence. We demonstrated separate detection and
mitigation efficacy in 3.2. Figure 2 compares the hallucination percentage in GPT-3.5’s output and
our “active” approach. It reduces the hallucination percentage from 47.4% to 14.53% which proves
that the active intervention indeed successfully prevents hallucination propagation. In Figure 10
(Appendix), we plot this comparison for different categories of hallucinations and show that our
approach does well in all the categories. We further elaborate on it in Appendix D.

4     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
To further demonstrate our approach’s wide applicability, we present three additional studies and
discuss other usecases in K. We present main results here and a detailed description in the Appendix.

4.1   E FFICACY WITH A NOTHER LLM (V ICUNA -13B FINE - TUNED ON LL A MA-2)

Figure 6 compares hallucination % in the output of Vicuna-13B (on the ‘article generation task’)
and with our proposed active detection and mitigation approach. We select Vicuna (v1.5) because


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


it is the SOTA open-source model. Our approach considerably reduces the hallucinations similar
to the case with GPT-3.5 model. This study is conducted on 10 randomly sampled topics (i.e., 50
generated sentences) from the topic set described in Section 3. We
note that similar to the setup with GPT-3.5 where we used instruc-
                                                                            70        lower is better
tional prompts with GPT-3.5 itself for all the steps of the approach
(i.e., identifying key concepts, creating validation questions, etc.),      60     56
                                                                            50


                                                                                                        % Hallucination
following the same, here we use Vicuna-13B for all those steps. This
result demonstrates generality and applicability of our approach            40
in reducing hallucinations of LLMs.
                                                                            30
                                                                            20                    18
4.2 A DAPTING THE A PPROACH FOR M ULTI - HOP Q UESTIONS
                                                                            10
Here, we show that our approach can be adapted to improve the per-           0 Vicuna 13B Active Detection
formance on multi-hop bridge questions (Table 10). Recall that our                           and Mitigation
approach works by mitigating hallucination/incorrectness in the sen-
tences generated by the model. Thus, if we can enable the model to Figure 6: Comparing halluci-
answer these multi-hop questions step by step, then our active detec- nation % for Vicuna-13B and
tion and mitigation approach can be applied to these steps, leading to our proposed approach on the
correct predictions. To this end, we prompt the model and provide ‘article generation task’.
in-context examples demonstrating it to answer a given multi-hop
question step by step. Appendix H shows the corresponding prompt
used for this purpose. Specifically, for a test question, the model generates the answer in multiple
steps (one step at a time) and for each step, we apply our technique in which we first identify the low
probability concepts from the sentence, validate their correctness using web search results, mitigate
the hallucination (if detected), and then proceed to generate the next step. In our case study, we
sample 50 multi-hop bridge questions from the validation set of HotpotQA Yang et al. (2018).
Main Result (Figure 7): First, we show the perfor-
mance of GPT-3.5 which answers 54% of the questions                                          60
                                                                                                   54
                                                               % Hallucination (Incorrect)



incorrectly. GPT-3.5 with in-context examples results                                                                       50
in a slight improvement over the zero-shot performance.                                      50
GPT-3.5 leveraging the knowledge retrieved from the web                                      40                                       38
(using the question as search query) as context improves
the performance and results in fewer incorrect predic-                                       30                                                26
tions. Finally, we show the performance of our active                                        20
detection and mitigation approach which results in con-
siderably fewer hallucinations (just 26%), i.e., a higher                                    10
percentage of correct answers. Table 11 (Appendix H)
                                                                                              0 GPT-3.5 GPT-3.5 GPT-3.5 w/                     Our
shows examples of responses generated using our ap-
                                                                                                                          few-shot Knowledge Approach
proach. This demonstrates our approach’s effectiveness
in improving performance on multi-hop QA.
                                                                 Figure 7: Comparing % hallucination
                                                                 on Multi-hop bridge Questions.
4.3   FALSE P REMISE Q UESTIONS

LLMs perform remarkably well on a wide range of ques-
tions that are factually correct and make the right assumptions Khashabi et al. (2020); Brown et al.
(2020); Zhang et al. (2022). However, users in real-world applications often ask questions that are
based on false premises such as “Why energy is absorbed in exothermic reactions?” and “Why do
floppy disks have higher storage capacity than USB drives?”. We observe that SOTA models often
struggle to appropriately respond to such questions; thus, they serve as another challenging evalua-
tion setting. To this end, we conduct a case study and compile a set of 50 such adversarial questions,
i.e., questions for which GPT-3.5 generates an incorrect response. Furthermore, we also create a
true premise question corresponding to each false premise question (examples in Table 12).
Approach: An ideal response to such questions is application dependent; some applications may
require identifying such questions and then abstaining on them like the selective prediction systems
Kamath et al. (2020); Xin et al. (2021) while some applications may also require suggesting a ‘recti-
fied’ question and providing response to that rectified question like the search engines. Our approach
supports these requirements by using the validation and mitigation step on the given question.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Specifically, we first retrieve the relevant knowledge (via Bing Search using the question as query).
Then, we apply our validation and mitigation technique, i.e.,
conditioned on the retrieved knowledge, we prompt the model             Adversarial
                                                                        Questions
to respond ‘Yes’ if the question makes factually correct as-
sumptions, otherwise respond ‘No’. If the response to this                  100
prompt is No, then we proceed to modify the question using
                                                                                     76
the mitigation step. Table 13 shows the corresponding instruc-
tional prompts. This step enables identifying false premise
questions and rectifying them to facilitate the system in pro-
viding an appropriate response. Importantly, we also show that
our approach does not incorrectly modify a true premise ques-                                 24
tion. This is crucial because if the user’s question is correct
then the system’s response must be pertinent to that.
Main Result (Figure 8): As mentioned above, the questions
in our evaluation set are adversarially collected, i.e., GPT-
3.5 gives incorrect response to all of them. We evaluate the Figure 8: Comparing % hallucina-
performance of GPT-3.5 when retrieved knowledge (via bing tion on ‘False Premise Questions’.
search) is given as additional context. We find that even with
the knowledge, it manages to answer only 24% false premise
questions correctly, i.e., hallucinates on the remaining 76%. In contrast, our approach answers
76% questions correctly and hallucinates only on 24%. Furthermore, we note that even in some
of these 24% hallucinated responses, some of the individual sentences in the responses are correct.
However, since we focus on complete answer correctness, we consider them as incorrect. Table 15
shows examples of responses on false premise questions generated by the GPT-3.5, GPT-3.5 with
retrieved knowledge, and our active detection and mitigation approach.

5    R ELATED W ORK
One thread of research pertaining to hallucinations has focused on studying different causes of this
phenomenon such as training data quality Wang (2019); Lee et al. (2022a), source-target divergence
Dhingra et al. (2019), ill-suited modeling Aralikatte et al. (2021); Feng et al. (2020); Li et al. (2018),
and stochasticity during inference Dziri et al. (2021); Tian et al. (2019); Lee et al. (2022b).
The other thread focuses on addressing this problem Manakul et al. (2023); Azaria & Mitchell
(2023); Lee et al. (2022b); Du et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023). Manakul et al. (2023) propose to first
sample multiple responses from the model and then measure the information consistency between
them to detect hallucinations. They posit that when a model knows a given concept well, the sampled
responses are likely to contain consistent facts. Another recent work Azaria & Mitchell (2023) trains
a separate classifier that takes the LLM’s activation values as input and predicts its truthfulness. Lee
et al. (2022b) hypothesize that the randomness of sampling is more harmful to factuality when it
is used to generate the latter part of a sentence than the beginning and propose factual-nucleus
sampling that dynamically adapts the ‘nucleus’ p along the generation of each sentence. Du et al.
(2023) propose an approach motivated by The Society of Mind and multi-agent settings in which
multiple models individually propose and jointly debate their responses and reasoning processes to
arrive at a common answer. We present an extended and detailed related work in Appendix A.
In our approach, we propose to actively detect and mitigate hallucinations by breaking down the
complex task into multiple simpler steps. We utilize the logit values to identify candidates of poten-
tial hallucination, web search to validate the information and prompting to fix the hallucination.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed an approach called active detection and mitigation to address the problem
pertaining to the factual hallucinations of large language models. Through systematic and extensive
experiments on several tasks such as article generation, multi-hop QA, and false premise QA, we
showed that our approach considerably reduces the hallucinations of LLMs. Overall, by addressing
the hallucination problem, our work contributes to improving LLMs’ reliability and trustworthiness,
a crucial step en route to enabling their widespread adoption in real-world applications.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
The proposed approach considerably reduces the hallucination in the output of LLMs; however, it
does not eliminate it completely. In other words, it certainly improves the correctness and reliabil-
ity of LLMs but does not empower them with absolute correctness. We have provided a detailed
description of the dataset in Section 3 which does not involve any kind of bias to the best of our
knowledge. We will release both sentence and concept-level hallucination annotations to facilitate a
systematic future research in this important research direction.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We note that the experiments conducted in this work are easy to reproduce. We have detailed our ap-
proach in Section 2 and provided all the additional information in Appendix B. All the experimental
details are provided in Section 3 and Appendix C.

R EFERENCES
Rahul Aralikatte, Shashi Narayan, Joshua Maynez, Sascha Rothe, and Ryan McDonald. Focus
  attention: Promoting faithfulness and diversity in summarization. In Proceedings of the 59th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6078–6095, Online,
  August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.474.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.474.
Amos Azaria and Tom Mitchell. The internal state of an llm knows when its lying. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.13734, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Meng Cao, Yue Dong, and Jackie Cheung. Hallucinated but factual! inspecting the factuality of
 hallucinations in abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3340–3354, Dublin,
 Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.
 236. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.236.
Anthony Chen, Panupong Pasupat, Sameer Singh, Hongrae Lee, and Kelvin Guu. Purr: Efficiently
  editing language model hallucinations by denoising language model corruptions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14908, 2023.
Sihao Chen, Fan Zhang, Kazoo Sone, and Dan Roth. Improving faithfulness in abstractive sum-
  marization with contrast candidate generation and selection. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-
  ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
  man Language Technologies, pp. 5935–5941, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.475. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  naacl-main.475.
I Chern, Steffi Chern, Shiqi Chen, Weizhe Yuan, Kehua Feng, Chunting Zhou, Junxian He, Gra-
  ham Neubig, Pengfei Liu, et al. Factool: Factuality detection in generative ai–a tool augmented
  framework for multi-task and multi-domain scenarios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13528, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Bhuwan Dhingra, Manaal Faruqui, Ankur Parikh, Ming-Wei Chang, Dipanjan Das, and William Co-
  hen. Handling divergent reference texts when evaluating table-to-text generation. In Proceedings
  of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4884–4895, Flo-
  rence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1483.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1483.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improv-
  ing factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14325, 2023.

Nouha Dziri, Andrea Madotto, Osmar Zaı̈ane, and Avishek Joey Bose. Neural path hunter: Reducing
  hallucination in dialogue systems via path grounding. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2197–2214, Online and Punta Cana,
  Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2021.emnlp-main.168. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.168.

Yang Feng, Wanying Xie, Shuhao Gu, Chenze Shao, Wen Zhang, Zhengxin Yang, and Dong Yu.
  Modeling fluency and faithfulness for diverse neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 59–66, 2020.

Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Yujiu Yang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen.
  Critic: Large language models can self-correct with tool-interactive critiquing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.11738, 2023.

Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=rygGQyrFvH.

Yichong Huang, Xiachong Feng, Xiaocheng Feng, and Bing Qin. The factual inconsistency problem
  in abstractive text summarization: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14839, 2021.

Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.

Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang,
  Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. Active retrieval augmented generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.06983, 2023.

Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language mod-
  els (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.

Amita Kamath, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Selective question answering under domain shift. In
 Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
 5684–5696, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
 2020.acl-main.503. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.503.

Daniel Khashabi, Sewon Min, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. UNIFIEDQA: Crossing format boundaries with a single QA system.
  In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 1896–1907,
  Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  findings-emnlp.171. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.171.

Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and
  Ashish Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id= nGgzQjzaRy.

Philipp Koehn and Rebecca Knowles. Six challenges for neural machine translation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation, pp. 28–39, Vancouver, Au-
  gust 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-3204. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/W17-3204.

Mayank Kulkarni, Debanjan Mahata, Ravneet Arora, and Rajarshi Bhowmik. Learning rich repre-
 sentation of keyphrases from text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08547, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rémi Lebret, David Grangier, and Michael Auli. Neural text generation from structured data
   with application to the biography domain. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Em-
   pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1203–1213, Austin, Texas, November
   2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D16-1128. URL https:
   //aclanthology.org/D16-1128.

Katherine Lee, Daphne Ippolito, Andrew Nystrom, Chiyuan Zhang, Douglas Eck, Chris Callison-
  Burch, and Nicholas Carlini. Deduplicating training data makes language models better. In
  Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 8424–8445, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022a. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.577. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  acl-long.577.

Nayeon Lee, Wei Ping, Peng Xu, Mostofa Patwary, Pascale N Fung, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan
  Catanzaro. Factuality enhanced language models for open-ended text generation. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:34586–34599, 2022b.

Haoran Li, Junnan Zhu, Jiajun Zhang, and Chengqing Zong. Ensure the correctness of the sum-
  mary: Incorporate entailment knowledge into abstractive sentence summarization. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 1430–1441,
  Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, August 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/C18-1121.

Shayne Longpre, Kartik Perisetla, Anthony Chen, Nikhil Ramesh, Chris DuBois, and Sameer Singh.
  Entity-based knowledge conflicts in question answering. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7052–7063, Online and Punta Cana,
  Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2021.emnlp-main.565. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.565.

Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark JF Gales. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource black-box hallu-
  cination detection for generative large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08896, 2023.

Joshua Maynez, Shashi Narayan, Bernd Bohnet, and Ryan McDonald. On faithfulness and factuality
  in abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 1906–1919, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.173. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  acl-main.173.

Paul Michel, Xian Li, Graham Neubig, and Juan Pino. On evaluation of adversarial perturba-
  tions for sequence-to-sequence models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
  American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
  nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 3103–3114, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1314. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/N19-1314.

Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Wei Koh, Mohit Iyyer,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Factscore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual
  precision in long form text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14251, 2023.

Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.

Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick, Patrick LeGresley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Jared
  Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, et al. Using deep-
  speed and megatron to train megatron-turing nlg 530b, a large-scale generative language model.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11990, 2022.

Ran Tian, Shashi Narayan, Thibault Sellam, and Ankur P Parikh. Sticking to the facts: Confident
  decoding for faithful data-to-text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08684, 2019.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hongmin Wang. Revisiting challenges in data-to-text generation with fact grounding. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 12th International Conference on Natural Language Generation, pp. 311–
  322, Tokyo, Japan, October–November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/W19-8639. URL https://aclanthology.org/W19-8639.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Ji Xin, Raphael Tang, Yaoliang Yu, and Jimmy Lin. The art of abstention: Selective prediction and
   error regularization for natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting
   of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on
   Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1040–1051, Online, August 2021.
   Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.84. URL https:
   //aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.84.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
  Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question an-
  swering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1259. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1259.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Tianhua Zhang, Hongyin Luo, Yung-Sung Chuang, Wei Fang, Luc Gaitskell, Thomas Hartvigsen,
  Xixin Wu, Danny Fox, Helen Meng, and James Glass. Interpretable unified language checking.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03728, 2023.
Ruochen Zhao, Xingxuan Li, Shafiq Joty, Chengwei Qin, and Lidong Bing. Verify-and-edit: A
  knowledge-enhanced chain-of-thought framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03268, 2023.
Zheng Zhao, Shay B. Cohen, and Bonnie Webber. Reducing quantity hallucinations in abstractive
  summarization. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp.
  2237–2249, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2020.findings-emnlp.203. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.203.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, and Ed H. Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables
  complex reasoning in large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2023a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WZH7099tgfM.
Wenxuan Zhou, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Muhao Chen. Context-faithful prompting for
 large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11315, 2023b.


A PPENDIX

A    E XTENDED R ELATED AND C ONCURRENT W ORK
Advancements in the field of natural language processing have led to the development of models
that possess an impressive ability to generate fluent and coherent text. However, these models are
vulnerable to hallucinate in their output. Prior work Maynez et al. (2020); Huang et al. (2021);
Ji et al. (2023) has categorized text hallucinations into two classes: Intrinsic (when the generated
output contradicts the source content) and Extrinsic (when the generated output cannot be verified
from the source content, i.e., it that can neither be supported nor contradicted by the source).
One thread of research pertaining to hallucinations has focused on studying different causes of this
phenomenon such as training data quality Wang (2019); Lee et al. (2022a), source-target diver-
gence Dhingra et al. (2019) (when a model is trained on noisy data with source-reference diver-
gence, it may learn to generate text that is not necessarily grounded or faithful to the given source),


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ill-suited modeling Aralikatte et al. (2021); Feng et al. (2020); Li et al. (2018), stochasticity during
inference Dziri et al. (2021); Tian et al. (2019); Lee et al. (2022b) (decoding strategies that improve
the generation diversity, such as top-k sampling, top-p, and temperature parameters, often result in
increased hallucinations which could be attributed to the introduction of “randomness/stochasticity”
while selecting tokens (from top-k or top-p) instead of choosing the most probable token while de-
coding), and parametric knowledge bias Longpre et al. (2021); Zhou et al. (2023b); Michel et al.
(2019) in which Models often tend to prioritize the parametric knowledge (knowledge acquired dur-
ing pre-training and implicitly stored in the parameters of the model) over the provided contextual
knowledge resulting in hallucinations.
The other thread focuses on addressing the hallucination problem Manakul et al. (2023); Azaria &
Mitchell (2023); Lee et al. (2022b); Du et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023). A recent work Manakul
et al. (2023) propose a sampling-based hallucination detection approach in which they first sample
multiple responses from the model and then measure the information consistency between the dif-
ferent responses. They posit that when a language model knows a given concept well, the sampled
responses are likely to be similar and contain consistent facts; on the other hand, for hallucinated
facts, stochastically sampled responses are likely to diverge and may completely contradict one an-
other.
Another recent work Azaria & Mitchell (2023) leverages LLM’s internal state to identify the truth-
fulness of a statement. Using an annotated dataset, they train a separate classifier that takes the
LLM’s activation values as input and predicts its truthfulness. Kadavath et al. (2022) have shown the
utility of model’s uncertainty values in detecting incorrectness in the model’s responses by demon-
strating that larger models are well-calibrated on multiple-choice and true/false questions. Lee et al.
(2022b) hypothesize that the randomness of sampling is more harmful to factuality when it is used
to generate the latter part of a sentence than the beginning of a sentence and propose a new sam-
pling algorithm named factual-nucleus sampling that dynamically adapts the ‘nucleus’ p along the
generation of each sentence.
Du et al. (2023) propose an approach motivated by The Society of Mind and multi-agent settings
in which multiple models individually propose and jointly debate their responses and reasoning
processes to arrive at a common answer.
Similar to our approach, concurrent work Gou et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2023); Zhao et al. (2023);
Chern et al. (2023) also proposes to use external knowledge/tools to address the hallucination prob-
lem of LLMs. Other concurrent work FactScore Min et al. (2023) presents an evaluation method that
breaks the model’s generation into a series of atomic facts and computes the percentage of atomic
facts supported by a reliable knowledge source. This supports the utility and effectiveness of our
concept validation step. Though, it has considerable differences with our approach. Firstly, we vali-
date the correctness of only the uncertain concepts which we identify using the logit output values.
This is because we have shown that models tend to hallucinate more on these uncertain concepts.
Secondly, we create a validation query pertinent to an uncertain concept and retrieve the pertinent
information using that as the search query. Also, we not only detect the hallucinations but also re-
pair them and then continue generating the next sentences. Different from our post-hoc approach
that utilizes the pretrained LLM, Chen et al. (2023) finetunes a T5-large model as compact editor to
denoise the corruptions to detect incorrectness in a given sentence. Another concurrent work Jiang
et al. (2023) proposes active retrieval augmented generation. Our work differs from this in the fol-
lowing aspects. Firstly, we calculate uncertainty at a concept level (after identifying the important
concepts using the LLM itself); in contrast, Jiang et al. (2023) actively trigger retrieval if any token
of the sentence has a probability lower than a threshold. In this work (Appendix G), we have shown
the importance of identifying the concept tokens in detecting hallucinations. This also ensures that
the validation queries are created for the entire concept and not just some tokens. Furthermore, in
this work, we demonstrate the necessity of active intervention using our novel propagation of hallu-
cination study. Also, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in multiple differnt settings
including open-ended reference free text generation.
In summary, in our approach, we propose to actively detect and mitigate hallucinations by breaking
down the complex task into multiple simpler steps. We utilize the logit output values (uncertainty) to
identify candidates of potential hallucination (at concept-level), web search to validate the informa-
tion, and prompting to fix the hallucination. We demonstrate the effectiveness and wide applicability



                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Step                Prompt
           Input Prompt            Write an article about {topic}

Identify Important Concepts        Identify all the important keyphrases from the above sentence
                                   and return a comma separated list.

 Create Validation Question        For the above sentence about {topic}, generate a yes/no
                                   question that tests the correctness of {concept}.

Answer Validation Question         {search results} Answer the below question about topic in Yes
                                   or No based on the above context. {validation question}.

Repair Hallucinated Sentence       The above sentence has information that can not be verified
                                   from the provided evidence, repair that incorrect information
                                   and create a new sentence based on the provided evidence.


              Table 3: Instructional Prompts corresponding to different steps of our approach.


of our approach on a variety of tasks, including article generation, multi-hop question answering,
and false premise question answering.

B        A DDITIONAL D ETAILS OF THE A PPROACH
In this section, we provide additional details of our approach. Table 3 shows the instructional
prompts used for different steps of the approach. We note that the instruction technique is the
preferred technique as it does not require calling a task-specific tool to achieve the corresponding
objectives of the steps.

B.1       I DENTIFY K EY C ONCEPTS S TEP

For keyword extraction, we explore a model1 that uses Keyphrase Boundary Infilling with Replace-
ment (KBIR) as its base model and is fine-tuned on the KPCrowd dataset Kulkarni et al. (2021).
Table 4 shows examples of concepts identified using the three methods, i.e., Entity Extraction, Key-
word Extraction, and Instructing the Model. It shows that the entity extraction model misses many
important concepts while the keyword extraction model identifies a lot of insignificant concepts also.
In contract, instruction technique successfully identifies all the important concepts.

B.2       C REATE VALIDATION Q UESTION S TEP

Table 5 shows examples of validation questions corresponding to each concept created via the in-
struction technique. It shows examples of both the question types, i.e., Yes/No and Wh questions.
We prefer Yes/No questions as it is relatively easier to verify the answer of these questions.
We have also conducted evaluations of the efficacy of the instructions. Specifically, for the concept
identification step, we studied randomly sampled 50 sentences. The instruction technique identified
155 concepts in total. It missed only 2 concepts (that too these missed concepts can only be loosely
regarded as important in the context of the sentence). Furthermore, the efficacy of the validation and
mitigation instructions is presented in Table 1 and 2, respectively.
We note that the overall efficacy of these techniques (and how well they serve their purpose) is
evaluated by the overall improvement in reducing the hallucinations.
We also note that the LLM can be prompted in a different way also to achieve the same objective;
however, the purpose of this work is to show that the complex task of addressing hallucinations in
an end-to-end manner can be decomposed into simpler steps that can be solved via instructing the
model.
    1
        https://huggingface.co/ml6team/keyphrase-extraction-kbir-kpcrowd


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Text                                             Entity Extrac-       Keyword Extrac-         Instructing Model
                                                 tion                 tion
John Russell Reynolds was an English             John    Russell      John         Russell    John         Russell
physician and neurologist who made signif-       Reynolds, En-        Reynolds, English,      Reynolds, English,
icant contributions to the field of neurology.   glish                physician, neurol-      physician, neurolo-
                                                                      ogist,    significant   gist, neurology
                                                                      contributions, field,
                                                                      neurology

He was born in London in 1820 and studied        London, 1820,        born,      London,      London,       1820,
medicine at the University of London.            the University of    1820,        studied    medicine, Univer-
                                                 London               medicine, Univer-       sity of London
                                                                      sity, London

After college, he worked as a lawyer for the     the PGA Tour,        college,    worked,     college,  lawyer,
PGA Tour, eventually becoming the Tour’s         Tour, 1989           lawyer, PGA, Tour,      PGA Tour, Deputy
Deputy Commissioner in 1989.                                          eventually,   Tour,     Commissioner,
                                                                      Deputy Commis-          1989
                                                                      sioner

He was born in Sydney in 1971 and grew up        Sydney, 1971         born, Sydney, 1971,     Sydney,      1971,
in the city’s western suburbs.                                        grew, city, suburbs     western suburbs

                   Table 4: Examples of concepts identified by different techniques.


Input           Generated Sentence          Concept           Validation Question
                                                              [Y/N] Was John Russell Reynolds born in Lon-
                                            London
                                                              don?
                                                              [Wh] Where was John Russell Reynolds born?

                                                              [Y/N] Was John Russell Reynolds born in 1820?
                                            1820
Write an                                                      [Wh] What year was John Russell Reynolds born?
                Reynolds was born in
article about
                London in 1820 and
John                                                          [Y/N] Did John Russell Reynolds study
                studied medicine at the
Russell                                 medicine              medicine?
                University of London.
Reynolds                                                      [Wh] What did John Russell Reynolds study at the
                                                              University of London?

                                                              [Y/N] Did Reynolds study medicine at the Uni-
                                            University        versity of London?
                                            of London         [Wh] What university did John Russell Reynolds
                                                              study medicine at?

Table 5: Examples of validation questions corresponding to the identified keyphrases generated by
Instructing the Model technique.


B.3     D ESIGN D ECISIONS

B.3.1    W HY THE TASK OF ADDRESSING HALLUCINATIONS IS BROKEN DOWN INTO MULTIPLE
         STEPS ?

We note that dealing with the hallucination problem is a complex task and prior work has shown
that breaking down a complex task into simpler sub-tasks helps the model in solving the task better
and achieve higher performance Wei et al. (2022); Zhou et al. (2023a); Khot et al. (2023). Thus,
we break down this task into individual sub-tasks which are considerably easier for the model. For
the same reason, we also break down the validation procedure into several steps. We also note
that creating multiple steps can increase the chances of propagation of error from one to the other;
however, the individual steps in our approach are very simple, and the models perform remarkably
well on these steps.


                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3.2    W HY VALIDATION IS DONE USING THE WEB SEARCH ?

Our preferred technique for retrieving knowledge is web search because the web is more likely to
contain the updated knowledge in comparison to a knowledge corpus whose information can become
stale, outdated, and obsolete.

B.3.3    W HY “ACTIVE ” DETECTION & MITIGATION AND NOT “ POST- HOC ” AFTER COMPLETE
         RESPONSE GENERATION ?

We note that our detection and mitigation techniques can also be applied in a “posthoc” manner after
complete response generation. However, it has several limitations which are addressed by our “ac-
tive” approach. The “active” approach prevents the propagation of hallucinations in the subsequently
generated sentences, i.e., if hallucination is detected in the initially generated sentences then it would
be mitigated and course correction would be done for the subsequently generated sentences. How-
ever, the “post-hoc” approach does not provide such an opportunity of course correction. In other
words, in the “active” approach, the model sees the mitigated / corrected sentences while generating
the subsequent sentences; thus, its output will be more correct, coherent, and fluent. In contrast, in
the “posthoc” approach, the generated sentences are based on the initially generated previous sen-
tences and thus the mitigated sentence will not be able to influence the generation of subsequent
sentences; thus, the output would not be as coherent and fluent as the active approach.
Also, applying it in a post-hoc manner will fix the sentences individually thus, redundant information
could be present in multiple sentences hampering the quality of the response.
For example, for the topic “Twila Shively”, the model generated “Twila Shively is a renowned Amer-
ican artist and sculptor who has been creating art for over four decades. She is best known for her
large-scale sculptures, which often feature abstract shapes and forms. . . . ” which is completely
hallucinated.
After applying our approach in a post-hoc manner gives “Twila Shively was an American competitive
baseball player who played from 1945 through 1950 in the All-American Girls Professional Baseball
League. Twila Shively is known for playing baseball. . . . ”
In contrast, active approach results in “Twila Shively was an American competitive baseball player
who played from 1945 through 1950 in the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League. She
was born in Decatur, Illinois on March 20, 1922 and passed away on November 25, 1999. Twila
began playing softball at the age of eight and quickly moved up in the softball ranks in Chicago.
...”
Thus, the active approach results in an output of much higher quality and doesn’t suffer from issues
such are incoherence, consistency, repetition, etc.

B.4     W HY THE UNIT OF GENERATION IS A SENTENCE ?

We select a unit as a sentence over multiple sentences and (also over just a few words instead of a
sentence) because of the following reasons:
Why not multiple sentences? In autoregressive generation, the generation depends on the context
including the model’s previously generated text. Thus, if we consider multiple sentences as a unit
in our approach (let’s say 3 sentences) and if one of the initial sentences is hallucinated (and thus
replaced with the corrected sentence), the subsequent sentences (i.e., the remaining sentences of the
unit) may not stand relevant (as they were based on a sentence that has been replaced) and it may
make the generation incoherent. Furthermore, the propagation of hallucination is another negative
contributor as the next sentences may carry forward the hallucination of the previous incorrect sen-
tences. Thus, the subsequent sentences in the unit would need to be regenerated. This implies that
using multiple sentences as a unit may not return that benefit (that too at the extra cost of generating
multiple sentences at once).
Why not a phrase or a set of words? We note that using a few words (i.e., a window of text) may
not have sufficient information to test the correctness of the concepts in the generation. For instance,
if the window is of the following words: “Rick Mahler won three gold medals and 2 silver medals
at the”, it doesn’t have sufficient information to validate the correctness of the individual concepts.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


On the other hand, a sentence typically provides richer context to validate the correctness of the
concepts of the sentence.
Because of the above two reasons, we use a sentence as the unit in our method.

B.5     A DVANTAGES OF THE P ROPOSED A PPROACH

In addition to the effectiveness and wide applicability of our approach in addressing hallucinations
of LLMs (as demonstrated through extensive experiments), it has numerous other advantages:
1. It circumvents the need for modifying the internals of LLMs to address their hallucination
   problem making it a plug-and-play yet effective solution.
2. It improves the explainability and interpretability of the LLM’s output as the generation can
   be attributed back to the retrieved knowledge.
3. The knowledge retrieval step allows opportunities to use proprietary/domain-specific knowl-
   edge during the generation process. Thus, allowing it access to the updated information.
4. Our retrieval method retrieves knowledge pertinent to the sentence and thus enables accurate
   hallucination detection and mitigation.
5. Active intervention allows opportunities for course correction during the generation process.

B.6     D RAWBACKS OF THE P ROPOSED A PPROACH

B.6.1    I MPACT ON I NFERENCE E FFICIENCY
Our approach results in improvements in the form of reduced hallucinations and thus makes the
model more reliable; however, it comes at the expense of increased inference cost. However, we
believe that at current time, to enable the widespread adoption of LLMs, it is more important to
address their reliability and trustworthiness concerns because computational advancements are on-
going at a rapid pace. Moreover, even larger models with multi-fold times more parameters such
as PaLM (540B) Chowdhery et al. (2022), Gopher (280B) Rae et al. (2021), and MT-NLG (530B)
Smith et al. (2022) are also being developed which have even higher inference cost showcasing a
larger focus of the community on developing better performing systems. Though it may not be a
problem for all use cases, we provide a detailed discussion on it for all the steps with suggestions on
their lower-cost alternatives.
Identifying Important Concepts: Firstly, we note the importance of this step because validating the
correctness of the entire sentence at once is infeasible as a sentence can contain multiple different
facets all of which can not be validated at once. In contrast, individually validating correctness
corresponding to the concepts provides opportunities for accurately detecting incorrectness. Thus,
if we skip this step and directly proceed to the validation step for the entire sentence then it will have
limitations. For example, sentences like “Steven Threet is best known for his time at the University
of Michigan, where he was a three-year starter and led the Wolverines to a Big Ten Championship
in 2008.” contain multiple facets that need to be validated separately because a single web search
may not return all the information that is required to validate the entire correctness.
This step incurs the cost of inference in which the input is the instruction (provided in Table 3) and
the sentence. We mention the benefits of “instructing the model” technique in Section 2.1.1.
We discuss other lower-cost alternatives for this step below: A simple yet efficient method is to
leverage a relatively smaller LLM for this step. This is feasible because identifying the concepts
is an “easy” step and even smaller LLMs are typically very effective in this. Moreover, even a
more smaller model such as T5 can also be finetuned for this particular task which can considerably
reduce the cost. Smaller models have low inference cost (both in terms of FLOPs and latency).
Furthermore, the other techniques already discussed in the paper, namely Entity Extraction and
keyword extraction are other lower-cost alternatives. Specifically, the KBIR model is built on top of
RoBERTa architecture which is even more efficient.
In summary, smaller models (smaller LLMs or task-specific finetuned models) can be utilized for
this task to make it more efficient.
Calculating Model’s Uncertainty: This is not a resource intensive task as it just requires calculating
the score from the logit values.


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Creating Validation Question: Similar to the first step, creating a validation query for a concept
is also a task at which even smaller models (that even have only a few million parameters) do quite
well. A lot of existing research on question generation uses the T5 models. Creating a validation
question using an LLM requires taking the instruction (filled with the concept) (Table 3) and the
sentence as input.
Another cost-effective alternative for this step is to simply mask out the selected concept from the
sentence and use it as the validation query for the web search. Though, it requires some heuristics
to create an appropriate validation query (such as selecting only a window of tokens on both sides
of the concept after masking as the validation query, this would be required because using the entire
sentence would have many different facets, and web search may not return relevant results). This
would definitely make it much more efficient but it will lose effectiveness in creating “high-quality”
queries pertinent to the concept and thus may not result in slight degradation in the validation pro-
cedure.
Answering Validation Question and Mitigation Steps: These steps are more costly than the oth-
ers because they also take the retrieved knowledge as input. We note that these are crucial steps of
the method. They can be made more efficient (though it will compromise the effectiveness) by com-
bining them into a single step, i.e., validation and mitigation can be done using a single instructional
prompt. However, we note that this is a relatively difficult task as compared to the previous steps
and thus decomposing it into two individual steps provides better results. Thus, making this step
more efficient will have tradeoffs with the performance.
Overall, these steps can be made more efficient (in terms of both computation cost and latency)
using smaller LLMs or external task-specific tools. In contrast, the methodology highlighted in red
in Figure 1 uses the same model for all the steps. Furthermore, we note that in resource-constrained
applications, the suggested efficient alternatives can be utilized.
We present an empirical analysis of the latency where we compare the latency of all the steps of the
methodology. Figure 9 shows the comparison of latency of various steps (at a sentence level). We
note that the latency of the mitigation step is low as it is only conditionally called for some sentences.
We show the average mitigation latency for sentences on which it is called in the Mitigation∗ bar.
We conduct this study for 10 topics (i.e., 50 sentences) for the GPT-3.5 (text-davinci-003) model.
Comparison of Overall Latency with the Generation: The overall latency of the method is 2.58
times that of the regular generation (5354.20 against 2071.69).
Why the latency of the generation step is high? This is because for the later sentences, it also
takes the context in the input.
Why the latency of validation is high? This is because validation procedure includes three steps
(validation question creation, retrieval, and answering validation question). Furthermore, validation
could be required for multiple concepts.
What does Mitigation∗ represent? Note that the mitigation step is only conditionally executed for
some sentences. We show the average mitigation latency for sentences on which it is called in the
Mitigation∗ bar.


B.6.2    C ORRECTNESS OF R ETRIEVED K NOWLEDGE

Web searches can sometimes return information that is fabricated. Though we use the top web
search results as our context (primarily from the reliable sources), there remains a chance that the
knowledge is incorrect which can result in incorrect hallucination detection.


B.6.3    E RROR P ROPAGATION

Multiple sequential steps can increase the chances of propagation of error from one to the other;
however, we note that the individual steps in our approach are very simple, and the LLMs perform
remarkably well on these steps. Furthermore, our mitigation technique does not introduce new
hallucinations even in the case of incorrectly detected hallucinations, i.e., false positives.


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      5000


                Avg. Latency at Sentence Level (ms)
                                                      4000


                                                      3000


                                                      2000


                                                      1000


                                                        0
                                                             Generation Identify Validation Mitigation Mitigation * Overall
                                                                        Uncertain
                                                                        Concepts

Figure 9: Comparing latency of various steps of the methodology (at a sentence level). Note that
the latency of mitigation is low as it is only conditionally called for some sentences. We show the
average mitigation latency for sentences on which it is called in the Mitigation∗ bar.


C     E VALUATION DATA

C.1   S TATISTICS

Table 6 shows the statistics of the sentences generated by the GPT-3.5 (text-davinci-003 with tem-
perature 0) model. A sentence has ∼ 18 words on average and each sentence has ∼ 3.2 key
concepts that are identified by our instruction technique.

                                                                 Statistic                         Mean ± Std
                                                                 # Words in a Sentence              18.6 ± 5.55
                                                                 # Key Concepts in a Sentence       3.27± 1.63
                                                                 # Words in a Key Concept           1.79 ± 1.02

                                                                Table 6: Statistics of generated sentences.


Table 7 shows examples of sentence-level and concept-level hallucination annotations.

C.2   H UMAN A NNOTATION AND AGREEMENT WITH E XPERT A NNOTATION

We additionally compile human annotations from two annotators on randomly sampled 10 topics
(50 sentences). Specifically, we asked them to mark the correctness of the sentence by searching
over the web, the same annotation procedure followed for expert annotation detailed in Section 3.
Cohen’s kappa of the annotators with the expert annotation is 0.84 and 0.92 respectively and the
kappa within themselves is 0.84. This shows the high agreement and correctness of our annotations.
We note that we use our expert annotations for all the results as they are more accurate and reliable.
Since the generation is for a variety of topics of different domains and would be beyond the common
knowledge of a typical human, thus, we use web search to gather the relevant information to check
the correctness of the generation. Multiple web searches were required in some cases because a
generation can contain multiple facets of information all of which can not be validated in a single
web search.
For example, sentences like “Steven Threet is best known for his time at the University of Michigan,
where he was a three-year starter and led the Wolverines to a Big Ten Championship in 2008.”,
“Rick Mahler was a Major League Baseball pitcher who played for the Atlanta Braves, Cincinnati


                                                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Sentence #      Sentence                                                                       Sentence-level
                                                                                                Correctness
 Sentence 1      Eleanor Arnason is an award-winning                      science fiction and   Correct
                  fantasy author who has been writing since the 1970s .
 Sentence 2      She is best known for her novel A Woman of the Iron People ,                   Correct
                 which won the James Tiptree Jr. Award in 1991 .
 Sentence 3      Her work has been praised for its exploration of gender , race ,               Correct
                 and identity , as well as its imaginative world-building .
 Sentence 4      Arnason was born in Minneapolis , Minnesota in 1942 .                          Hallucination
 Sentence 5      She attended the University of Minnesota , where she earned a                  Hallucination
                  degree in English literature .

Table 7: Examples of both sentence and concept-level annotations for the input: “Write an article
about Eleanor Arnason”. Annotation for correct concepts is represented in green while annotation
for hallucinated concept is represented in red .


                                             140       text-davinci-003
                                             120       Our Approach
                       Hallucination Count


                                             100
                                              80
                                              60
                                              40
                                              20
                                               0
                                                   Date Number Not Other No
                                                              Related Factual Evidence
                                                                       Errors
                  Figure 10: Comparing hallucinations across different categories.


Reds, and St. Louis Cardinals from 1979 to 1994.” contain multiple facets that need to be validated
separately because a single web search may not return all the information that is necessary to validate
the correctness of all the facets of such sentences.

D    ACTIVE D ETECTION AND M ITIGATION P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS

Figure 2 compares the percentage of hallucination in the output of GPT-3.5 model and our approach.
It reduces the hallucination percentage from 47.4% to 14.53%. This proves that the active interven-
tion during the generation process also does well in preventing the propagation of hallucination in
the model’s output. In Figure 10, we plot this comparison for different categories of hallucination
and show that our approach does well in all the categories.

E    R ECALL OF H ALLUCINATION D ETECTION VS P ROBABILITY T HRESHOLD

Figure 11 compares the recall of hallucination detection for self-inquiry and web search techniques
at different probability thresholds. Web search considerably outperforms self-inquiry at all
thresholds and hence is better at detecting hallucinations. Selecting the probability threshold de-


                                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               (a) Sentence-level                                                                     (b) Concept-level
             100                                                                                    100
                         Self-Inquiry                                                                           Self-Inquiry
                         Web Search                                                                             Web Search
             80                                                                                      80

             60                                                                                      60
    Recall


                                                                                           Recall
             40                                                                                      40

             20                                                                                      20

              0                                                                                       0
                   0.2   0.3    0.4     0.5          0.6   0.7     0.8   0.9         1.0                  0.2   0.3    0.4     0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1.0
                                 Probability Threshold                                                                  Probability Threshold

Figure 11: Recall of hallucination detection vs Probability threshold plot for Self Inquiry and web
search techniques at both sentence-level and concept-level.



                                                                                       Minimum across All tokens
                                                    0.70                               (AUC=0.568)
                                                                                       Minimum across Concept tokens
                                                                                       (AUC=0.623)
                                                    0.65
                                        Precision


                                                    0.60

                                                    0.55

                                                    0.50


                                                             0.2               0.4                  0.6         0.8             1.0
                                                                                            Recall
Figure 12: Demonstrating the benefit of identifying concepts from a sentence for detecting halluci-
nations. The figure shows precision-recall curves for the sentence level hallucination detection task
corresponding to two methods that use the probabilities calculated from the logit output values. The
blue curve corresponds to the technique in which we use the minimum probability across all tokens
of the sentence and the orange curve is for the technique in which we use the minimum over only
the tokens of the identified concepts.


pends on the tolerance level of the application. For instance, in a high-risk application domain like
biomedical, we can keep a very high threshold, and in a low-risk domain like movie recommen-
dation, we can relatively lower threshold. In this work, we use a probability threshold of 0.55.
However, we note that it can be adjusted as per the application requirements.



F    H ALLUCINATION M ITIGATION A NALYSIS

Tables 8 shows examples where our mitigation technique successfully mitigates the hallucinations.
Table 9 shows examples where our technique fails to mitigate hallucinations. We observe that in
many of the failure cases, our technique fixes some hallucinated content of the sentences but fails to
fix ALL the hallucinated content from them. Furthermore, in some of the failure cases, our technique
results in a sentence which is no longer hallucinated but it not completely related to the topic.


                                                                                           22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Topic               Rick Mahler
Original Sentence   Mahler was born in San Diego, California in 1956 . (✗)
Hallucination       He was born in Austin in 1953.
Reason
Modified Sentence   Rick Mahler was born in Austin, Texas on August 5, 1953. (✓)
Topic               Matthew Aylmer, 1st Baron Aylmer
Original Sentence   Baron Aylmer, was an English naval officer and politician who served as a Member of
                    Parliament and later as a peer in the House of Lords . (✗)
Hallucination       He was in House of Commons not House of Lords.
Reason
Modified Sentence   Baron Aylmer was an Anglo-Irish Royal Navy officer and Whig politician who sat in the
                    English and British House of Commons between 1695 and 1720. (✓)
Topic               Derek King
Original Sentence   In 2014, Derek King released his debut single ”Let’s Go,” which quickly became a hit
                    in Canada. (✗)
Hallucination       ”Let’s Go” was not his song.
Reason
Modified Sentence   In 2014, Derek King released his debut mixtape Fake I.D., which featured fellow Bay
                    Area artists Rayven Justice and IAMSU!, among others. (✓)
Topic               Marshall Manesh
Original Sentence   Marshall Manesh is an Iranian-American actor best known for his roles on the television
                    shows How I Met Your Mother and The Middle . (✗)
Hallucination       He was not in The Middle.
Reason
Modified Sentence   Marshall Manesh is an Iranian-American actor best known for his recurring roles on
                    the television shows Will & Grace, Scrubs, Andy Barker, P.I., Hot in Cleveland, Boston
                    Legal, and How I Met Your Mother, where he played taxi driver Ranjit. (✓)
Topic               William J. Flanagan, Jr.
Original Sentence   He is the founder and CEO of Flanagan Financial Group, a financial services firm based in
                     New York City . (✗)
Hallucination       The complete sentence is hallucinated as he is a retired US Navy admiral.
Reason
Modified Sentence   He is a retired four-star admiral who served as Commander in Chief, United States At-
                    lantic Fleet from 1994 to 1996 and is the recipient of numerous military awards. (✓)

Table 8: Examples of successful mitigation of hallucinations by our mitigation technique. Original
Sentence corresponds to the sentence generated by the model and Modified Sentence corresponds
to the sentence obtained on applying our technique.


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Topic               Matthew Aylmer, 1st Baron Aylmer
Original Sentence   Aylmer joined the Royal Navy in 1790 and served in the French Revolutionary Wars
                    and the Napoleonic Wars . (✗)
Hallucination       He did not serve in these wars.
Reason
Modified Sentence   Aylmer       entered     the     Royal      Navy     under     the   protection of   the
                    Duke of Buckingham as a Lieutenant in 1678 and served in                             the
                     French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars . (✗)
Hallucination       It rectified the date but failed to correct the hallucination about wars.
Reason
Topic               K. S. Manilal
Original Sentence   Manilal was a prolific writer and translator, having written more than 50 books and
                    translated over 100 works from English, Sanskrit , and other languages into Malayalam.
                    (✗)
Hallucination       He has not written 50 books and translated works to English and Malayalam.
Reason
Modified Sentence   Manilal was a prolific researcher and translator, having translated Hendrik van Rheede’s
                    17th century Latin botanical treatise, Hortus Malabaricus, into English, Sanskrit , and
                    Malayalam. (✗)
Hallucination       The information about Hortus Malabaricus is correct but he translated it into English and
Reason              Malayalam only and not Sanskrit.
Topic               Freddie Frith
Original Sentence   He was born in London in 1929 and began his racing career in 1951 . (✗)
Hallucination       He was born in Grimsby in 1909 and began his career in 1930.
Reason
Modified Sentence   Freddie Frith was born in Grimsby, England in 1909 and began his racing career in 1935
                    when he won the Junior Manx Grand Prix. (✗)
Hallucination       He did win the Junior Grand Prix in 1935 but he began hi career in 1930.
Reason
Topic               Harry S. Kennedy
Original Sentence   Harry S. Kennedy was an American politician who served as the 35th President of the United States
                     from 1961 to 1963 . (✗)
Hallucination       This sentence is true for John F. Kennedy not Harry S. Kennedy.
Reason
Modified Sentence   John F. Kennedy was an American politician who served as the 35th President of the
                    United States from 1961 to 1963. (✗)
Hallucination       This sentence is not hallucinated but it is not related to the topic.
Reason

Table 9: Examples where our mitigation technique fails to mitigate complete hallucination in the
generated sentence. Original Sentence corresponds to the sentence generated by the model and
Modified Sentence corresponds to the sentence obtained on applying our technique.


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       0.70                            Miniumum
                                       0.65                            Average
                                                                       Normalized
                                       0.60
                                       0.55


                           Precision
                                       0.50
                                       0.45
                                       0.40
                                       0.35
                                              0.2   0.4       0.6     0.8      1.0
                                                          Recall
Figure 13: PR curves for the hallucination detection task (concept-level) using the three probability
calculation techniques. ‘Minimum’ technique achieves highest AUC.



Question                                                                              Answer
The football manager who recruited David Beckham managed Manchester United            from 1986 to 2013
during what timeframe?
The Vermont Catamounts men’s soccer team currently competes in a conference           the North Atlantic Confer-
that was formerly known as what from 1988 to 1996?                                    ence
Ralph Hefferline was a psychology professor at a university that is located in what   New York City
city?
What is the county seat of the county where East Lempster, New Hampshire is           Newport
located?
Blackfin is a family of processors developed by the company that is headquartered     Norwood, Massachusetts
in what city?

                      Table 10: Examples of multihop questions from HotpotQA.



G     A NALYSIS OF L OGIT O UTPUT VALUES

G.1    B ENEFIT OF I DENTIFYING C ONCEPTS FROM A S ENTENCE

Now, we demonstrate the benefit of identifying concepts from a sentence and leveraging the logit
output values corresponding to their tokens for detecting hallucinations. To this end, we plot
precision-recall curves for the hallucination detection task corresponding to two methods that use
the probabilities calculated from the logit output values. The blue curve corresponds to the technique
in which we use the minimum probability across all tokens of the sentence and the orange curve is
for the technique in which we use the minimum over only the tokens of the identified concepts.
Figure 12 shows the two curves. The orange curve achieves higher area under the precision-recall
curve implying that utilizing the probabilities of the concept tokens provides a stronger signal
for hallucination as compared to the probabilities corresponding to all the tokens.



G.2    C OMPARING P ROBABILITY C ALCULATION T ECHNIQUES

Figure 13 shows the Precision-Recall curves for the hallucination detection task (at concept-level)
using the three probability calculation techniques, i.e., Minimum, Average, and Normalized (de-
scribed in 2.1.2). The ‘Minimum’ technique achieves the highest area under the curve and
hence is better at the hallucination detection task.


                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     M ULTI - HOP QA E XPERIMENT

H.1    P ROMPT WITH I N - CONTEXT E XAMPLES


    Question: Which team does the player named 2015 Diamond Head Classic’s MVP
    play for?

    Answer: The 2015 Diamond Head Classic’s MVP was Buddy Hield. Buddy Hield
    plays for the Sacramento Kings of the NBA. So, the answer is Sacramento
    Kings.


    Question: The Dutch-Belgian television series that "House of Anubis" was
    based on first aired in what year?

    Answer: "House of Anubis" was based on is Het Huis Anubis. Het Huis Anubis
    was first aired in 2006. So, the answer is 2006.


    Question: What is the birth date of the coach of the 2014-15 Michigan
    Wolverines men’s basketball team?

    Answer: The coach of the 2014-15 Michigan Wolverines men’s basketball team
    was John Beilein. John Beilein’s birth date is February 5, 1953.


    Question: {question}
    Answer:



Prompt with in-context examples used for prompting the model to answer ‘bridge’ multi-hop ques-
tions step by step.


H.2    E XAMPLES OF M ULTI - HOP B RIDGE Q UESTIONS

Table 10 shows examples of multi-hop bridge questions from HotpotQA dataset.


H.3    E XAMPLES OF M ODEL R ESPONSES

Table 11 shows examples of responses generated using our approach for multi-hop bridge questions.



I     FALSE P REMISE QA E XPERIMENT

Table 12 shows examples of false premise and true premise question pairs. Table 15 shows responses
generated on a few false premise questions by the GPT-3.5 (text-davinci-003) model, GPT-3.5 (text-
davinci-003) using the retrieved knowledge as context, and our approach.
Efficacy of Question Rectification: We analyze the performance of our approach in rectifying
questions; it successfully repairs 76% false premise questions while not incorrectly modifying
any true premise question. Though this step makes modifications in a small number of true premise
questions (6 instances), it does not change their semantics as shown in Table 14. Not incorrectly
modifying a true premise question is an important characteristic of this approach.


                                               26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Question: Kent Dairy Round Barn is near the city in what Montana county?
Response: The Kent Dairy Round Barn is located near Red Lodge, Montana. Red Lodge is located in Carbon
County, Montana. So, the answer is Carbon County .

Question: What political party was the 6th governor of Hawaii that passed bills to help with global warming
in Hawaii?
Response: The 6th governor of Hawaii was Linda Lingle. Linda Lingle was a member of the Republican
Party and passed bills to help with global warming in Hawaii. So, the answer is Republican Party .

Question: In what city is the mortgage lending company, founded by Dan Gilbert, headquartered?
Response: The mortgage lending company founded by Dan Gilbert is Quicken Loans. Quicken Loans is
headquartered in Detroit, Michigan. So, the answer is Detroit, Michigan .

Question: Actor David Lee Stenstrom played the character Waldo the inventor in a TV show that ran on
Nickelodeon during what yeras?
Response: The TV show was Out of Control (1984). David Lee Stenstrom played the character Waldo the
inventor in the show. The show ran on Nickelodeon from 1984 to 1985. So, the answer is 1984 to 1985 .

Question: What music school did the singer of The Search for Everything: Wave One attend?
Response: The singer of The Search for Everything: Wave One is John Mayer. John Mayer attended the
Berklee College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts. So, the answer is Berklee College of Music .

     Table 11: Examples of responses generated using our approach for multihop bridge questions.


False Premise Question                                 True Premise Question
Why does Mars have three moons?                        Why does Mars have two moons?
Why are golf balls bigger than basketballs?            Why are golf balls smaller than basketballs?
What are some papers on the relationship between       What are some papers on the relationship between
homeschooling and neuroplasticity?                     homeschooling and college preparedness?
Why do migrant workers never leave their home?         Why do migrant workers leave their home?
When a diver swims deeper, why does the water pres-    When a diver swims deeper, why does the water pres-
sure declines?                                         sure increases?
Why does Mars have higher gravity than Earth?          Why does Mars have lower gravity than Earth?
Why is baseball the most popular sport in the          Why is soccer the most popular sport in the world?
world?
How does Earth make up over 99% of the solar           How does Sun make up over 99% of the solar sys-
system’s mass?                                         tem’s mass?
Why does Helium have atomic number of 1?               Why does Hydrogen have atomic number of 1?

Table 12: Examples of ‘false premise’ questions and their corresponding ‘true premise’ counterparts.


Step     Prompt
 I       Context: {search results} Question: {question} Based on the above context, does the
         above question make factually correct assumptions?

 II      Context: {response of Step I} Question: {question} Rectify the incorrect information
         in the given question based on the context.

              Table 13: Instructional Prompts for rectifying the false premise questions.


                                                      27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Original Question                              After Modification
                    False Premise Questions

Why does Mars have three moons?                Why does Mars have two moons? (✓)
Why are golf balls bigger than basketballs?    Why are golf balls smaller than basketballs? (✓)
What are some papers on the relationship be-   What are some papers on the relationship between home-
tween homeschooling and neuroplasticity?       schooling and learning outcomes? (✓)
Why USA has the lowest happiness index?        What factors have contributed to the decline in happiness
                                               among Americans? (✓)
How many metres does a typical apple weigh?    How many grams or ounces does a typical apple weigh? (✓)
Why do gases have a particular shape?          Why do gases not have a definite volume or shape? (✓)
Why do migrant workers never leave their       Why do migrant workers leave their home? (✓)
home?
When a diver swims deeper, why does the wa-    When a diver swims deeper, why does the water pressure in-
ter pressure declines?                         crease? (✓)
Why does Mars have higher gravity than         Why does Mars have weaker gravity than Earth? (✓)
Earth?
Why do sprinters run at slower speeds than     Why do sprinters sometimes run at faster speeds than
marathon runners?                              marathon runners? (✓)
Why do all rabbits have red eyes?              Why do some rabbits have red eyes? (✓)
Why does Helium have atomic number of 1?       Why does Helium have atomic number of 2? (✓)
Why does Bangladesh have the highest popu-     Why does Bangladesh have the highest population growth rate
lation in the world?                           in the world? (✗)
Why are tigers’ eggs bigger than chicken’s     Why do some breeds of chickens lay larger eggs than others?
eggs?                                          (✗)
                    True Premise Questions

Why gases are shapeless?                       Why are gases shapeless? (✓)
How did USA become a developed country?        How did the United States become a developed country (✓)
Why Afghanistan has a low happiness index?     What factors contribute to Afghanistan’s low happiness index?
                                               (✓)
Why are golf balls smaller than basketballs?   Why are golf balls typically smaller than basketballs? (✓)
How were the 2020 USA presidential election?   What were the results of the 2020 USA presidential election?
                                               (✓)

Table 14: Examples of original questions (both false premise and true premise) and the questions
after rectification. ✗and ✓indicate that the modified question is incorrect and correct, respectively.


                                                   28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


False Premise Ques-   Why are golf balls bigger than basketballs?
tion

GPT-3.5                Golf balls are bigger than basketballs because they need to be able to travel farther
                      distances and have a larger surface area to create more spin and control. The larger
                      size also helps to reduce air resistance, allowing the ball to travel farther. (✗)
GPT-3.5 w/ Knowl-      Golf balls are bigger than basketballs because they need to be heavier and denser in
edge                  order to travel farther when hit with the same amount of force. The larger size allows
                      for more mass-density, which gives the ball more momentum and distance when hit.
                      (✗)
Our Approach           Golf balls are smaller than basketballs because they are optimized for golfers to pro-
                      vide the most ball velocity and distance possible, along with a controllable spin rate.
                      The diameter of a golf ball must reach 1.68 inches, or 42.67 mm, in diameter, and a
                      weight of no more than 1.62 ounces, or 45. (✓)
False Premise Ques-   Why do deserts have higher soil moisture than grasslands?
tion

GPT-3.5                Deserts have higher soil moisture than grasslands because they receive more rainfall.
                      Deserts typically receive less rainfall than grasslands, but the rain that does fall is
                      more concentrated and intense. This causes the soil to absorb more moisture than in
                      grasslands, where the rainfall is more spread out and less intense. (✗)
GPT-3.5 w/ Knowl-      Deserts have higher soil moisture than grasslands because they receive more precip-
edge                  itation than grasslands. Deserts are located in areas where the demand for water by the
                      atmosphere (evaporation) and plants (transpiration) is much greater than precipitation.
                      This means that the soil in deserts is able to retain more moisture than the soil in grass-
                      lands. (✗)
Our Approach           Deserts have lower soil moisture than grasslands because they have less water vapor
                      in the air, which makes it harder to trap heat or cold in a desert. Additionally, deserts
                      typically have less precipitation than grasslands, which further contributes to lower soil
                      moisture levels. (✓)
False Premise Ques-   Why is it more difficult to swim in seawater than fresh river water?
tion

GPT-3.5               Seawater is more dense than fresh river water due to its higher salt content. This
                      increased density makes it more difficult to swim in because it requires more effort
                      to move through the water. Additionally, the salt content of seawater can cause skin
                      irritation and dehydration, making it more uncomfortable to swim in. (✗)
GPT-3 w/ Knowl-        It is more difficult to swim in seawater than fresh river water because seawater is
edge                  more dense than fresh river water. This means that the buoyancy of the swimmer
                      is reduced in seawater, making it more difficult to stay afloat. Additionally, the salt
                      content in seawater can cause skin irritation and dehydration, making it more difficult
                      to swim. (✗)
Our Approach           It is easier to swim in seawater than fresh river water because seawater is denser than
                      fresh water due to its higher mineral content, including sodium, chloride, sulphate,
                      magnesium and calcium. This increased density provides more buoyancy, making it
                      easier for swimmers to stay afloat. (✓)

Table 15: Comparing responses generated on a few false premise questions by the GPT-3.5 model,
GPT-3.5 moel leveraging the retrieved knowledge as context, and our approach.


                                                    29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J   E FFECTIVENESS OF THE M ETHOD BEYOND THE F IRST F IVE G ENERATED
    S ENTENCES
Our study on the article generation task is conducted on the first five generated sentences. After
applying our method, the correctness at sentence number level (averaged over all the inputs) is as
follows (Sentence 1: 90.0%, Sentence 2: 82.67%, Sentence 3: 86.67%, Sentence 4: 82.67%, Sen-
tence 5: 85.34%). These values are indeed close and do not considerably reduce as the sentence
number increases. With this result, we show that our method of active detection and mitigation
successfully mitigates the hallucination throughout the generation (not restricted to any specific sen-
tence number). Furthermore, it shows that the ability to address hallucinations does not considerably
diminish as the sentence number increases. Thus, even increasing the number of sentences is not
expected to considerably impact the improvement that our method would bring

K    OTHER A PPLICATIONS OF OUR A PPROACH
Our approach has utility in a variety of other applications also such as Abstractive Summarization
and Claim Verification. In abstractive summarization where the generated summary has been shown
to be often hallucinated Cao et al. (2022); Zhao et al. (2020); Chen et al. (2021) can be improved us-
ing our approach. Here, the relevant knowledge during validation will be retrieved from the original
document instead of the web. Our approach can be adapted for the claim verification task also as we
can first identify the key sub-claims and then verify each sub-claim using the validation procedure.
Here, the mitigation step will also be useful for providing explanations behind the model’s decision.
We leave exploring these other usecases of our approach for future work.


                                                  30
