Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F INITE -S TATE AUTOREGRESSIVE E NTROPY C ODING
FOR E FFICIENT L EARNED L OSSLESS C OMPRESSION

 Yufeng Zhang1,2∗, Hang Yu2†, Jianguo Li2†, Weiyao Lin1†
 1
  Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Ant Group



                                                 A BSTRACT
              Learned lossless data compression has garnered significant attention recently due to
              its superior compression ratios compared to traditional compressors. However, the
              computational efficiency of these models jeopardizes their practicality. This paper
              proposes a novel system for improving the compression ratio while maintaining
              computational efficiency for learned lossless data compression. Our approach
              incorporates two essential innovations. First, we propose the Finite-State AutoRe-
              gressive (FSAR) entropy coder, an efficient autoregressive Markov model based
              entropy coder that utilizes a lookup table to expedite autoregressive entropy coding.
              Next, we present a Straight-Through Hardmax Quantization (STHQ) scheme to
              enhance the optimization of discrete latent space. Our experiments show that the
              proposed lossless compression method could improve the compression ratio by
              up to 6% compared to the baseline, with negligible extra computational time. Our
              work provides valuable insights into enhancing the computational efficiency of
              learned lossless data compression, which can have practical applications in vari-
              ous fields. Code is available at https://github.com/alipay/Finite_
              State_Autoregressive_Entropy_Coding.

1 I NTRODUCTION
Lossless data compression has been a prominent area of interest in both academic research and
industry. By reducing the amount of space required for data storage and minimizing the bandwidth
necessary for data communication, lossless compression codecs hold great potential for applications
in a broad range of computing and communication systems.
A practical lossless compression codec requires both superior compression ratios and computational ef-
ficiency, but most existing methods fail to achieve both simultaneously. Traditional methods (Boutell,
1997; webmproject, 2023) rely on hand-crafted codecs that offer efficiency but yield suboptimal
compression ratios. Conversely, recent advances in machine learning have introduced generative
models, including Autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Burda et al., 2015), GANs (Mirza
& Osindero, 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017), Flow models (Dinh et al., 2016; Kingma & Dhariwal,
2018) and Autoregressive models (van den Oord et al., 2016b; Parmar et al., 2018), which exhibit
remarkable potential in modeling data likelihood. These models can automatically learn codecs for
different domains given sufficient training data. However, while these models have demonstrated
improved compression ratios compared to the traditional methods, they suffer from high time
complexity, rendering them impractical for general-purpose computation devices such as CPUs.
In this paper, we target at improving the compression ratio while maintaining the computational
efficiency for lossless compression. Our focus lies on latent space models, specifically autoencoders,
due to their ease of optimization and efficient computation (Mentzer et al., 2018; Townsend et al.,
2019b; Ballé et al., 2018; Minnen et al., 2018). Most existing frameworks in this direction could be
built upon the Asymmetric Numeral System (ANS) (Duda, 2009) for latent entropy coding, and can
be categorized into three groups: continuous random latent space, discrete deterministic latent space,
and discrete autoregressive latent space. The decompression workflows of these frameworks are
illustrated in Figure 1a, Figure 1b and Figure 1c, respectively. The first group, based on continuous
latent spaces (Townsend et al., 2019a; Kingma et al., 2019; Theis & Ho, 2021; Ruan et al., 2021),
typically employs bits-back coding(Townsend et al., 2019a) (cf. Figure 1b). Although the continuous
     ∗
         This work was done when Yufeng Zhang was a research intern at Ant Group.
     †
         Corresponding Authors.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              …


                                                                                            𝑝(𝒚|𝒚<𝑖 ) Context
                                                                               …                                           …                   …                                     …                   …


                                                                                                      Model
                                                                                                                                     𝑦𝑖                                                      𝑦𝑖


                                               𝑝(𝒚)
                                                                    𝑦𝑖


                                                                                                                                                           𝑝(𝒚|𝒚<𝑖 )
                                                                                                                                                                         0 1 …
                                                                                                                                                                       0     …
                                                                     Look                                                            Upd-                                                     Look
                                                             𝑠𝑖−1              𝑠𝑖                                         𝑠𝑖−1                 𝑠𝑖                      1     …      𝑠𝑖−1                 𝑠𝑖
                                                                      -up                                                             ate                                                      -up


    𝑞(𝒛|𝒙)
                                                                                                                                                                       … … … …


                                               𝑇𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒
                           ANS                                                                                                                                     Lookup
                  quant   Encode       0                                                                                         Autoregressive rANS                                                 FSAR-tANS
                                                                         tANS Coding
                                       1
                                       0                𝐲
              𝐲                        0                                                                                                                                         𝑝(𝒚|𝒚<𝑖 )
                           ANS                                       ANS                                        𝐲                  ANS                                  𝐲                     ANS
                  𝑝(𝒛)                 1                    𝑝(𝒚)                0                                                               0                                                        0
                          Decode       1                            Decode      1                                       𝑝(𝒚|𝒚<𝑖 ) Decode        1                                            Decode      1
                                       1                                        0                                                               0                                                        0
                                       0                                        1                                                               1                                                        1
                                       0                                        0                                                               0                                                        0
    𝑝(𝒙|𝒛)


                                               𝑝(𝒙|𝒛)


                                                                                           𝑝(𝒙|𝒛)


                                                                                                                                                       𝑝(𝒙|𝒛)
                                       1                                        0                                                               0                                                        0
                  quant    ANS         …                    quant    ANS        1                                        quant       ANS        1                                 quant       ANS        1
                          Decode                                    Decode      …                                                   Decode      …                                            Decode      …
              𝐱                    BitStream            𝐱                  BitStream                                𝐱                      BitStream                        𝐱                       BitStream

             (a) Bits-back ANS                              (b) tANS                       (c) Autoregressive rANS                                                      (d) FSAR-tANS

Figure 1: Different ANS-based decompression workflows for latent space models. (a) Bits-back ANS (Townsend
et al., 2019a) for continuous random latent space. (b) table ANS (tANS) (Duda, 2013) coder for discrete
deterministic latent space. (c) Autoregressive range ANS (rANS) (Duda, 2013) coder for discrete autoregressive
latent space. (d) The proposed FSAR-tANS coder for discrete autoregressive latent space.
latent space facilitates optimization and achieves a favorable compression ratio, the decompression
process becomes complex and slow due to the additional ANS encode step via the inference model.
By contrast, frameworks (Ballé et al., 2018; Mentzer et al., 2018) utilizing discrete deterministic latent
spaces enable fast decompression using a low-complexity table ANS (tANS) coder (Duda, 2013)
(cf. Figure 1b). However, the representation power of independent discrete space is limited, and
optimizing the discrete latent space is notoriously challenging, resulting in an inferior compression
ratio. To mitigate this issue, the third group of works (Minnen et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018; Cheng
et al., 2020) improves the compression ratio by assuming flexible autoregressive dependence among
the discrete latent variables instead of strict independence. However, similar to the continuous latent
space, this improvement comes at the cost of decompression speed, as autoregressive models require a
lengthy sequential decompression process that involves a complex context model in each iteration (cf.
Figure 1c). Ultimately, existing frameworks fail to simultaneously achieve a satisfactory compression
ratio and computational efficiency.
In contrast to the aforementioned works, our proposed method combines the best of both worlds.
It features an efficiently coded discrete autoregressive latent space with a flexible latent model that
can fit the input data well while robustly optimizing this latent space. We first develop an efficient
autoregressive model called the Finite-State AutoRegressive (FSAR) model as the latent prior,
which can be easily implemented with a lookup table, as illustrated in Figure 1d. Compared with other
autoregressive models, the FSAR implementation has a similar time complexity to the low-complexity
tANS, only adding an extra lookup step to the original tANS implementation. Thus, it achieves an
excellent compression ratio with the help of autoregressive models while keeping the computation as
efficient as tANS. Moreover, to better optimize the discrete latent space as required by the FSAR,
we propose Straight-Through Hardmax Quantization (STHQ) based on the straight-through
estimator (Bengio et al., 2013). STHQ further strengthens the representation ability of the latent
space and improves the compression ratio. To summarize, our contributions are listed as follows:
 • The Finite-State AutoRegressive (FSAR) entropy coder is proposed for flexible discrete latent
   space coding. It combines a low-complexity autoregressive Markov model with a fast entropy
   coder to achieve efficient latent coding.
 • An optimization scheme called Straight-Through Hardmax Quantization (STHQ) is proposed for
   robust optimization of the discrete latent space. It enables gradient descent via the deterministic
   quantization process while maximizing the latent entropy for better likelihood estimation.
 • Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method improves the compression ratio
   by up to 6% compared to commonly used discrete deterministic autoencoders, with negligible
   additional computational time. Moreover, it is over 300 times faster than commonly used discrete
   autoregressive models while achieving a similar compression ratio.

2            R ELATED W ORKS
In this section, we review learned compression methods based on discrete deterministic latent space
models and discrete autoregressive latent space models, as they are directly relevant to our work. For
a brief survey on continuous random latent space models, we refer the readers to Appendix A.
Discrete Deterministic Latent Space Numerous compression methods employ discrete deterministic
autoencoders due to their simplicity in latent coding. However, quantizing continuous latent space
to discrete counterparts while enabling gradient calculation for optimization poses a challenge.


                                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                                                                   (a) Finite State Autoregressive Entropy Coding
                                                                                                                                                                        0
              Adaptive State Number


                                                                        Markov Model
                                                                                                                                                                        1


                                                                         Finite State
                                                                                            1                 0 1 2
                  Soft Mask               Sparse Mask                                       0               0     …                          Look-up    Latent          0
                                          0 1 2 3
                                                                                                            1     …                           Table    ANS Coder        0
               0 123
                     … 01 2 3 …                                                                             2 … … …                                                     1
                                          O O O X
                                                                                                                                                                        …
                                                               0                  1                                                                           Latent Stream
                                                               2                  3                                                   12020…
                                                                   Codebook                                                        Latent Indices


                                                                                                                  Dot-Product
                                                                                        𝒚                                                                               0


                                            Distance
              𝒙


                                                                                                Hardmax
                                                                                                                                             𝑝(𝒙|𝒛)


                                                        Mask
                                                                                                                                                                        1


                                                                                                                                Generative
                              Inference
                                                               012                      1


                                                                                                                                 Network
                               Network
                                                                                                              .                              Likeli-     Data           0
             Data                                 ∆


                                                               𝒒(𝒛|𝒙)
                                                                               𝜹𝒚/𝜹                                                          hood      ANS Coder        0


                                                                                                Sampling
                                                       Quant                                               Dequant                                                      1
                                                                                    012
                                                                                                                                                                        …
                                                                                                                                                               Data Stream
                                           (b) Straight-through Hardmax Quantization


Figure 2: Overview of the proposed method. Here x represents the input data, z, y represents latent variables
and samples respectively. ANS are employed for entropy coding of both the latent space and the data. Our major
contributions are highlighted in red dashed boxes: (a) Finite-State Autoregressive Entropy Coding for latent
entropy coding. (b) Straight-Through Hardmax Quantization for latent space optimization scheme.

To address this, universal quantization and soft scalar quantization have been applied respectively
in (Ballé et al., 2018) and (Mentzer et al., 2018), allowing for gradient pass-through while simulating
quantization. However, these methods overlook the complexity of the high-dimensional latent space,
resulting in poor approximation. Alternatively, VQ-VAE (van den Oord et al., 2017) introduces
vector quantization (VQ) and improves latent modeling through an additional codebook. Subsequent
works, such as (Razavi et al., 2019; Esser et al., 2020), adopt this approach, employing trainable
codebooks to enhance the quality of generative models. However, optimizing VQ-VAE is difficult as
it requires an auxiliary loss function similar to the K-means algorithm. To counteract this problem,
Sønderby (2017) proposed the continuous relaxation of VQ, representing the VQ process as sampling
from a categorical distribution and enabling optimization using the ELBO similar to VAEs. This
idea was further extended by utilizing hierarchical relaxed VQ-VAEs to model more complex latent
spaces (Zhu et al., 2022). However, this relaxation breaks the deterministic nature of VQ. Instead,
Agustsson et al. (2017) introduce soft VQ with deterministic annealing to enable optimization through
hard quantization, but the practical implementation of the annealing schedule requires careful tuning.
Moreover, Takida et al. (2022) propose self-annealed stochastic quantization (SQ-VAE) to make the
stochastic VQ-VAE converge to deterministic quantization. Unfortunately, the convergence from SQ
to VQ relies on the collapse of the likelihood term (i.e., the generative model) (Takida et al., 2022),
which is impractical for lossless compression as the likelihood is required for entropy coding.
Discrete Autoregressive Latent Space Autoregressive models have been widely applied for image
likelihood modeling and generation (van den Oord et al., 2016b;a; Razavi et al., 2019). However,
most methods exploit masked convolution (van den Oord et al., 2016b) to implement autoregressive
models in the observation space for images, incurring heavy floating-point operations (FLOPs) and
increasing the computational cost. Furthermore, the sequential nature of autoregressive models, where
each observation depends on previous ones, hinders parallel computations and further diminishes
efficiency. Although recent works (Ruan et al., 2021; Ryder et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2022; 2023)
develop parallelizable autoregressive models for efficient coding on parallel computation devices
like GPUs, their theoretical time complexity remains high, resulting in suboptimal efficiency on
general computation devices such as CPUs. One potential solution is to apply autoregressive methods
(e.g., masked convolutions) to the lower-dimensional latent space (Minnen et al., 2018; Lee et al.,
2018; Cheng et al., 2020), as the latent space is typically smaller than the observation space and
subsequently reducing the number of sequential steps. However, the number of FLOPs in masked
convolution still remains large.
In this work, our objective is to improve the compression ratio of autoencoder-based codecs while
maintaining computational efficiency. To this end, we prefer the discrete autoregressive latent space
due to its superior compression ratio, and we aim to further boost its efficiency.
3    T HE P ROPOSED L EARNED L OSSLESS C OMPRESSION A RCHITECTURE
In this section, we propose an effective and efficient framework for lossless data compression.
Overall Architecture Our proposed lossless compression system combines latent space models with
autoregressive models, as depicted in Figure 2. The framework is composed of three main parts:
1) a backbone network that consists of the inference network and generative network, 2) a latent
space that incorporates an efficient autoregressive Markov model, and 3) a quantization method for
the discrete latent space optimization. In this system, the data is initially processed by an inference


                                                                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Bits                                                              Bits


           …    𝑠𝑖−1      𝑇𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒(𝑠𝑖−1 , 𝑦𝑖 )        𝑠𝑖         …       …         𝑠𝑖−1        𝑇𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒(𝑠𝑖−1 , 𝑦𝑖 )        𝑠𝑖         …
                                                                                        𝑦𝑖−2
                                                                              0 1 …
                 𝒑𝑖              𝑦𝑖               𝑇𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒                     0
                                                                                    𝑦
                                                                                  … 𝑖−1                             𝑇𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒
                                                                          𝐿 1     …
                                                                                                       𝑦𝑖
                                  1                       …                                  1                              …
                                              0           …                 … … … …                             0           …
                                              1           …                                                     1           …
                                              2           …                                                     2           …
                                              3           …                            𝐿 𝑦𝑖−1 , 𝑦𝑖−2            3           …

                                (a)                                         (b)
Figure 3: Different Designs of the ANS Coder, where T able represents the state transition lookup table of table
ANS (tANS), while si−1 and si correspond to the previous and current state of ANS, respectively. Additionally,
p denotes the prior probability utilized by ANS to construct T able. (a) Non-Autoregressive tANS Coding. (b)
Proposed Finite-State Autoregressive (Order-2 Channel) tANS Coding. Here, L signifies the lookup table.
network to obtain discrete latent variables z using a codebook, which are then quantized to y (see
Figure 2 (b)) and encoded by an autoregressive latent ANS coder (see Figure 2 (a)). Based on these
latent variables, the generative network generates the data likelihood, which is essential for data ANS
coding. More details on this framework are provided in Appendix B.
Backbone Network The backbone network serves as a crucial component of the latent space model.
Generally, deeper networks yield a more compact latent space and better generative results, thus
improving the compression ratio. However, deeper networks demand more computational resources,
making shallow networks preferable for efficient compression. Moreover, for lossless compression,
the generative results should be random rather than deterministic. This is because the distribution of
the observation space is necessary for entropy coding of the original data. Thus, autoencoders with
collapsed generative networks (Takida et al., 2022) cannot be employed for lossless compression.
Latent Space The latent space, serving as a condensed representation of the original data, also needs
to be encoded in the final bitstream. As discussed in Section 1, encoding continuous random latent
spaces is fraught with difficulties, motivating our preference for efficient frameworks that leverage
discrete deterministic latent spaces. In line with previous findings that vector quantized latent spaces
yield superior results for generative tasks (Kang et al., 2022), we adopt this format as the latent space
representation in our framework. Furthermore, to enhance the compression of the latent space without
relying on deep networks as the backbone, we introduce an efficient autoregressive model, namely
the FSAR model as a compensatory measure (see Figure 2 (a)), which will be further elaborated upon
in Section 4. The FSAR model can be easily implemented with a lookup table and boasts similar time
complexity to modern entropy coders such as ANS (Duda, 2009). Moreover, we propose Learnable
State Number (LSN) to further reduce the space complexity associated with the lookup table.
Optimization As discussed in Section 2, optimizing discrete deterministic latent spaces can be
challenging due to the non-differentiable quantization process. Therefore, we analyze existing
works and propose an improved quantization scheme, namely STHQ, based on the straight-through
estimator (Bengio et al., 2013) (see Figure 2 (b)). This scheme facilitates rapid and robust optimization
of the vector quantized latent space, which will be discussed in Section 5. Thanks to the STHQ
quantization scheme, the entire framework, encompassing the backbone network, latent space, and
vector quantization codebook, can be collectively optimized in an end-to-end manner.

4    F INITE -S TATE AUTOREGRESSIVE E NTROPY C ODING
Autoregressive models have shown promise for improving compression ratios in lossless compression.
However, their limited efficiency poses significant restrictions. In this section, we propose a novel
and compact approach to autoregressive modeling based on finite-state Markov models. This model
acts as the prior for a discretized latent space within deterministic autoencoders, thereby shortening
the sequential process and enabling compact coding. Importantly, the implementation of this model
using a lookup table showcases low complexity comparable to modern entropy coders. We refer to
the combination of FSAR and entropy coder as Finite-State Autoregressive Entropy Coding.
The Efficiency of Autoregressive Models Existing autoregressive models are computationally
expensive, primarily due to the long sequential process and high time complexity, as detailed
in Section 1. On the contrary, modern entropy coders, despite their sequential nature, typically
demonstrate satisfactory efficiency due to their low complexity at each step. This suggests that by
making autoregressive models sufficiently compact, high computational efficiency is still attainable.
Indeed, compression methods prioritizing computational efficiency, such as Ballé et al. (2018) and
Zhu et al. (2022), could utilize efficient entropy coders such as tANS (Duda, 2013) on discrete latent


                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


spaces, relying solely on lookup tables with minimal time complexity. Hence, we aim to harness the
capabilities of such entropy coders to alleviate the computational burden of autoregressive models.
Finite-State Markov Models In a discretized latent space, the latent variables can only take values
from a finite set. Consequently, the outcomes of the autoregressive model for a discretized latent space
can also be represented by a finite set. To implement such an autoregressive model, we introduce
an order-N finite-state Markov model M that produces prior distributions based on the previous N
variables, each with C possible states. Each iteration or step of the autoregressive Markov model can
be executed with an N -dimensional lookup table L, similar to tANS (Duda, 2013). Denoting samples
from the finite set as y, this process can be succinctly expressed as:
                      pi = M(y1 , ...yN ) = L[y1 , ...yN ], y1 , ...yN ∈ {1, 2, ..., C}.             (1)
As an illustration, Figure 3b shows an order-2 finite-state Markov model combined with tANS coding,
leveraging a 2-dimensional lookup table L to reduce the time complexity. Here, only two memory
operations are necessary to read both dimensions of the lookup table and retrieve the corresponding
state transition lookup table for tANS.
It is important to mention that the training process of the finite-state Markov model does not explicitly
optimize the lookup table. Instead, the transition process in the finite-state Markov model M can be
approximated using neural networks with discrete input, such as a Multi-Layer Perceptron network.
Once the training is complete, the lookup table L can be generated by feeding all possible state
combinations into the network.
Learnable State Number We notice that the size of the lookup table O(C N ) can become pro-
hibitively large, especially when N ≥ 2. A common practice to optimize C is through hyperparameter
tuning. However, this tuning process is time-consuming, as it requires training the full model multiple
times to determine the optimal hyperparameter. To mitigate this issue, we propose an end-to-end
adaptive optimization method for selecting C called Learnable State Number (LSN).
A straightforward approach to adjusting the state number involves applying a masking function to the
state probabilities, preventing certain states from being sampled. Additionally, a trainable parameter
θ controlling the sparsity of the mask can be introduced. To facilitate gradient descent, the mask
should be a continuous function of θ. Here, we adopt α-entmax (Peters et al., 2019), a normalizing
function similar to the softmax function, that allows the generation of precisely zero probabilities
and enables sparse masking of states. It can be defined as:
                                                                     1
                               entmax(θ, α) = [(α − 1)θ − τ 1]+α−1 .                                 (2)
                                    P
where τ is a constant that ensures entmax(θ, α) = 1. The state probabilities, denoted as π, are
then modified by the α-entmax function as shown below:
                                      π · entmax(θ, α)
                             π′ = P                       , π, θ ∈ RC .                              (3)
                                      C π · entmax(θ, α)
Note that α can be manually set to control the reduction rate or set as a trainable parameter following
(Correia et al., 2019) for more flexible masking during training.
Discussion for FSAR as Latent Prior When compressing a natural data vector x, it is common for
dependencies to exist among the variables in x. Markov models are often employed to simplify these
dependencies, assuming that each variable depends only on a few preceding variables. However,
even with Markov models, decoding each p(xi |xi−N :i−1 ) still requires the previous N variables,
resulting in a sequential iteration process for every element of x, which can be time-consuming.
Alternatively, latent space models, such as autoencoders, can transform x into a smaller latent vector
z. By applying Markov models in the latent space, the sequential iteration process can be shortened.
Although disentanglement of all latent variables is unattainable under unsupervised optimization
targets for lossless compression (Locatello et al., 2018), the inference network in autoencoders can
still disentangle certain dependencies among variables, making a compact Markov model sufficient
as a prior for the latent space. This approach provides appreciable improvements for compression
ratios while preventing overfitting. Consequently, we employ the proposed FSAR model with a low
order (typically N ≤ 2) as the latent prior.
Relationship to Masked Convolution (van den Oord et al., 2016b) Masked convolution can also be
exploited as an autoregressive prior in the discrete latent space. In fact, the masked convolution-based
autoregressive model is essentially a subset of the finite-state Markov model. However, constructing
the lookup table becomes nearly impossible due to the high order in most cases. For instance, a 3x3 2D


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


masked convolution-based autoregressive model corresponds to an Order-4 finite-state Markov model
in the discrete latent space, denoted as p(yi,j,k |yi,j,k−1 , yi,j−1,k−1 , yi,j−1,k , yi,j−1,k+1 ), where i, j, k
represent the indices of the channel, height, and width dimensions, respectively. Generating the
lookup table for this model requires a space complexity of O(C 4 ), which is generally unacceptable.
Furthermore, mask convolution usually requires FLOPs, which can introduce potential inconsistencies
in computation between the compression and decompression stages Ballé et al. (2019). On the
contrary, the proposed method is immune to such inconsistencies as it relies solely on memory
operations for latent coding.
Relationship to ANS (Duda, 2009) Recent implementations of entropy coders have embraced
ANS (Duda, 2009), as shown in Figure 3a. In the i-th step, ANS utilizes the previous state si−1 ,
the current symbol yi , and the corresponding prior distribution p to determine the state transition
process. When the inputs of the state transition process, namely si−1 and yi , are drawn from a finite
set, techniques such as tANS (Duda, 2013) can be employed to precalculate all possible inputs and
construct a lookup table for efficient state transition computation. This concept inspires us to devise a
similar scheme for coding in the discrete latent space. In fact, the proposed FSAR can seamlessly
integrate with tANS, where a state transition table is derived from the FSAR lookup table L at each
step (see Figure 3b). For a detailed implementation of FSAR-tANS and a discussion on the time
complexity of related methods, we direct the readers to Appendix C.

5    S TRAIGHT T HROUGH H ARDMAX Q UANTIZATION
As mentioned in Section 1, optimizing discrete latent space models is complicated despite their
preference for efficient latent coding. In this section, we examine the limitations of existing methods
for optimizing vector quantized (VQ) discrete latent space models and propose a robust quantization
method called Straight Through Hardmax Quantization (STHQ).
Recall that the original VQ-VAE (van den Oord et al., 2017) is optimized with a K-means-like loss:
             LV Q = || sg(I(x)) − By T ||2 + β||I(x) − sg(By T )||2 − log p(x|By T ),           (4)
where I(x) is the output of the inference network, B represents the codebook, y denotes the one-hot
vector that selects the closest codeword to I(x) in B, and sg represents the stop gradient operator.
However, updating all codewords in each step is infeasible due to the one-hot selection of a single
codeword by y, resulting in zero gradients for other codewords in the codebook (Sønderby, 2017;
Roy et al., 2018).
To overcome this limitation, the relaxed VQ (RVQ) approach (Sønderby, 2017) introduces a cate-
gorical distribution q(z|x) in the latent space. The logits of this distribution are determined by the
Euclidean distance between the latent variable and the codewords, that is,
                           q(z|x) = Categorical(softmax(−D(I(x)))),                                 (5)
where Di (I(x)) = ||I(x) − Bi ||2 is the euclidean distance between I(x) and i-th codeword vector
Bi . The entire model is then optimized using the negative evidence lower bound (ELBO) formulation:
                        LRV Q = −H(q(z|x)) − Eq (log p(z)) − log p(x|z),                            (6)
where H(q(z|x)) is the entropy of q(z|x). The inclusion of the entropy term facilitates global
optimization of all distances D, encouraging close latent variables and codewords to be grouped
together. This formulation has been adopted by recent works such as SQ-VAE (Takida et al., 2022).
However, there are two potential issues immediately arising when optimizing the entropy term in
RVQ. Firstly, the partial derivative of the entropy term with respect to the distance Di can be negative
for all i, which could be derived from Proposition 5.1. As a consequence, the distance may continually
increase during the optimization process and cause the codebook to diverge.
Proposition 5.1. It is possible that ∀i, ∂H(q(z|x))/∂Di ≤ 0.
Proof. See Appendix D.1 for proof.
Secondly, the inclusion of the entropy term H(q(z|x)) creates an entropy gap between VQ and RVQ,
resulting in an inferior performance of RVQ in generative tasks, as proven in Proposition 5.2:
Proposition 5.2. Assume p(z) follows a uniform distribution and give the same sample input y
and parameters θ for the generative model log pθ (x|By T ), we have log parg minθ LRV Q (x|By T ) <
log parg minθ LV Q (x|By T ).
Proof. See Appendix D.2 for proof and see Appendix D.4 for the corresponding experiments.

                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In order to avoid these problems and enable global updates similar to RVQ, we propose STHQ.
Straight Through Hardmax Quantization Inspired by the straight through Gumbel-softmax
method (Jang et al., 2016) which employs categorical one-hot samples in the forward process
but Gumbel-softmax based soft samples in the backward process (backpropagation), we propose a
similar gradient estimator called straight through hardmax (st-hardmax). This approach incorporates
a VQ-based hardmax in the forward process while using sampling in the backward process:
                                                                    ∂y ST ∂ GSτ (−D(I(x)))
  y = st-hardmax(−D(I(x))) ↔ y = hardmax(−D(I(x))),                     =                      , (7)
                                                                   ∂D               ∂D
where GSτ represents the Gumbel-softmax reparameterization (Jang et al., 2016) with temperature
τ . In this manner, the forward process remains the same as VQ, thereby mitigating the entropy
gap issue. Meanwhile, the backward process allows for the global update of z and all Bi based on
their respective distances Di . Consequently, we can use a simple regularization loss term ||Dmin ||2 ,
similar to VQ-VAE, to update all distances Di:
                          ||Dmin ||2 = || arg min Di ||2 = ||I(x) − By T ||2 .                    (8)
                                            i
By combining the st-hardmax operator and this L2 regularization term, the overall loss function of
STHQ can be expressed as:
                       LST HQ = ||Dmin ||2 − log p(x|By T ) − Eq log p(z).                     (9)
Note that in VQ, p(z) is typically assumed to follow a uniform distribution and is omitted from
the loss function. However, in STHQ, we adopt the proposed FSAR model as p(z) for better
compression. To learn the parameters of the FSAR model, p(z) needs to be included in Eq. (9).
Specifically, following previous VQ methods, we only utilize Eq log p(z) for optimizing the FSAR
model, while excluding this term when optimizing the backbone network and the codebook.
Relationship to Other VQ-based Methods By assuming p(z) to be uniform in STHQ (9) and
ignoring the stop-gradient operations in VQ-VAE (4), we can find that the loss functions in these two
methods are identical. It is worth noting that both VQ-VAE and STHQ apply the straight-through
estimator on the likelihood term log p(x|By T ) to enable gradient calculation on the inference model.
However, in STHQ, we also apply the straight-through estimator to the L2 regularizer term ||Dmin ||2 ,
which benefits from the global update property and leads to faster convergence. On the other hand,
when compared to RVQ-based methods such as (Sønderby, 2017; Takida et al., 2022), STHQ omits
the entropy term. This term can potentially hinder the optimization process, as indicated in the above
two propositions. More details are presented in Appendix D.3.
6     E XPERIMENTS
6.1   DATASETS AND M ETRICS
In our experiments, we focused on compressing and decompressing image datasets, specifically
CIFAR10 (CF10) (Krizhevsky, 2009) and ImageNet32/64 (IN32, IN64) (Deng et al., 2009). We
evaluated performance using four criteria: Bits Per Dimension (BPD) for compression ratio, compres-
sion speed (CSpd) and decompression speed (DSpd) measured in megabytes per second (MB/s) to
assess time complexity, and occupied memory (Mem) in megabytes (MB) to assess space complexity.
The measured time or speed was obtained running on CPUs, as our method targets general-purpose
computation devices. The detailed experimental setup can be found in Appendix F.1.
6.2 C OMPARISON WITH OTHER L ATENT C ODING M ETHODS
To demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed FSAR model as a prior for latent
modeling, we conducted a comparative analysis with various other latent space coding methods.
The methods compared include commonly used continuous latent models with bits-back coding
(Townsend et al., 2019a), discrete latent models such as Vector Quantization (VQ) (van den Oord
et al., 2017), Universal Quantization (UQ) (Ballé et al., 2018), and McQuic (Zhu et al., 2022), as
well as autoregressive-based latent models such as Masked Convolution (MaskConv) (van den Oord
et al., 2016b) and Checkerboard context model (Checkerboard) (He et al., 2021). Our proposed
FSAR model encompassed Markov models of different orders, ranging from Order-1 to Order-3.
Additionally, we consider the Order-2 model with LSN to evaluate its usefulness. We utilized the
proposed STHQ training for all autoregressive methods (MaskConv2D, Checkerboard, FSAR(O1),
FSAR(O2), FSAR(O2)+LSN, FSAR(O3)), while also conducting an additional experiment in the non-
autoregressive latent space (i.e., only tANS (Duda, 2013) entropy coding) as a reference. Furthermore,
to provide detailed efficiency comparisons, we presented the average decompression time of the


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Table 1: Experiment results of different latent coding methods. The detailed running time for each module in
different methods is obtained by processing a single image from CIFAR10 dataset. Order-1, Order-2 and Order-3
denoted as O1, O2, and O3, respectively. For BPD results, bold numbers indicate the best practical BPD for
each dataset, "OOM" indicates the out-of-memory error during coding, "ERR" indicates inconsistency between
the decompressed data and the original data, and "NAN" indicates a failed training process.
                                                                 BPD (Theoritical/Practical)       CF10 Decomp Time (ms)     Mem (MB)
                         Methods
                                                              CF10         IN32          IN64      Net     Coder    Total      CF10
  Continuous         bits-back (Townsend et al., 2019a)     4.99/8.99    5.45/9.11    5.05/11.15   32.44    9.85    42.29      0.000
                          UQ (Ballé et al., 2018)           5.16/5.19    5.65/5.68     5.36/5.38   1.60     1.54     3.15      0.015
    Discrete           VQ (van den Oord et al., 2017)       5.50/5.52    6.16/6.17     5.61/5.62   1.57     0.88     2.45      0.008
                        McQuic (Zhu et al., 2022)           5.81/5.50    6.19/9.57    NAN/NAN      1.57     8.75    10.32      0.082
                  MaskConv2D (van den Oord et al., 2016b)   5.02/ERR     5.42/ERR      5.08/ERR    1.75    632.24   633.99     1.127
 Autoregressive       Checkerboard (He et al., 2021)        5.11/5.11    5.49/5.50     5.23/5.23   1.63     4.71     6.34      1.127
                            tANS (Duda, 2013)                5.25/5.25    5.72/5.72    5.46/5.48   1.66    0.86     2.52       0.008
                               FSAR(O1)                      5.14/5.17    5.54/5.55    5.16/5.18   1.58    0.97     2.55       2.010
   Proposed                    FSAR(O2)                      5.05/5.06    5.45/5.46    5.05/5.07   1.62    1.04     2.65      516.512
                             FSAR(O2)+LSN                    5.08/5.09    5.43/5.46    5.10/5.12   1.59    1.06     2.65      276.586
                               FSAR(O3)                     5.00/OOM     5.41/OOM     5.08/OOM     OOM     OOM      OOM        OOM


backbone networks (Net) and the entropy coders (Coder) for processing a single image in CIFAR10.
The results are shown in Table 1. Compression time are further provided in Appendix E.1 for
reference. It is apparent that the proposed method achieves comparable or superior performance to
the existing methods in terms of both compression ratio (i.e., theoretical/practical BPD) and speed
(i.e., run time).
Concretely, in terms of the practical BPD, the proposed FSAR-based methods achieve the best
performance on all datasets. Moreover, the theoretical BPD closely aligns with the practical one for
all methods, except for bits-back and MaskConv. This discrepancy arises from the initial bits issue
encountered in bits-back (Flamich et al., 2020) and the floating-point inconsistency issue observed in
MaskConv (Ballé et al., 2019). Comparing FSAR models of different orders, we find that the order-2
Markov model outperforms the order-1 model in terms of compression performance, while the order-3
model does not provide a significant improvement over the order-2 model. This observation implies
that a compact Markov model can adequately describe the latent space, as the backbone model
is capable of disentangling dependencies within the data to some extent, resulting in a simplified
dependency structure in the latent space. Furthermore, considering the memory-intensive nature of
order-3 models, the order-2 Markov model is the optimal choice for FSAR.
In terms of speed, the bits-back and MaskConv methods are notably slow due to their high time
complexity in the backbone network and entropy coder, respectively. The Checkerboard context
model employs parallelized computation during latent decoding, resulting in significantly shorter
decoding time. However, Checkerboard remains slower than the non-autoregressive tANS, whereas
the FSAR model performs as fast as tANS. In addition, the increased time cost of accessing lookup
tables in FSAR, which scales with memory size, has minimal impact on the overall decompression
time, as the time is dominated by the FLOPs in the backbone networks.
Note that memory occupation is a concern for FSAR models. Although the proposed LSN method
successfully reduces the memory requirement of FSAR(O2) by approximately 50% without causing
noticeable changes in compression performance, the memory occupation remains relatively high.
6.3 C OMPARISON WITH OTHER C OMPRESSION M ETHODS
In this section, we evaluate the proposed codec by comparing it with state-of-the-art image compres-
sion methods in a general setting. No restrictions are imposed on the network backbone or training
schedule in this experiment. The benchmark methods include traditional image lossless compression
codecs such as PNG (Boutell, 1997), WebP (webmproject, 2023) and FLIF (Sneyers & Wuille, 2016),
as well as autoencoder based methods including L3C (Mentzer et al., 2018), bitswap (Kingma et al.,
2019), and PILC (Kang et al., 2022). Since the proposed method solely employs latent space models
and does not restrict the method of observation space data coding, it can be seamlessly combined
with PILC, which adopts autoregressive models and entropy coding in the observation space, by
replacing the VQ-VAE used in PILC with the proposed method. We calculate the BPD based on the
length of the compression bitstream to evaluate practical compression performance. For a qualitative
understanding of the results, we present the BPD versus Speed comparison for different methods on
CIFAR10 in Figure 1. For complete numerical results, please refer to Appendix E.2.
Generally, the proposed learned codec has similar BPD and speed with traditional WebP and FLIF,
thereby bridging the gap between learned and traditional methods. Compared to the autoencoder-


                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                     1E+2                                                                               1E+2
                                   PILC, 4.28                                                                             PILC, 4.28 WebP, 4.52          PNG, 5.78
                     1E+1                         PILC+STHQ,                                            1E+1
                                                      4.29                 PNG, 5.78                               PILC+STHQ+         PILC+STHQ,
                            PILC+STHQ+
                                                                                                                    FSAR, 4.18            4.29


                                                                                          DSPD (MB/S)
       CSPD (MB/S)
                     1E+0    FSAR, 4.18                                                                 1E+0
                                                         WebP, 4.52                                                              FLIF, 4.29
                                           FLIF, 4.29
                     1E-1                                                                               1E-1                           L3C, 4.77
                                                        L3C, 4.77
                                bitswap,                                                                            bitswap,
                     1E-2                                                                               1E-2          3.84
                                  3.84

                     1E-3                                                                               1E-3
                         3.50       4.00         4.50           5.00      5.50     6.00                     3.50         4.00        4.50         5.00   5.50   6.00
                                                          BPD                                                                               BPD

               Figure 4: The BPD versus Speed (CSpd and Dspd) comparison for different methods on CIFAR10.
                                            Table 2: BPD results (with standard deviation) for the ablation studies.
                                                                    BPD          Saved                                         BPD           Saved                       BPD        Saved
    VQ (van den Oord et al., 2017)                              5.37(0.02)       0.00%      STHQ                          5.23(0.02)         -2.66%       -STH         5.54(0.08)    3.16%
       RVQ (Sønderby, 2017)                                     5.68(0.10)       5.73%    +FSAR(O1)                       5.15(0.03)         -4.16%        -L2         6.58(0.03)   22.36%
      SQ (Takida et al., 2022)                                  5.50(0.11)       2.42%    +FSAR(O2)                       5.06(0.02)         -5.80%      +Entropy      5.34(0.06)   -0.67%


based method PILC, the improved version of the proposed method, called "PILC+STHQ+FSAR,"
reduces BPD by 2.2-2.5% but also slightly decreases CSpd by 7% and DSpd by 5%. The reduced
BPD can be attributed to the incorporation of the FSAR model. Additionally, the compression
performance of our method is similar to that of the deterministic autoencoder-based method L3C
(Mentzer et al., 2018), but is inferior to the variational autoencoder-based method bitswap (Kingma
et al., 2019). However, in terms of speed, our method outperforms both L3C and bitswap by a large
margin, owing to the shallow backbone and the efficient entropy coder. It is worth noting that bitswap
requires initial bits, rendering it unsuitable for single or small-batch image compression.
6.4 A BLATION S TUDIES
Here, we conduct ablation studies to examine the role of each component in the proposed method.
The theoretical BPD is reported, as previous experiments have shown a negligible disparity between
theoretical and practical compression performance. Our baseline is the widely-used VQ-VAE with a
discrete latent space (van den Oord et al., 2017). We compare it with RVQ-VAE (Sønderby, 2017),
SQ-VAE (Takida et al., 2022), and the proposed STHQ-based methods. For a fair comparison, we
disable the self-annealing mechanism in SQ-VAE for the sake of lossless compression. Different
variants of STHQ are considered, including the one with the FSAR prior (+FSAR), without the
st-hardmax operator (-STH), without the L2 regularization term ||Dmin ||2 (-L2), and with an
entropy term similar to RVQ-VAE (+Entropy). The experiments are performed on CIFAR10 images
using the same backbone network and sizes of latent variables and codebooks. The results are
presented in Table 2. For additional results from the ablation study, including different settings of the
backbone network, latent space, and codebook size, we refer the readers to Appendix E.3-E.5.
It is obvious that the proposed method surpasses all variants. STHQ reduces the BPD by about 2%
compared to VQ-VAE, and the inclusion of FSAR yields an additional 2-4% improvement. RVQ-VAE
and SQ-VAE perform worse than VQ-VAE, probably due to the entropy gap discussed in Section 5.
The higher variance observed in RVQ-VAE and SQ-VAE suggests instability, which can be explained
by the codebook divergence (cf. Proposition 5.1). Regarding the variants of STHQ, we observe that
the L2 regularization term achieves a 20% BPD decrease by supporting the simultaneous update of
all codewords. Moreover, without the st-hardmax operator, the distance updates in STHQ resemble
those of SQ-VAE, and so both STHQ-st-hardmax and SQ-VAE perform similarly but worse than
STHQ by 6%. Recall that SQ-VAE is unsuitable for compression purposes due to its reliance on
likelihood degeneration to obtain a deterministic decoder (see Section 2). In addition, introducing the
entropy term can cause instability in the optimization process (cf. Proposition 5.1), thus degrading
STHQ’s performance by about 2%. In summary, the st-hardmax operator, L2 regularization term,
and exclusion of the entropy term are all vital for the robust optimization of the discrete latent space.

7           C ONCLUSIONS
This paper presents a novel framework for efficient learned lossless compression, which incorporates
FSAR for efficient autoregressive latent coding and improved compression, together with STHQ for
robust optimization of the discrete latent space and further enhancement of compression performance.
Experimental results demonstrate a substantial improvement over the baseline, with a 6% increase
in compression ratio while maintaining comparable compression and decompression speeds. These
findings highlight the potential of our approach for advancing the field of lossless compression.


                                                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work was supported by Ant Group and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
62325109, U21B2013).

R EFERENCES
Workshop and challenge on learned image compression. https://clic.compression.cc/,
 2023. Accessed: 2023-01-09.
Kodak lossless true color image suite. https://r0k.us/graphics/kodak/, 2023. Accessed:
  2023-11-12.
Eirikur Agustsson, Fabian Mentzer, Michael Tschannen, Lukas Cavigelli, Radu Timofte, Luca
  Benini, and Luc Van Gool. Soft-to-hard vector quantization for end-to-end learning compressible
  representations. In NIPS, 2017.
Martín Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein gan. ArXiv, abs/1701.07875,
 2017.
Johannes Ballé, David C. Minnen, Saurabh Singh, Sung Jin Hwang, and Nick Johnston. Variational
  image compression with a scale hyperprior. ArXiv, abs/1802.01436, 2018.
Johannes Ballé, Nick Johnston, and David C. Minnen. Integer networks for data compression with
  latent-variable models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:108308220.
Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron C. Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients
  through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. ArXiv, abs/1308.3432, 2013.
Thomas Boutell. Png (portable network graphics) specification version 1.0. RFC, 2083:1–102, 1997.
Yuri Burda, Roger Baker Grosse, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Importance weighted autoencoders.
  CoRR, abs/1509.00519, 2015.
Zhengxue Cheng, Heming Sun, Masaru Takeuchi, and J. Katto. Learned image compression with
  discretized gaussian mixture likelihoods and attention modules. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7936–7945, 2020.
Gonçalo M. Correia, Vlad Niculae, and André F. T. Martins. Adaptively sparse transformers. In
 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2019.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, K. Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009.
Laurent Dinh, Jascha Narain Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using real nvp.
  ArXiv, abs/1605.08803, 2016.
Jarek Duda. Asymmetric numeral systems. ArXiv, abs/0902.0271, 2009.
Jarek Duda. Asymmetric numeral systems: entropy coding combining speed of huffman coding
  with compression rate of arithmetic coding. arXiv: Information Theory, 2013. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13409455.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Björn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  12868–12878, 2020.
Gergely Flamich, Marton Havasi, and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. Compressing images by
  encoding their latent representations with relative entropy coding. ArXiv, abs/2010.01185, 2020.
Gergely Flamich, Stratis Markou, and Jos’e Miguel Hern’andez-Lobato. Fast relative entropy coding
  with a* coding. ArXiv, abs/2201.12857, 2022.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lina Guo, Xinjie Shi, Dailan He, Yuanyuan Wang, Rui Ma, Hongwei Qin, and Yan Wang. Practical
  learned lossless jpeg recompression with multi-level cross-channel entropy model in the dct domain.
  2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5852–5861,
  2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247793842.

Lina Guo, Yuanyuan Wang, Tongda Xu, Jixiang Luo, Dailan He, Zhen fang Ji, Shanshan Wang,
  Yang Wang, and Hongwei Qin. Efficient learned lossless jpeg recompression. 2023. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261214835.

Dailan He, Yaoyan Zheng, Baochen Sun, Yan Wang, and Hongwei Qin. Checkerboard context model
  for efficient learned image compression. 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 14766–14775, 2021.

Kaiming He, X. Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
  2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2015.

Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Neural Informa-
 tion Processing Systems, 2017. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
 326772.

Emiel Hoogeboom, Jorn W. T. Peters, Rianne van den Berg, and Max Welling. Integer discrete flows
  and lossless compression. ArXiv, abs/1905.07376, 2019.

Eric Jang, Shixiang Shane Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax.
  ArXiv, abs/1611.01144, 2016.

Ning Kang, Shanzhao Qiu, Shifeng Zhang, Zhenguo Li, and Shutao Xia. Pilc: Practical image lossless
  compression with an end-to-end gpu oriented neural framework. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3729–3738, 2022.

Diederik P. Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions.
  ArXiv, abs/1807.03039, 2018.

Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. CoRR, abs/1312.6114, 2013.

Friso H. Kingma, P. Abbeel, and Jonathan Ho. Bit-swap: Recursive bits-back coding for lossless
  compression with hierarchical latent variables. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2019.

Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Neil Gordon Alldrin, Jasper R. R. Uijlings, Ivan Krasin, Jordi
  Pont-Tuset, Shahab Kamali, Stefan Popov, Matteo Malloci, Alexander Kolesnikov, Tom Duerig,
  and Vittorio Ferrari. The open images dataset v4. International Journal of Computer Vision, 128:
  1956–1981, 2018.

Jooyoung Lee, Seunghyun Cho, and Seunghwa Beack. Context-adaptive entropy model for end-
  to-end optimized image compression. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.

Fangzheng Lin, Heming Sun, Jinming Liu, and J. Katto. Multistage spatial context models for learned
  image compression. ArXiv, abs/2302.09263, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:257038187.

Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Olivier
  Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentangled represen-
  tations. ArXiv, abs/1811.12359, 2018.

Fabian Mentzer, Eirikur Agustsson, Michael Tschannen, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Practical
  full resolution learned lossless image compression. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10621–10630, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


David C. Minnen, Johannes Ballé, and George Toderici. Joint autoregressive and hierarchical priors
  for learned image compression. ArXiv, abs/1809.02736, 2018.
Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. Conditional generative adversarial nets. ArXiv, abs/1411.1784,
 2014.
Niki Parmar, Ashish Vaswani, Jakob Uszkoreit, Lukasz Kaiser, Noam M. Shazeer, Alexander Ku,
  and Dustin Tran. Image transformer. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Ben Peters, Vlad Niculae, and André F. T. Martins. Sparse sequence-to-sequence models. ArXiv,
  abs/1905.05702, 2019.
Boris Polyak and Anatoli B. Juditsky. Acceleration of stochastic approximation by averag-
  ing. Siam Journal on Control and Optimization, 30:838–855, 1992. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3548228.
Ali Razavi, Aäron van den Oord, and Oriol Vinyals. Generating diverse high-fidelity images with
  vq-vae-2. ArXiv, abs/1906.00446, 2019.
Kenneth M. Rose. Deterministic annealing for clustering, compression, classification, regression,
  and related optimization problems. Proc. IEEE, 86:2210–2239, 1998.
Aurko Roy, Ashish Vaswani, Niki Parmar, and Arvind Neelakantan. Towards a better understanding
  of vector quantized autoencoders. 2018.
Yangjun Ruan, Karen Ullrich, Daniel de Souza Severo, James Townsend, Ashish Khisti, A. Doucet,
  Alireza Makhzani, and Chris J. Maddison. Improving lossless compression rates via monte carlo
  bits-back coding. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Tom Ryder, Chen Zhang, Ning Kang, and Shifeng Zhang. Split hierarchical variational compression.
  2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 386–395,
  2022.
Claude E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J., 27:623–656, 1948.
Jon Sneyers and Pieter Wuille. Flif: Free lossless image format based on maniac compression. 2016
  IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 66–70, 2016.
Casper Kaae Sønderby. Continuous relaxation training of discrete latent variable image models.
  2017.
Yuhta Takida, Takashi Shibuya, Wei-Hsiang Liao, Chieh-Hsin Lai, Junki Ohmura, Toshimitsu Uesaka,
  Naoki Murata, Shusuke Takahashi, Toshiyuki Kumakura, and Yuki Mitsufuji. Sq-vae: Variational
  bayes on discrete representation with self-annealed stochastic quantization. ArXiv, abs/2205.07547,
  2022.
Lucas Theis and Jonathan Ho. Importance weighted compression. In Neural Compression: From
  Information Theory to Applications–Workshop@ ICLR 2021, 2021.
James Townsend, Thomas Bird, and David Barber. Practical lossless compression with latent variables
  using bits back coding. ArXiv, abs/1901.04866, 2019a.
James Townsend, Thomas Bird, Julius Kunze, and David Barber. Hilloc: Lossless image compression
  with hierarchical latent variable models. ArXiv, abs/1912.09953, 2019b.
Rianne van den Berg, Alexey A. Gritsenko, Mostafa Dehghani, Casper Kaae Sønderby, and Tim
  Salimans. Idf++: Analyzing and improving integer discrete flows for lossless compression.
  ArXiv, abs/2006.12459, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  219965949.
Aäron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, Lasse Espeholt, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Oriol Vinyals, and
  Alex Graves. Conditional image generation with pixelcnn decoders. ArXiv, abs/1606.05328, 2016a.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14989939.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aäron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural networks.
 ArXiv, abs/1601.06759, 2016b.
Aäron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learning.
  In NIPS, 2017.
webmproject. libwebp. https://github.com/webmproject/libwebp, 2023. Accessed:
  2023-01-09.
Feiyu Yang, Luis Herranz, Yongmei Cheng, and Mikhail G. Mozerov. Slimmable compres-
  sive autoencoders for practical neural image compression. 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4996–5005, 2021. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:232417114.
Jiahui Yu, L. Yang, N. Xu, Jianchao Yang, and Thomas S. Huang. Slimmable neural networks.
   ArXiv, abs/1812.08928, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
   56657799.
Xiaosu Zhu, Jingkuan Song, Lianli Gao, Fengcai Zheng, and Hengtao Shen. Unified multivariate
  gaussian mixture for efficient neural image compression. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 17591–17600, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    F URTHER R EVIEW ON R ELATED W ORKS
Continuous Random Latent Space Variational autoencoders (VAE) with continuous random latent
space (Kingma & Welling, 2013) are commonly employed in learned lossless compression due
to their ease of optimization using the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO). However, the practical
encoding of their latent space poses a challenge, as the random samples are continuous and cannot
be directly processed by a simple entropy coder. To tackle this issue, previous approaches have
proposed two main solutions: bits-back based latent coding (Townsend et al., 2019a; Kingma et al.,
2019; Theis & Ho, 2021; Ruan et al., 2021) and relative entropy coding (Flamich et al., 2020;
2022). Bits-back ANS (Townsend et al., 2019a) suggests taking random samples directly from the
compressed stream. Subsequent works have extended or optimized bits-back for different types of
VAE variants, including hierarchical VAEs (Townsend et al., 2019b; Kingma et al., 2019), importance
weighted autoencoders (Theis & Ho, 2021), and Monte-Carlo VAEs (Ruan et al., 2021). Another
approach, relative entropy coding (Flamich et al., 2020; 2022), incorporates a shared random number
generator between the compressor and decompressor, compressing the sampled index to represent
latent samples. However, both methods still require additional bits for the random source, and the
implementation of the entropy coder remains complex.

B    BACKGROUND K NOWLEDGE FOR S ECTION 3
Entropy Coding with ANS Entropy coding plays a central role in most compression frameworks, as
it compresses messages sampled from a probability distribution into a bitstream with a length close
to its entropy (Shannon, 1948), expressed as −EP log2 P (x). For a single sample from P (x), the
optimal code length is − log2 P (x). A recently proposed near-optimal entropy coder, ANS (Duda,
2009), treats the bitstream as a growing state. It pushes and pops values to and from this state based
on their probabilities. One of the ANS implementations, tabled ANS, is illustrated in Figure 3a. ANS
achieves the optimal code length − log2 P (x) for any given samples from P (x).
Compression with Variational Autoencoders The proposed framework draws inspiration from
previous compression frameworks based on variational autoencoders. A variational autoencoder
models the probability of the input data p(x) by transforming x to latent variables z and generating
the likelihood p(x|z) based on z. Consequently, x can be compressed or decompressed using p(x|z)
by applying an entropy coder. The latent variables z follow a random distribution conditioned on
x, denoted as q(z|x). As z is required by p(x|z), z also needs to be entropy coded with p(z). The
entire process of modeling p(x) using a variational autoencoder can be represented as:
                                                 p(z)p(x|z)
                                         p(x) =              .                                     (10)
                                                    q(z|x)
The length of the compressed stream produced by entropy coders can be estimated using
−Eq log p(x), which can be rewritten as:
  −Eq log p(x) = Eq log q(z|x) − log p(z) − log p(x|z) = KL(q(z|x)||p(z)) − log p(x|z). (11)
Here, − log p(x|z) estimates the compressed length of x, and KL(q(z|x)||p(z)) estimates the
compressed length of z. It’s important to note that common entropy coders can only process samples
rather than distributions. Hence, the true compressed length should satisfy the inequality given by:
      − log p(z) − log p(x|z) ≥ Eq log q(z|x) − log p(z) − log p(x|z) = −Eq log p(x).              (12)
As q(z|x) is a discrete distribution, equality is achieved only if q(z|x) is a one-hot distribution.
Therefore, we can straightforwardly set q(z|x) as a categorical distribution with one-hot probabilities,
which can be easily parameterized using a quantization function.
As shown in Figure 2, the inference network provides parameters for q(z|x), while the generative
network implements p(x|z). The one-hot representation of q(z|x) is obtained by quantizing the
output of the inference network using a learnable codebook, employing the proposed STHQ method.
To be specific, we calculate the euclidean distances between the inference network output and each
codeword in the learnable codebook. The negative euclidean distances are then utilized to determine
the sampling probability of each codeword, following a similar approach as in (Sønderby, 2017).
Additionally, we incorporate the sparse mask from the LSN module in FSAR to further prune the
codebook. The proposed STHQ produces one-hot latent samples by selecting the codeword with
the highest probability through quantization. These one-hot samples can be converted into latent
indices for compression into the latent stream and are also used in the dequantization process, where


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a specific codeword is chosen from the codebook as the input for the generative network. p(z) is
effectively encoded using an efficient autoregressive entropy coder based on the proposed FSAR
model. The optimization process can use Eq. (12) as the loss function to minimize the length of the
compressed bitstream and achieve superior compression ratios.


C     D ISCUSSIONS FOR S ECTION 4

C.1    T IME C OMPLEXITY C OMPARISON

Comparison of Complexity with ANS The utilization of lookup tables has been explored in
table ANS (tANS) implementation (Duda, 2013). This approach precalculates all possible state
transitions and utilizes lookup tables during the coding process to expedite the process. Given that
the autoregressive Markov model can be iterated alongside the entropy coder, it is straightforward to
design a similar lookup table-based autoregressive Markov model for acceleration. To compare the
complexity, we provide a breakdown of the number of operations for different ANS implementations,
including range ANS (rANS) (Duda, 2013) and table ANS (tANS) (Duda, 2013), as shown in Table 3.
It is evident that the proposed FSAR model requires only a few additional memory operations
compared to ANS, thanks to its lookup table-based iteration process.


Comparison of Complexity with Masked Convolution based Autoregressive Models Masked
convolution (van den Oord et al., 2016b), which relies on FLOPs, is commonly employed for
implementing autoregressive models. In Table 4, we provide a breakdown of the number of operations
per iteration required for masked convolution-based autoregressive models. In contrast, the proposed
FSAR model completely avoids expensive FLOPs and exhibits complexity comparable to that of
entropy coders, as shown in Table 3.

Table 3: Integer, floating-point, and memory operations per symbol in modern entropy coders. Operations are
distinguished by color-coded boxes in the accompanying pseudo-code.

                                          PseudoCode                           Int     Float     Mem
                                     start, freq = CDF [yi ] ;
    rANS Encode       s = (si−1 / freq) » nbit + si−1 % freq + start;          6         0         1
                                       si = flushbits (s);

                                     cfreq = si−1 & bitmask;
                                 yi , start, freq = ICDF [cfreq] ;
    rANS Decode                                                                6         0         1
                          s = freq * (si−1 » nbit) + cfreq - start;
                                       si = readbits (s)

                                 nbit, delta = TransTable [yi ] ;
    tANS Encode                          flushbits (si−1 );                    3         0         2
                           si = StateTable [(si−1 » nbit) + delta]

                                 nbit, yi , s = DecTable [si−1 ] ;
    tANS Decode                                                                1         0         1
                                        si = readbits (s)

     FSAR(O2)+          TransTable, StateTable = Table [yj−1 ] [yk−1 ] ;
    tANS Encode
                                                                               3         0         4
                             tANSEncode (TransTable, StateTable);

     FSAR(O2)+                 DecTable = Table [yj−1 ] [yk−1 ] ;
    tANS Decode
                                                                               1         0         3
                                    tANSDecode (DecTable);


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Integer, floating-Point, and memory operations per symbol in various autoregressive models. Oper-
ations are distinguished by color-coded boxes in the accompanying formula or pseudo-code. Convolutional
layers are assumed to have a single channel. Ma, b and Ca, b represent kernel sets, defined as Ma, b =
(j, k)|∀j, k ∈ Z, −a < j < 0, |k| < b ∪ (0, k)|∀k < 0 and Ca, b = (j, k)|∀j, k ∈ Z, (j + k) mod 2 ̸= 0, re-
spectively.

                                 Formula/PseudoCode                    Int         Float       Mem
                               Pm,n
        MaskConv2D3x3           (m,n)∈M2,2 yj+m,k+n Wm,n                0      2|M2,2 | = 8     0
                               Pm,n
        MaskConv2D5x5           (m,n)∈M4,4 yj+m,k+n Wm,n                0      2|M4,4 | = 24    0
                               Pm,n
      Checkerboard2D3x3         (m,n)∈C2,2 yj+m,k+n Wm,n                0      2|C2,2 | = 8     0
            FSAR(O1)                    Table [yk−1 ]                   0           0           1
            FSAR(O2)               Table [yj−1 ] [yk−1 ]                0           0           2


C.2      I MPLEMENTATION OF FSAR- TANS

In theory, FSAR has the potential to be combined with any entropy coders. However, for practical
implementation efficiency, we have opted for tANS (Duda, 2013), which leverages lookup tables
for accelerated processing. The algorithm for finite-state autoregressive entropy coding based on
tANS, including the initialization, encoding, and decoding processes, is illustrated in Algorithm 1.
The modified or added steps, which differ from the original tANS algorithm, are highlighted in red.
It is obvious that the only additional step during encoding and decoding is the n-dimensional table
lookup.


D     D ISCUSSIONS FOR S ECTION 5

D.1      P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5.1

Proposition 5.1 It is possible that ∀i, ∂H(q(z|x))/∂Di ≤ 0

Proof.
                                                         P
                                ∂H(q(z|x))    ∂          i qi log qi   ∂qi
                                           =−                              .                          (13)
                                  ∂Di                        ∂qi       ∂Di

Note that
                                                        e−Di
                                  qi = softmaxi (−D) = P −Di .                                        (14)
                                                         ie


Let Si = e−Di ∈ (0, 1], we have
                      P
                    ∂ i (qi log qi )                                 X
                                     = 1 + log qi = 1 + log Si − log   Si ,                           (15)
                          ∂qi                                        i
and                                                P
                                ∂qi   ∂Si ∂qi        i Si − Si
                                    =         = −Si P          .                                      (16)
                                ∂Di   ∂Di ∂Si       ( i Si )2

Therefore,                                                     P
                       ∂H(q(z|x))                                 i Si − Si
                                                         X
                                  = Si (1 + log Si − log   Si ) P          2
                                                                             .                        (17)
                         ∂Di                             i
                                                                (    i Si )


Since                                       P
                                              i Si − Si
                                          Si P          > 0,                                          (18)
                                             ( i Si )2

                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Finite-State Autoregressive tANS Coding Algorithm. The steps that are different from
tANS are highlighted in red.
  procedure I NITIALIZATION(FSMarkov M, NumStates C, Order n)
     Initialize n-dimensional Lookup Table LE , LD
     for y1 ∈ {0, 1, ..., C}, ..., yn ∈ {0, 1, ..., C} do
         π ← softmax(M(y1 , ..., yn ))
         LE [y1 , ..., yn ] ← BuildT ansEncodeT able(vpi)
         LD [y1 , ..., yn ] ← BuildT ansDecodeT able(π)
     end for
     return LE , LD
  end procedure
  procedure E NCODE(Symbols y, EncoderLookupTable LE , Offsets o = {o1 , ..., on })
     Initialize ANSState s, BitStream B
     for yi ∈ reserve(y) do                                  ▷ ANS requires a LIFO queue
         L ← LE [yi−o1 , ..., yi−on ]
         T ← GetEncodeStateT ransition(L, yi )
         s, nbits ← T (s)
         OutputBits(B, LowerBits(s, nbits))
         s ← s >> nbits
     end for
     F lush(B, s)
     return B
  end procedure
  procedure D ECODE(BitStream B, DecoderLookupTable LD , Offsets o = {o1 , ..., on })
     Initialize Symbols y
     i←0
     s ← InputBits(B, M axBits(s))
     while not IsF inished(B) do
         L ← LD [yi−o1 , ..., yi−on ]
         T ← GetDecodeStateT ransition(L, s)
         yi , nbits ← T (s)
         s ← (s << nbits) + InputBits(B, nbits)
         i←i+1
     end while
     return y
  end procedure


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to guarantee that ∂H(q(z|x))/∂Di > 0, the following inequality must hold:
                                                 X
                               1 + log Si − log      Si > 0.                                             (19)
                                                               i
Equivalently, we have
                                                      X                            X
                        Di = − log Si < 1 − log                Si = 1 − log               e−Di .         (20)
                                                           i                         i

Therefore, we only need to find a case such that:
                                                                           X
                                 ∀i,    Di = − log Si ≥ 1 − log                    Si .                  (21)
                                                                               i

As Di ≥ 0, we only need:
                                             X                 X
                                       log       Si ≥ 1,             Si ≥ e.                             (22)
                                             i                  i

which can be easily satisfied when the codebook size is large or the codewords are close to each other.
This completes the proof.

D.2    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5.2

Proposition 5.2: Suppose that p(z) follows a uniform distribution. Given the same sample input y
and parameters θ of the generative model log pθ (x|By T ), we have log parg minθ LRV Q (x|By T ) <
log parg minθ LV Q (x|By T ) .

Proof. Suppose that
                                θ̂, B̂ = arg min LV Q = arg min LRV Q .                                  (23)
                                             θ,B                    θ,B


It follows from (4) that
                       θ̂ = arg max log pθ (x|By T ),               and,   I(x) = By T .                 (24)
                                 θ

For RVQ,
                                                                    ∂LRV Q   ∂H(q(z|x)) ∂D
             LRV Q = H(q(z|x)) − log pθ (x|By T ),                         =               .             (25)
                                                                     ∂B         ∂D      ∂B
According to the proof of Proposition 5.1, we can obtain ∂H(q(z|x))/∂D = 0 only if
                                                           X
                              ∀i, Di = − log Si = 1 − log      Si .                                      (26)
                                                                           i
                                            P
In other words, D1 = D2 = ... = 1 − log i Si , which means that q(z|x) is a uniform distribution.
Given (24), the above equality is satisfied only when B1 = B2 = ... = I(x), that is, the codebook
collapses.
Apparently, this is not the global optimal point of the codebook for LRV Q , which contradicts with
(23). Therefore,
      log parg minθ,B LRV Q (x|By T ) < log pθ̂,B̂ (x|By T ) = log parg minθ,B LV Q (x|By T ). (27)

This completes the proof.

D.3    R ELATIONSHIP TO SQ-VAE (TAKIDA ET AL ., 2022)

SQ-VAE (Takida et al., 2022) introduces a stochastic quantization and dequantization process into the
latent model of the relaxed VQ. The quantized latent variable is denoted as zq and the dequantized
latent variable as z. The inference model can be represented as q1 (z|x)q2 (zq |z) and the generative
model as p(zq )p1 (x|zq )p2 (z|zq ). The optimization objective of SQ-VAE is the negative ELBO:
                              p2 (z|zq )
LSQ = Eq1 (z|x)q2 (zq |z) log            − Eq2 (zq |z) log q2 (zq |z) − Eq2 (zq |z) log p(zq ) − log p(x|zq ).
                              q1 (z|x)
                                                                                                         (28)


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 600
                                                                                                       3.9
                 500
                                                                                                       3.7

                 400                                                                                   3.5


                                                                                         log p(x|zq)
    Perplexity

                                                                                                       3.3
                 300
                                                                                                       3.1
                 200
                                                                                                       2.9
                 100
                                                                                                       2.7

                   0                                                                                   2.5
                       0    20000    40000      60000     80000   100000   120000                            0   20000    40000       60000     80000   100000   120000
                                             Traning Step                                                                         Training Step
                                    VQ   RVQ    SQVAE    STHQ                                                            VQ   RVQ     SQVAE    STHQ


                                               (a)                                                                                  (b)

                                     Figure 5: Convergence processes for different quantization methods.


Let us further assume that z is a Gaussian distribution with the same variance σϕ in both p2 and q1 .
Eq. (28) can be simplified as:
                  ||z − zq ||2
         LSQ =                 − Eq2 (zq |z) log q2 (zq |z) − Eq2 (zq |z) log p(zq ) − log p(x|zq ). (29)
                      2σϕ2
Recall that the loss function of the proposed STHQ is
                        LST HQ = ||Dmin ||2 − Eq log p(z) − log p(x|By T ).                                                                                          (30)
We can tell that SQ-VAE is equivalent to STHQ when 2σϕ2 = 1, the entropy term is removed, and the
Gumbel-softmax sampling for the categorical distribution is replaced by the proposed st-hardmax
sampling for q2 (zq |z). As discussed in Section 2, SQ-VAE requires log p(x|zq ) to degenerate so
as to ensure σϕ → 0. However, for compression tasks, log p(x|zq ) needs to be non-degenerate.
                ||z−z ||
Consequently, 2σ2q 2 approaches infinity if σϕ → 0. In other words, the stochastic quantization in
                     ϕ
SQ-VAE is not applicable to our problem, and thus, we propose STHQ as a remedy.

D.4                    E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS OF D IFFERENT Q UANTIZATION M ETHODS

In order to further substantiate the preceding discussions, we conducted optimization experiments
employing different quantization methods, namely VQ, RVQ, SQ-VAE, and the proposed STHQ.
The experimental setup used in Section 6.2 was adopted for training. Following the methodology
outlined in (Takida et al., 2022) for SQ-VAE, we employed codebook perplexity as a measure of
codebook utilization, and the likelihood (log p(x|zq )) as an indicator of the quality of reconstruction
throughout the entire training process. The results are presented in Figure 5.
It is obvious that STHQ achieves the best reconstruction result and the codebook utilization is very
close to RVQ and SQ-VAE. Analysis of the codebook perplexity results reveals that RVQ and SQ-
VAE achieve a more representative codebook compared to VQ, owing to the global update property
facilitated by the entropy term. However, their likelihood remains inferior to that of VQ, as confirmed
by Proposition 5.2. In contrast, the proposed STHQ approach achieves a perplexity value comparable
to that of RVQ and SQ-VAE, while exhibiting faster convergence of likelihood than VQ. This notable
improvement can be attributed to the global update capability and the mitigation of the entropy
gap problem enabled by STHQ, resulting in accelerated convergence of both the codebook and the
likelihood.


E                 E XTRA E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

E.1                    F ULL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS FOR S ECTION 6.2

Here we present the compression time of the backbone network and entropy coders for each method
in Table 1. The results, displayed in Table 5, indicate that for most methods, the compression time


                                                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Experimental results of latent coding Methods. Expands upon Table 1 by including compression and
decompression times for each method on CF10.

                                                                 CF10 Comp Time (ms)         CF10 Decomp Time (ms)
                          Methods                                 Net    Coder   Total       Net       Coder    Total
   Continuous         bits-back (Townsend et al., 2019a)         32.07   4.54    36.61       32.44     9.85     42.29
                           UQ (Ballé et al., 2018)                0.98    1.53    2.51       1.60      1.54      3.15
      Discrete          VQ (van den Oord et al., 2017)            0.98    0.61    1.59       1.57      0.88      2.45
                         McQuic (Zhu et al., 2022)                1.03   11.25   12.28       1.57      8.75     10.32
                   MaskConv2D (van den Oord et al., 2016b)        1.03   4.26    5.28        1.75     632.24   633.99
 Autoregressive        Checkerboard (He et al., 2021)             1.03   4.65    5.67        1.63      4.71     6.34
                              tANS (Duda, 2013)                  0.99    0.92    1.91        1.66      0.86     2.52
                                 FSAR(O1)                        0.98    1.00    1.98        1.58      0.97     2.55
      Proposed                   FSAR(O2)                        0.99    1.08    2.07        1.62      1.04     2.65
                               FSAR(O2)+LSN                      0.98    1.47    2.45        1.59      1.06     2.65
                                 FSAR(O3)                        OOM     OOM     OOM         OOM       OOM      OOM

Table 6: Experimental results of lossless image compressors on different datasets. BPD values for IDF and
IDF++ on CF10, IN32, and IN64 datasets are obtained from their respective original papers.
                                                                Practical BPD                         Speed (MB/s)
                  Methods                    CF10        IN32     IN64   Kodak     CLIC20            CSpd      DSpd
                            PNG              5.78        6.09     5.42    4.53       4.23            16.559    59.207
   Traditional              WebP             4.52        4.95     4.32    3.20       3.08             1.762    26.688
                            FLIF             4.29        4.78     4.25    2.88       2.82             0.858     2.715
                            L3C              4.77        4.89     4.29    3.55       3.34            0.036     0.057
  Autoencoder             bitswap            3.84        4.54       -       -          -             0.003     0.004
                           PILC              4.28        4.95     4.51    3.68       3.55            2.659     3.725
                             IDF             3.34        4.18     3.90      -            -           0.010     0.007
       Flow                 IDF++            3.26        4.12     3.81      -            -           0.009     0.007
                      PILC+STHQ              4.29        4.90     4.50    3.68       3.57            2.566     3.795
   Proposed        PILC+STHQ+FSAR            4.18        4.80     4.39    3.66       3.51            2.378     3.590



closely aligns with the decompression time. However, the MaskConv2D autoregressive method
demonstrates a notable distinction, benefitting from its parallel computation during the compression
process.

E.2     F ULL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS FOR S ECTION 6.3

We present comprehensive results in Figure 4, encompassing experiments conducted on Ima-
geNet32/64, as well as a high-resolution benchmark utilizing the Kodak (Kod, 2023) dataset and
CLIC 2020 (CLI, 2023) validation set (referred as to Kodak and CLIC20 respectively). The Kodak
dataset consists of images with a resolution of 512 × 768, while the CLIC dataset ranges from
720 × 439 to 2048 × 1370 in resolution. It is important to note that our model is trained following the
methods described in (Mentzer et al., 2018) and (Kang et al., 2022), using a subset of the preprocessed
Open Images training dataset (Kuznetsova et al., 2018). Furthermore, our evaluation includes lossless
codecs based on flow models, specifically integer discrete flows (IDF) (Hoogeboom et al., 2019) and
its enhanced version IDF++ (van den Berg et al., 2020). The corresponding results are presented
in Table 6.
The results of the PILC+STHQ+FSAR method on IN32/64 demonstrate similarity to CIFAR10,
exhibiting similar BPD values to WebP and FLIF, and slightly inferior performance compared to
PILC. In the case of high-resolution images, the PILC+STHQ+FSAR method performs marginally
worse than WebP but outperforms PNG, likely due to the limited versatility of the shallow backbone.
This implies the necessity for improved backbones when dealing with large-scale images. However, it
is important to note that the proposed STHQ and FSAR techniques enhance the performance of PILC
across all datasets, validating the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed method for lossless


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: BPD results (with standard deviation) for using different autoregressive Markov models on different
spaces. The standard deviations are presented in the brackets.

                                               Observation        Latent
                                  None             8.00        5.23 (0.02)
                                MaskConv        5.37(0.00)     5.05(0.04)
                                FSAR(O1)        6.19(0.00)     5.15(0.03)
                                FSAR(O2)        5.49(0.01)     5.06(0.02)
                                FSAR(O3)        5.26(0.01)     4.96(0.03)



image compression tasks. Regarding flow models, IDF and IDF++ surpass all other methods in terms
of BPD, although their slower processing speed remains a critical concern.


E.3   C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT U SAGES OF AUTOREGRESSIVE M ARKOV M ODELS

As discussed in Section 4, the use of autoregressive Markov models as the latent prior is considered
an optimal solution. This is because the latent space is typically smaller than the observation space,
and the dependency between variables is relatively weak in the latent space. As a result, a more
compact autoregressive Markov model, such as the FSAR model, can be employed. In this section,
we empirically demonstrate the validity of this assertion by comparing the performance of various
autoregressive Markov models. These models include the proposed FSAR model, a higher-order
autoregressive Markov model (order-3 FSAR), and a Masked Convolution based model (van den Oord
et al., 2016b). The comparison is conducted for both observation space and latent space scenarios
using the CIFAR10 dataset. The theoretical BPD is reported for this experiment.
The results demonstrate that, in the observation space, more complex autoregressive Markov models
generally yield better compression performance than their simpler counterparts. This suggests that
the dependencies between variables are more intricate in the observation space than in the latent
space. Conversely, applying higher-order Markov models does not result in significant improvements
in the latent space. This highlights the advantages of employing compact, low-order autoregressive
Markov models as the latent prior.


E.4   C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT H YPERPARAMETERS FOR O PTIMIZING STHQ

This study aims to establish the superiority of the proposed STHQ method over existing VQ-based
methods. To compare these models, various hyperparameters are considered, including backbone
network settings, latent space, and codebook size. The experiments are conducted on the CIFAR10
dataset. Specifically, two backbone networks are evaluated: a shallow backbone (consisting of one
downsampling or upsampling layer, and one residual layer with 64 latent channels) used in previous
experiments, and a deeper backbone (consisting of two downsampling or upsampling layers, and two
residual layers with 256 latent channels). For the shallow backbone, the latent variables are quantized
to 1, 2, and 4 channels, with corresponding codeword channels of 64, 32, and 16, respectively. For
the deeper backbone, the latent variables are quantized to 4, 8, and 16 channels, with corresponding
codeword channels of 64, 32, and 16, respectively. The proposed STHQ method is compared to
VQ-VAE (van den Oord et al., 2017) (denoted as VQ), Relaxed VQ-VAE (Sønderby, 2017) (denoted
as RVQ) and SQ-VAE (Takida et al., 2022) (denoted as SQ). The results are summarized in Table 8.
Our findings reveal that the proposed STHQ method outperforms all other VQ-based methods in most
configurations, except for a few cases where the compression performance of STHQ is comparable to
other methods. Generally, VQ-VAE performs relatively worse when quantized to fewer channels (1
or 2), but better when quantized to more channels (4, 8, or 16). Conversely, the relaxed VQ-VAE
and SQ-VAE exhibit relatively higher performance when quantized to fewer channels, but lower
performance for more channels. In contrast, the proposed STHQ method consistently achieves
comparable or superior results across all configurations, demonstrating its robustness in optimizing
discrete latent space.


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: BPD results (with standard deviation) for using different hyperparameters for different VQ based
methods. The standard deviations are presented in the brackets.

                Hyperparameters                                            Method
    Backbone    Latent    Quant     Codeword            VQ           RVQ             SQ        Proposed
                             1          64         5.75 (0.04)    5.60 (0.04)    5.48 (0.01)   5.44 (0.02)
      1-layer     64         2          32         5.34 (0.07)    5.81 (0.18)    5.62 (0.22)   5.26 (0.06)
                             4          16         5.87 (0.03)    6.67 (0.02)    6.91 (0.05)   5.66 (0.08)
                             4          64         5.00 (0.05)    5.09 (0.10)    5.35 (0.06)   4.96 (0.03)
    2-layers     256         8          32         4.87 (0.02)    5.23 (0.03)    6.02 (0.02)   4.79 (0.02)
                            16          16         5.20 (0.07)    6.30 (0.04)    7.40 (0.15)   5.17 (0.03)


                       Table 9: Generation task results for different VQ-based methods.

                                                 NLL      FID      Perplexity
                                 VQ              2.83     58.00        262.93
                                 RVQ             2.88     64.15        327.68
                                 SQ              2.96     83.09        489.07
                                 EMA-VQ          2.80     48.59        380.45
                                 EM-VQ           2.76     55.76        282.97
                                 Anneal-RVQ      3.12     81.02         61.55
                                 Proposed        2.67     42.63        487.75



E.5     C OMPARISON OF VQ- BASED METHODS ON G ENERATION TASKS

Finally, we conduct a comparative analysis of our proposed STHQ method against existing vector
quantization (VQ)-based approaches in simple image generation tasks. In addition to the methods
listed in Table 8, we include comparisons with VQ variants, namely exponential moving average-based
codebook update for VQ-VAE (EMA-VQ) (Polyak & Juditsky, 1992), expectation maximization
optimizer for VQ-VAE (EM-VQ) (Roy et al., 2018), and relaxed VQ with exponential deterministic
annealing (Anneal-RVQ) (Rose, 1998), where the softmax temperature is annealed from 1.0 and
halved every 200 epochs. In our evaluation, we employ the negative log-likelihood (NLL) metric,
commonly used for assessment, along with the Frechet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017)
to gauge the quality of the generated images. Additionally, we utilize perplexity as a measure of
codebook utilization, where a higher perplexity indicates better codebook training. These experiments
are conducted on CIFAR10, utilizing the same hyperparameters as described in Section 6.2. The
results are presented in Table 9.
The results reveal that the proposed STHQ method outperforms all other approaches across all metrics.
Among the VQ variants, EMA-VQ and EM-VQ demonstrate superior performance compared to
traditional VQ, while Anneal-RVQ exhibits notably worse results, potentially due to an improper
annealing schedule. This suggests that tuning deterministic annealing proves challenging in practical
applications. On the other hand, the proposed STHQ method achieves better performance than both
EMA and EM optimization techniques, while also avoiding the complexities associated with tuning
the annealing process.


F      E XPERIMENT I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

F.1     H ARDWARE S ETUP

To ensure fair comparisons, we conduct all experiments under the same hardware configuration.
For CPU-based experiments, we utilize a desktop machine equipped with an Intel i7-6800K CPU.
For GPU-based model training, we employ a virtual machine on a Kubermaker cluster featuring 8
NVIDIA V100 GPUs.


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.2   N ETWORK S TRUCTURE

In our experiments, unless otherwise specified, we maintain consistency in the backbone network
across all methods to ensure that the compression ratio remains unaffected by variations in the
backbone architecture. Our focus on general computation devices, such as CPUs, leads us to adopt
a shallow backbone network based on ResNet (He et al., 2015). This selection aims to minimize
the number of floating-point operations (FLOPs) involved. The backbone network comprises a
single downsampling (or upsampling) convolutional layer and one residual block within the inference
(or generative) model. Consequently, the inference model performs 2x downsampling, while the
generative model performs 2x upsampling. With regard to the latent space, we set the number of
input latent channels to 64 and quantize them into 2 channels, each containing 256 codewords. This
configuration leads to a codebook size of 2 × 256 × 32, where 2 represents the quantized latent
channels, 256 denotes the number of codewords (also known as state number), and 32 signifies the
codeword dimension. Consequently, a 3 × 32 × 32 input image corresponds to 2 × 16 × 16 latent
variables.

F.3   H YPERPARAMETERS AND C ONFIGURATIONS OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHODS

Regarding FSAR, each variable relies on its previous neighboring variables in the spatial domain.
Specifically, the latent prior utilizing the Order-1 Markov model is defined as p(yi,j,k |yi,j,k−1 ), while
Order-2 is p(yi,j,k |yi,j−1,k , yi,j,k−1 ), and Order-3 is p(yi,j,k |yi,j−1,k−1 , yi,j−1,k , yi,j,k−1 ), where
i, j, k represent the indices of the channel, height, and width dimensions, respectively. During training,
the Markov models are implemented using a 3-layer network consisting of 3 Linear layers and 2
ReLU layers. For the learnable state number, the initial number of states is set to 256, and α = 1.5
is used in the α-entmax method. For STHQ, the temperature for Gumbel-softmax GSτ is set as a
constant 0.5.

F.4   T RAINING P ROCEDURE

The training process utilized the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−3 . For the CIFAR10
dataset, the training was performed for 1000 epochs, with a batch size of 64 per GPU. Regarding the
ImageNet32 dataset, the training was conducted for 50 epochs, with a batch size of 64 per GPU. As
for ImageNet64, the training setup was identical to ImageNet32, except that the batch size was set to
16 per GPU.
It is important to note that in the STHQ-based experiments, the Gumbel-softmax reparameterization
in the st-hardmax operator maintained a constant temperature throughout the training process. In
this case, a temperature of 1.0 was employed as we required its gradient for optimization purposes.
Additionally, the log p(x|By T ) term in the loss function (9) was implemented using a straight-
through estimator, similar to VQ-VAE (van den Oord et al., 2017). This approach, rather than directly
utilizing the samples in the proposed st-hardmax, proved to be beneficial for effectively optimizing
the inference network.

F.5   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS FOR THE L ATENT S PACE M ODELS IN TABLE 1

Here we provide implementation details for latent space models used in Table 1. First, Table 10
illustrates the overall architecture of each method by linking them to Figure 1. Generally, for discrete
latent space (Figure 1b), the variations among different methods primarily stem from the choice of
quantization method. On the other hand, for models utilizing a discrete autoregressive latent space
(Figure 1c), the main point of differentiation lies in the context model. Regarding our proposed FSAR-
tANS model (Figure 1d), we utilize the STHQ method for quantization and conduct experiments
using different FSAR models.
Next, we provide detailed explanations for the compared methods. Unless otherwise specified, all
models employed in this study adhere to the same training scheme and utilize identical inference
and generative networks. The reported values are obtained by averaging the corresponding metrics
from three independent experiments. It is worth mentioning that the memory occupation values
only take into account statically allocated data, such as the lookup table for tANS and the kernel
parameters for MaskConv. In the case of LSN, only valid states are utilized to construct lookup
tables. Therefore, the number of reduced states is consistent with the memory savings, as the lookup


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Table 10: Architecture and Implementation Details of methods in Table 1.

  Architecture                       Method                                        Detail
      Figure 1a        bits-back (Townsend et al., 2019a)                             -
                           UQ (Ballé et al., 2018)                           quant: uniform
      Figure 1b         VQ (van den Oord et al., 2017)                          quant: VQ
                         McQuic (Zhu et al., 2022)                        quant: 3-layer VQVAE
                  MaskConv2D (van den Oord et al., 2016b)                 context: MaskConv2D
      Figure 1c       Checkerboard (He et al., 2021)                      context: Checkerboard
                              tANS (Duda, 2013)                     FSAR-tANS: non-autoregressive
                                 FSAR(O1)                            FSAR-tANS: Order-1 Markov
      Figure 1d                  FSAR(O2)                            FSAR-tANS: Order-2 Markov
                               FSAR(O2)+LSN                       FSAR-tANS: Order-2 Markov + LSN
                                 FSAR(O3)                            FSAR-tANS: Order-3 Markov



table takes O(C N ) space. For example, the FSAR(O2)+LSN (C = 256, N = 2) approach achieves
an average of 187.33 states, which can be also inferred from the memory occupation saving from
Table 1: 256(276.586/516.512)1/2 ≈ 187.33.
STHQ+tANS (Duda, 2013) For the STHQ+tANS method, we utilize the tANS implementation from
the zstd library1 , in accordance with the conventions followed in other STHQ-based experiments
such as FSAR and various autoregressive-based latent models.
bits-back (Townsend et al., 2019a) The bits-back method is implemented using the craystack library2
provided by the authors.
UQ (Ballé et al., 2018) For universal quantization latent coding, we employ the entropy bottleneck
proposed in (Ballé et al., 2018) and implemented in CompressAI3 . The size of the latent channels is
set to 64, which is equivalent to the output channels of the inference network.
VQ (van den Oord et al., 2017) The VQ model is implemented using the original implementation
of VQ-VAE4 (van den Oord et al., 2017), with tANS used for constructing the latent coder. The
codebook size is the same as that used in the STHQ-based experiments, which is 2 × 256 × 32.
McQuic (Zhu et al., 2022) We adhere to the official McQuic repository5 for implementation,
replacing the entropy coder with tANS for a fair speed comparison. We adopt the recommended
hyperparameters m = 2 and K = [8192, 2048, 512], and the size of the latent channels remains
consistent with other experiments, which is 64.
MaskConv2D (van den Oord et al., 2016b) We employ a single masked convolution layer, using
mask A as described in (van den Oord et al., 2016b), as an autoregressive model for latent vari-
ables. The entropy coder used is the same as in STHQ+tANS. During latent entropy coding, the
autoregressive model is iterated along the spatial dimensions.
Checkerboard (He et al., 2021) Similar to MaskConv2D, we utilize a single masked convolution
layer as the autoregressive model, adopting a checkerboard-form mask as described in (He et al.,
2021). The latent entropy coding is iterated in two subsequent steps.

F.6     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS FOR THE COMPRESSION METHODS IN TABLE 6

PNG, WebP To compress images in PNG and lossless WebP formats, we utilize the pillow library6 .

   1
     https://github.com/facebook/zstd
   2
     https://github.com/j-towns/craystack
   3
     https://github.com/InterDigitalInc/CompressAI
   4
     https://github.com/bshall/VectorQuantizedVAE
   5
     https://github.com/xiaosu-zhu/McQuic
   6
     https://pypi.org/project/Pillow/


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FLIF For FLIF compression, we use the imageio-flif python library7 which binds the official C code8 ,
and we execute "imageio.v2.imwrite(bytesio, image, format="FLIF", disable_color_buckets=True)"
to compress images.
L3C (Mentzer et al., 2018) To test using the L3C method, we employ the official code9 and the
provided pretrained models for different datasets.
bitswap (Kingma et al., 2019) For bitswap compression, we use the official code10 and the provided
pretrained model (labeled "nz2") for testing on CIFAR10 and ImageNet32 (ImageNet64 is skipped as
no pretrained models is provided). It should be noted that, unlike other experiments, all images are
stored in the same bitstream, which is one reason for the method’s low BPD.
PILC (Kang et al., 2022) Since the code for PILC is currently unavailable, we implement this
method in our benchmark. This includes the three-way autoregressive (TWAR) model for image
prediction and the AI-ANS coder for entropy coding, as described in (Kang et al., 2022). Specifically,
we adopt the recommended backbone network from the authors, consisting of one downsampling (or
upsampling) convolutional layer and four residual blocks in the inference (or generative) model. It is
worth mentioning that the code for PILC is not publicly available, and therefore we have independently
implemented this method in our benchmark. Our implementation includes the proposed three-way
autoregressive (TWAR) model for image prediction and the AI-ANS coder (on CPU) for entropy
coding. We use the same backbone network architecture as our experiments, which consists of
one downsampling (or upsampling) convolutional layer and one residual block in the inference
(or generative) model. The proposed method combined with PILC also follows this backbone
architecture.

G       D ISCUSSIONS AND F UTURE W ORKS
Despite the promising outcomes achieved through the proposed finite-state autoregressive entropy
coding approach, there are still certain limitations that require attention. Notably, our experimental
utilization of the lookup table still demands approximately 300MB of storage, even after reducing the
number of states using the proposed Learnable State Number approach. This presents a significant
hurdle for implementing the approach on portable devices and emphasizes the necessity for future
research on maximizing the advantages of the autoregressive Markov model while keeping the space
complexity limited.
One potential solution is to restrict the number of probability distributions employed for tANS coding,
thereby limiting the corresponding state transition lookup tables used by tANS. By doing so, we only
need to store pointers to these restricted distributions in the FSAR lookup table L. Assuming we
limit the distributions to D and each corresponding state transition lookup table contains S states, for
order-2 FSAR models, the minimal memory requirement is DS⌈log256 S⌉ + C 2 ⌈log256 D⌉ bytes. In
contrast, unlimited distributions would necessitate C 2 S⌈log256 S⌉ bytes. In our experiments, setting
D = 256 reduced memory usage from approximately 512MB to around 2MB. We leave determining
the optimal selection of these limited distributions to achieve minimal performance degradation to
future work.
Furthermore, it would be advantageous for future studies to consider adaptive selection of the Markov
model structure. For instance, an intriguing approach has been explored in (Lin et al., 2023), where
the authors attempt different decoding orders for parallel autoregressive models and select the optimal
one during training. Similar methodologies could potentially be applied to the structure learning of
FSAR Markov models.
Finally, it is also interesting to investigate the acceleration of the backbone network by means of
methods such as neural architecture search. Indeed, Yang et al. (2021) have already delved into this
direction in compression codecs using slimmable neural networks (Yu et al., 2018).



    7
       https://codeberg.org/monilophyta/imageio-flif
    8
       https://github.com/FLIF-hub/FLIF
     9
       https://github.com/fab-jul/L3C-PyTorch
    10
       https://github.com/fhkingma/bitswap


                                                  25
