Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R ECURRENT L INEAR T RANSFORMERS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         The self-attention mechanism in the transformer architecture is capable of cap-
         turing long-range dependencies and it is the main reason behind its effectiveness
         in processing sequential data. Nevertheless, despite their success, transformers
         have two significant drawbacks that still limit their broader applicability: (1)
         In order to remember past information, the self-attention mechanism requires
         access to the whole history to be provided as context. (2) The inference cost in
         transformers is expensive. In this paper we introduce recurrent alternatives to the
         transformer self-attention mechanism that offer a context-independent inference
         cost, leverage long-range dependencies effectively, and perform well in practice.
         We evaluate our approaches in reinforcement learning problems where the
         aforementioned computational limitations make the application of transformers
         nearly infeasible. We quantify the impact of the different components of our
         architecture in a diagnostic environment and assess performance gains in 2D
         and 3D pixel-based partially-observable environments. When compared to a
         state-of-the-art architecture, GTrXL, inference in our approach is at least 40%
         cheaper while reducing memory use in more than 50%. Our approach either
         performs similarly or better than GTrXL, improving more than 37% upon GTrXL
         performance on harder tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many sequential
data processing problems, such as natural language processing (e.g., Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al.,
2018) and computer vision (e.g., Petit et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2020). These successes are often
attributed to the transformers self-attention mechanism which can to capture long-range dependen-
cies. Typically, the self-attention mechanism operates on the whole sequence at once and it uses a dot
product coupled with a softmax function to extract relationships between elements in the sequence.
Despite empirical success, transformers have two main limitations: (1) the context length limits how
far back in the sequence the transformer can model, and (2) its inference cost—the computational
cost of applying self-attention to a single element in the sequence—is high compared with alterna-
tives like recurrent neural networks. In fact, these issues are coupled because increasing the context
length in a transformer architecture leads to even higher inference costs. Addressing these issues is
now a major research topic (e.g., Dai et al., 2019; Choromanski et al., 2020; Bulatov et al., 2022).
The Linear Transformer architecture is an approach designed to reduce the computational complex-
ity of the self-attention mechanism (Katharopoulos et al., 2020). This approach uses a generic kernel
function instead of the softmax, what allows it to be updated iteratively instead of requiring the entire
context. Unfortunately, this approach has three main limitations: (1) its self-attention mechanism
naively adds positive values to the recurrent state, which can lead to instability when processing
long sequences due to continual growth. (2) Performance is dependent on the choice of the kernel
function—the element-wise feature maps used in the original paper, for example, have been shown
to have limited memory capacity (Schlag et al., 2021). Lastly, (3) the Linear Transformer’s self-
attention mechanism maintains a matrix as a recurrent state, which can result in a high memory cost
when multiple self-attention heads are used.
In this paper we introduce two recurrent alternatives extending the Linear Transformer’s self-
attention mechanism and that address the issues aforementioned. Our first contribution, Recurrent
Linear Transformer (ReLiT), uses a gated structure that allows it to uncover relationships far in the


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


past. It also uses a different self-attention mechanism that can learn a highly parallelizable feature
map that is amenable to sequential computation with a context-independent inference cost. Our sec-
ond contribution, Approximate Recurrent Linear Transformer (AReLiT), introduces an approximate
version of ReLiT’s self-attention, eliminating the need to maintain a matrix as a recurrent state.
We evaluate the proposed approaches in reinforcement learning (RL) problems, where reducing
computation and memory are key to enable transformers-based agents to learn while interacting with
the world. A slow inference step reduces how quickly the agent can update and select new actions,
dramatically increasing runtimes or negatively impacting performance in real-time environments.
In addition, contexts large enough to produce good performance are often not practical. Many
RL problems are partially observable and it is not feasible for the agent to store a long history of
interaction. Even simple RL problems require hundreds of millions of interactions and episodes
over 100,000 steps long (Nair et al., 2015; Machado et al., 2018). These numbers are already much
larger than what most transformer systems can process. These characteristics make it difficult to
apply current methods, even the linear transformer, to online RL.
Concretely, we first investigate our architecture in the T-Maze environment (Bakker, 2001): a small
diagnostic environment designed to test an agent’s ability to remember information far in the past.
We show that limiting the input context of the canonical self-attention mechanism has a detrimental
effect on performance and that a large input context, albeit at the cost of increased computational
complexity, is necessary for this task. Both ReLiT and AReLiT match the performance of much
more computationally expensive transformer architectures. We then extend these results to the larger
Mystery Path problem (Pleines et al., 2023), which is pixel-based navigation task that requires the
agent to memorize a long sequence of steps. In Mystery Path, our approach outperforms the state-
of-the-art transformer architecture in reinforcement learning, GTrXL (Parisotto et al., 2020), by
more than 37%. Finally, we extend these results to the larger Memory Maze (Pašukonis et al., 2023)
problem, illustrating that the performance of AReLiT is close to GTrXL while reducing computation
and memory 40% and 50% respectively.


2     P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we provide a brief overview of what is required to understand our proposed trans-
former approach. We first discuss the canonical transformer architecture and then we discuss the
Linear Transformer approach, which is the basis of our approach.

2.1   C ANONICAL T RANSFORMER A RCHITECTURE

The Transformer architecture was introduced for supervised next token prediction tasks (Vaswani
et al., 2017). Our main contribution is a new self-attention mechanism; this section provides the
background required to understand the self-attention mechanism in transformers.
Self-attention is mechanically simple. For a given query     Algorithm 1 Canonical Self-Attention
                              .
token i (embedded in xi = X(i, ·)), we output an             Input: X ∈ RN ×d
embedded context vector that weights each input to-          Parameters: WQ , WK , WV ∈ Rd×dh
ken’s importance (attention weighted) to the query to-
ken. The input to the self-attention layer is a matrix        1: Q ← XWQ
X ∈ RN ×d , an embedding of each input token (1 to N )        2: K ← XWK
into a vector, Rd . The output is a matrix A ∈ RN ×dh ,       3: V ← XWV
                                                                                ⊺

where dh is the head dimension. Algorithm 1 shows             4: A ← softmax( QK
                                                                               √ )V
                                                                                   d
a single self-attention layer with learnable parameters      Output: A ∈ RN ×dh
WQ , WK , WV ∈ Rd×dh .
We can think of the process in two steps. In step one we calculate the attention weights. We compare
each token in the context to all other tokens in the context (QK T ). The weights are then scaled the
size of the embedding dimension and normalized with an element-wise softmax. In step two, we
compute and return the attention-weighted context vectors, one for each input in X.
The self-attention mechanism in Algorithm 1 is computationally expensive. The inference cost of
self-attention, the cost for processing a single element in a sequence, depends on the input sequence
length N . For a naive implementation, the inference cost has O(N d2 ) time and O(N d) space


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


complexity; increasing the sequence length quadratically increases the computational complexity.
A simple mitigation is to limit the size of the input sequence by maintaining a window of the history
of input activations in memory (Dai et al., 2019), but doing so limits the past information the self-
attention mechanism can recall.

2.2   R ECURRENT ATTENTION WITH L INEAR T RANSFORMERS

The Linear Transformer architecture (Katharopoulos et al., 2020) introduces a general way of for-
mulating self-attention as a recurrent neural network by replacing the softmax with a kernel function,
leveraging its equivalence to applying kernel smoothing over inputs (see work by Tsai et al., 2019).

A single time-step of inference of the Linear Algorithm 2 Linear Transformer’s Self-Attention
Transformer self-attention is described in Al-                      d            dh ×dk
gorithm 2. Let k(a, b) = ϕ(a)⊺ ϕ(b), where Input: xt ∈ R , Ct−1 ∈ R                     , st−1 ∈ Rdk
                                                                                           dh ×d
ϕ : Rdh → Rdk is a non-linear feature map, Parameters : WQ , WK , WV ∈ R
dk is the output dimension of the feature map s0 ← 0, C0 ← 0.
ϕ, and k : Rdh × Rdh → R+ . Addition- 1: qt ← ϕ(WQ xt )
ally, let ⊗ be defined as the vector outer prod- 2: kt ← ϕ(WK xt )
uct operation. At a given timestep t, the Lin-         3: vt ← WV xt
ear Transformer self-attention maintains a ma-
trix Ct−1 ∈ Rdh ×dk and a vector st ∈ Rdk as a 4: Ct ← Ct−1 + vt ⊗ kt
                                                       5: st ← st−1 + kt
recurrent state, which is updated iteratively us-
ing the current input vector xt . Different from       6: at ← (Ct qt )/(s⊤
                                                                          t qt )
Algorithm 1, Algorithm 2 applies the feature
                                                                      d          d ×d            d
map ϕ to generate the query and key for a given Output: at ∈ R h ,Ct ∈ R h k , st ∈ R k
time-step (lines 1 and 2). The Linear Trans-
former self-attention stores the outer product of value and key vectors as a recurrent state matrix
Ct (line 4). Additionally, the sum of the key vectors is stored as a recurrent normalization vector
st (line 5). The attention output vector, at , is calculated by multiplying the recurrent state with the
query vector, and normalizing it using the product of the normalization vector, st , and the query
vector, qt (line 6).
The Linear Transformer’s self-attention has a context-independent inference cost, unlike the
canonical self-attention mechanism. In Algorithm 2, processing a single input vector (xt ) has
a space and time complexity of O(ddk ), assuming d, the embedding dimension (of the input),
is greater than dh , which is the size of the attention-weighted context vector at . Unlike vanilla
self-attention, the computational complexity does not depend on the context length, making it more
efficient for longer sequences.

3     R ECURRENT L INEAR T RANSFORMERS (R E L I T)
In this section we introduce ReLiT, to addresses two of the limitations of Linear Transformers.
Specifically, (1) the recurrent equations in Algorithm 2 (lines 5 & 6) add positive values to the
recurrent state, which could lead to potentially large recurrent states. (2) Performance critically
depends on the choice of the kernel feature map ϕ (lines 1 & 2); element-wise functions such as the
Exponential Linear Unit (ELU) typically perform worse than softmax (Katharopoulos et al., 2020).
ReLiT mitigates these two issues by introducing a gating mechanism and a parameterized feature
map. The gating mechanism controls the flow of information at each index of C (the location of
the recurrent states of the self-attention mechanism), allowing arbitrary context memory (inducing
a trade-off with precision). The parameterized feature map is used to calculate the key and query
vectors in the self-attention mechanism, eliminating the choice of kernel feature map ϕ.

3.1   G ATING M ECHANISM TO C ONTROL THE F LOW OF I NFORMATION

In the Linear Transformer self-attention, at a given time-step t, Algorithm 2 increments the recurrent
state, Ct−1 , and normalization vector, st−1 , (lines 4 and 5). Assuming C0 and s0 are initialized to
zero, recall the update equations for Ct and st are recursively defined as follows:


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                .                                                        .
             Ct = Ct−1 + vt ⊗ kt ,             (1)                    st = st−1 + kt .              (2)
Equations 1 and 2 add arbitrary positive values to Ct−1 and st−1 (due to the positive feature map ϕ)
and have no way to control the flow of past information. The recurrent states could grow arbitrarily
large, making prediction unstable. Instead, we use a normalized exponential average—with element-
wise learned decay parameters—which smoothly reduces the impact of past information.
Gating mechanisms can be used to control the flow of information in recurrent updates. We pro-
pose a learned outer-product-based gating mechanism that decays every element of Ct−1 and
st−1 allowing the network to learn the decay for each element (aka memory location). We in-
troduce learnable parameters Wβ ∈ Rdh ×d , Wγ ∈ Rdk ×d , and gating vectors βt , and γt .
                                                  .
Let σg be a sigmoid function defined as σg (x) = 1+e1−x , we define βt and γt as follows:
                   .                                              .
               βt = σg (Wβ xt ),            (3)               γt = σg (Wγ xt ).            (4)
Let ⊙ be the element-wise product, we use the outer product of βt and γt to control the flow of past
information in recurrent states Ct and st , modifying Equations 1 and 2 as follows:
                      .
                  Ct = (1 − βt ) ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ Ct−1 + βt ⊙ vt ⊗ γt ⊙ kt ,                        (5)
                                     .
                                  st = (1 − γt ) ⊙ st−1 + γt ⊙ kt .                              (6)
We use outer products to learn the decay rate for each index of Ct , without requiring individual
parameters for each index. The outer product assumes the decay rate at each index is independent.

3.2   L EARNABLE F EATURE M AP FOR S ELF -ATTENTION

Recall that the self-attention mechanism of the Linear Transformer uses a kernel feature map to
calculate the key and query vectors:
                     .                                                   .
                 kt = ϕ(WK xt ),                 (7)                 qt = ϕ(WQ xt ).                 (8)
We consider a deterministic approach to learn the key and value vectors in the Linear Trans-
former self-attention mechanism. We introduce modifications to kt , qt , and gating vectors cal-
culation described in Equations 7, 8, 3, and 4 respectively. We start by introducing a hyperpa-
rameter η that controls the dimension of the feature maps used to construct the kt and qt . Let
Wp1 , Wp2 , Wp3 ∈ Rη×d be learnable parameters. We modify the dimensions of Wγ as Wγ ∈
Rdh ×d , getting rid of dk , the kernel feature map dimension. Let flatten() be a function that flattens
a matrix into a vector. We redefine kt and qt (previously defined in Equations 7 and 8) as follows:
      .                                                 .
  kt = flatten(relu(Wp1 xt ) ⊗ relu(WK xt )) (9) qt = flatten(relu(Wp2 xt ) ⊗ relu(WQ xt )) (10)
We also modify the gating vectors γt calculation in Equation 4 as follows:
                                .
                            γt = flatten(σg (Wp3 xt ) ⊗ σg (Wγ xt ))                               (11)
                                                                                dh ×ηdh
Using the modified key, query, and gating vectors, the recurrent states Ct ∈ R           and st ∈ Rηdh
are calculated according to Equations 5 and 6. It is important to note that the feature map dimension,
dk = ηdh , is now controlled by the hyperparameter η. Equations 9 and 10 use outer products to
learn multiplicative interactions in the key and query vectors. Learning multiplicative interactions
in the feature vectors allows learning complex non-linear relationships through training instead of
relying on an explicit non-linear element-wise function or on random feature maps.
Finally, we use the relu activation function to ensure the output of the feature map is positive. A
positive feature map output is necessary as it ensures that the similarity scores produced by the
underlying kernel function are positive.
The Recurrent Linear Transformer (ReLiT) architecture incorporates the changes discussed
above into the Linear Transformer self-attention. The pseudo-code for ReLiT is available in Ap-
pendix B. ReLiT has similar space and time complexity as the Linear Transformer.  For processing

a single element in a sequence, ReLiT has a space and time complexity of O ηd2 and O ηd2 ,
respectively. In comparison, Linear Transformer requires O (dk d), and O (dk d). Notice dk is
defined to be the output dimension of the kernel feature map, which is ηdh in ReLiT. Similar to
Linear Transformer, the space and time complexity of ReLiT is independent of N and only depend
on static hyperparameters d and η.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4    A PPROXIMATE R ECURRENT L INEAR T RANSFORMER (AR E L I T)
Operating on large matrices is expensive. Recall that ReLiT stores a matrix of dimension d2h η as a
recurrent hidden state. This becomes more problematic with the use of multiple heads and layers;
which are typically required to improve stability during the training (see Michel et al., 2019). For
example, state-of-the-art architectures use 8 heads and 12 layers; 96 heads in total (Parisotto et al.,
2020). Second, the update to Ct makes use of expensive and memory heavy operations: an outer
product, element-wise matrix sum, and multiplication.
Our second approach, called Approximate Recurrent Linear Transformer (AReLiT), uses a low-
rank approximation to reduce the space complexity of ReLiT. We replace the previous recurrent
state matrix Ct−1 with a set of vectors, reducing the space complexity of ReLiT by d. We introduce
an approximation of the Kronecker delta function using a sum of cosine functions and we use this
to approximate Ct−1 .
Our goal is to approximate the recurrent state update in Equation 5 with an approximation that uses
less space than O(ηd2 ). Recall that Equation 5 replaces Ct with Ct−1 plus a new outer product.
To derive an approximation, we want to replace Ct−1 with a matrix that has a lower rank. Also,
we want to derive an update rule that is an approximation of Equation 5, but instead of updating the
full-rank matrix Ct−1 , we update the low-rank approximation.
We can use a sum of cosine functions to approximate a sum of outer products. This approximation
is deterministic and does not introduce variance in the approximation, and it keeps incremental up-
dates to the state end-to-end differentiable. Our approach is inspired by the rank-1 approximation
introduced by Ollivier et al. (2015), but instead of using random numbers to approximate a Kro-
necker delta function, we use a trigonometric identity that relates a Kronecker delta function to an
integral over cosines. Recall that the Kronecker delta function is defined for integers m and n such
that δmn = 1 if m = n, and δmn = 0 if m ̸= n. We present an approximation δ̂mn of δmn such that
δ̂mn is defined as follows:
                                       r
                                 . 2X             2πi          2πi
                            δ̂mn =          cos       m cos         n    .                      (12)
                                    r i=0          r             r

It can further be shown that limr→∞ δ̂mn = δmn . The derivation for this result is presented in Ap-
pendix C.1. We use the approximation of the Kronecker delta function in Equation 12 to approximate
                                                                                          k
the recurrent state update in Equation 5. For a given r, we maintain recurrent states ṽt−1    and k̃kt−1
                                . 2πk                 i       i
for k = 0, 1, . . . , r. For ωk = r , and assuming ṽ0 and k̃0 are initialized as zeros, we directly cal-
culate the attention output, at , in replacement of Ct , considering the recurrent updates to ṽti and k̃it :
      .                                                         .
 ṽtk = cos(ωk t)βt ⊙ vt + (1 − βt ) ⊙ ṽt−1
                                         k
                                             , (13)     k̃kt = cos(ωk t)γt ⊙ kt + (1 − γt ) ⊙ k̃kt−1 , (14)
                                           Pr                    ⊺
                                                     k        k
                                        .         ṽ
                                              k=0 t        k̃ t   qt
                                    at =                ⊺            .                                 (15)
                                                  2r(st qt )
Due to space constraints, the rationale behind these approximations is presented in Appendix C.1.1.
The pseudocode for AReLiT can also be found in the Appendix D. Unlike Equation 5, Equations
13 and 14 define a recurrence over vectors instead of matrices. If r ≪ d, then the recurrence is
more efficient in space than the recurrence in Equation 5. In Appendix E, we provide an empirical
evaluation of the impact of different values of r: in the quality of the approximation, showing
that, in practice, it seems small r does not compromise the quality of the approximation or overall
performance. The computational complexity of AReLiT is O(rηd) and O d2 + rηd in space
and time. With AReLiT, we have significantly improved the complexity of self-attention and these
differences manifest in experiments as we show next. We compare the computational complexities
of our proposed approaches to GTrXL Parisotto et al. (2020) in Appendix A.

5    E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
This section investigates our proposed approaches in several partially observable reinforcement
learning (RL) control problems. As previously mentioned, we evaluate the architectures we in-


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


troduced in RL problems because this is a setting that is particularly challenging to transformers.
In the RL, we need fast inference because of the interactive nature of the problem, and the agent
might need to remember events far in the past. RL problems highlight these requirements more than
most other benchmarks. The memory requirements vary across the environments we consider. In
T-maze (Bakker, 2001), the agent must remember a single cue signal. In CartPole, the agent must
estimate the hidden state by integrating information over time. In Mystery Path (Pleines et al., 2023),
the agent must remember multiple locations in a grid environment. Finally, we also experiment with
the Memory Maze environment (Pašukonis et al., 2023), which requires retaining the layout of a 3D
maze in addition to several locations across the maze.
                                                   Success
Diagnostic MDP The T-Maze environment is           Rate                T-Maze
used to evaluate an agent’s ability to learn long  1.0
                                                                                          GTrXL-256
context dependencies in a reinforcement learn-
                                                                                             ReLiT
ing scenario (Bakker, 2001). In this environ-                                                AReLiT
ment, the agent must remember a cue shown          0.8                            +4
                                                                      01
only at the beginning of an episode in order to
decide which way to turn at the end of a hall-                           Corridor
                                                                                  -1
way (inset plot in Figure 1). The cue is only in-  0.6                    Length
                                                                                          GTrXL-128
cluded in the observation on the first timestep.                                             GRU
The difficulty of this environment can be in-                                                LSTM
creased by increasing the corridor length. The         120      140      160       180    200
agent’s actions are NSEW, and the observation                      Corridor Length
is a binary encoding of the current cell (gray Figure 1: Success rate in the last 100K timesteps
code), the cue (on the first step), and several averaged over 50 runs in T-Maze (shown inset).
random distractor bits. The full details are pro- The shaded region represents the standard error.
vided in Appendix G.1.
We trained six agents for five million steps in the T-Maze environment, for corridor lengths 120–200.
The network architecture for each agent has a shared representation learning layer, either an RNN or
a transformer, which is then followed by separate actor and critic heads. Two of these agents were
trained using an RNN as the shared representation layer, namely LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997) and GRU (Graves et al., 2016). The other two agents used a transformer, particularly the
GTrXL architecture (Parisotto et al., 2020). In GTrXL, the memory size hyperparameter, defined as
the amount of stored history, controls the context length. We train two GTrXL agents, GTrXL-128
and GTrXL-256, corresponding to memory sizes 128 and 256. Note that for the corridor lengths
considered, GTrXL-256 has the entire episode provided as input. We also evaluate ReLiT (η = 4)
and AReLiT (η = 4, r = 1); we do so by replacing the XL-attention of GTrXL with one of the
two approaches, while preserving the order of the layers and the gating of GTrXL. This allows
us to evaluate exactly the impact of the newly introduced self-attention mechanisms without other
confounders. The base RL algorithm for all agents use Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) (Wu et al.,
2017). Architecture-specific hyperparameters and tuning strategies are described in Appendix G.1.
Figure 1 summarizes the main results. We report the success rate, the percentage of correct decisions,
averaged over the last 100K timesteps of the experiment. An agent that chooses randomly at the
intersection would achieve a success rate of 0.5. In this experiment, GTrXL is sensitive to the
amount of history provided as input; GTrXL-128 (brown) fails for corridor lengths greater than 120,
whereas GTrXL-256 (orange) works well across all corridor lengths. ReLiT (purple) and AReLiT
(red) match the performance of GTrXL-256 despite not having access to the entire episode as input.
Note that AReLiT performs close to ReLiT even with r = 1 (the approximation parameter). GRU
(green) outperforms LSTM (blue), but its performance drops in the longest corridor lengths.
We explored several ablations of our approach in the T-Maze, finding: (1) learning decay pa-
rameters for each element of C (gating) is better than a scalar decay used in the Linear Trans-
former (Peng et al., 2021), (2) our expansive feature map outperforms element-wise maps like
ELU+1 and DPFP (Schlag et al., 2021), and (3) our low-rank sin-cos based approximation out-
performs the rank-one approximation introduced by Ollivier et al. (2015). The results can be found
in Appendix K.
AReLIT is more computationally efficient than GTrXL-256 in T-Maze. For a single attention head,
AReLiT uses roughly 125.1 times fewer operations than GTrXL-256, and 36.57 times less space.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                Total             Noisy CartPole
                                                               Reward
                                                                        400                        AReLiT
Partially Observable Classic Control We explored a
two variants of CartPole (Barto et al., 1983), inspired by        300
previous work (Morad et al., 2022; Duan et al., 2016).
In the first, we masked out the velocity information                                          GRU
                                                                  200
from the observation vector and only allowed positional
information. This modification makes the problem                  100
difficult as the agent now needs to estimate these ve-
locities itself. The second modification introduced an                0        2          4
additional challenge by adding noise to the positional                           Steps       1e6
information communicated to the agent. We sampled the Figure 2: Partially observable CartPole.
noise from a normal distribution with zero mean and 0.1 The vertical axis is the total rewards
standard deviation. We use GRU as our baseline for this binned over 10 timesteps and averaged
diagnostic task as Morad et al. (2022) reported it to be over 27 different seeds ± standard er-
the best-performing architecture on partially observable ror. In this experiment, both agents had
classical control tasks, even compared to transformers. 1.7M parameters.
We trained for 5M steps, on the two variants of Cartpole,
two PPO-based agents (Schulman et al., 2017): one using a GRU, and the other using AReLiT. We
performed an extensive sweep of the hyperparameters of PPO and the GRU, which is described in
Appendix G.2.
Figure 2 summarizes the results from our experiment in Noisy CartPole. The agent based on AReLiT
learns faster and finds a better balancing policy than the GRU-based agent. The result on partially
observable CartPole (without noise) is qualitatively similar and can be found in Appendix G.2. This
result is qualitatively different than the T-Maze because of the different requirements imposed by the
environment. In CartPole the agents must integrate information over time to construct a reasonable
estimate of the underlying state of the MDP, whereas in T-Maze the agent must learn the cue was
important and remember it for a long period of time. These two experiments also demonstrate good
performance of AReLiT with two different base RL agorithms: A2C and PPO.

Mystery Path In Mystery Path (Pleines et al., 2023), the agent is required to remember multiple
cue signals for long periods of time in a 2D pixel-based environments. In this environment, the
agent’s goal is to reach a target position by traversing through a random invisible path. Episodes
have fixed length and the agent is reset back to the start location (along with a feedback observation)
upon deviating from the path. We consider two configurations of this environment: MPGrid and
the harder MP. In MP, there are six actions and a smoother motion dynamics compared to the easier
MPGrid, with grid-like movements and four actions. MPGrid has a maximum episode length of 128,
while MP’s is 512. Appendix G.3 describes the environment and the configurations considered.
We trained three GTrXL agents with memory sizes ∈ {32, 64, 128} and two AReLiT agents with
feature map dimension η ∈ {4, 8}, and r = 1. The architecture sizes for GTrXL and AReLiT were
chosen similar to the ones used in the T-Maze experiments. PPO was the base RL agent used. We
used a standard agent network architecture (e.g., Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017) for all
agents. Details on hyperparameters sweeps can be found in Appendix G.3.
Figure 3 summarizes the main results. Again we report success rate, the percentage of episodes the
agent reaches the goal before an episode timeout, calculated over a window of one million steps.
Across both configurations (MPGrid and MP) we observe that AReLiT matches the performance of
GTrXL-128 when η = 4 and surpasses GTrXL-128 in mean performance when η = 8. Also, similar
to T-Maze, we observe that reducing the memory size of GTrXL drastically impacts its performance.
We observe again that AReLIT is more computationally efficient than GTrXL. AReLiT-8 uses
roughly 55.75 times fewer operations than GTrXL-128 and it uses 9.84 times less space. In other
words, we observe performance at least as good as GTrXL, in both variants of pixel-based control,
at a fraction of the cost.

Memory Maze In our final experiment we use a 3D navigation environment called Memory
Maze (Pašukonis et al., 2023) that has a fixed horizon and that also requires the agent to remember
multiple cue signals for long periods of time. At the beginning of each episode, a new maze is gen-
erated randomly and several objects of different colors are distributed across the maze. The agent
perceives a 64 × 64 RGB image with a colored border indicating the color of the current object of


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Success                                                         Success
 Rate                    MPGrid                                  Rate                   MP
1.0                                              AReLiT-8       1.0

0.8                                                             0.8
             GTrXL-128
                                                 GTrXL-64
0.6                                                             0.6
                                                 GTrXL-32


0.4                                      Goal                   0.4
                                         Path
           AReLiT-4
0.2                                      Agent
                                                                0.2
                                         Start
                                                                0.0
  0.00    0.25    0.50    0.75    1.00   1.25       1.50              0       2           4       6            8
                          Steps                    1e8                                  Steps               1e8

Figure 3: Left: Learning curves in MPGrid (averaged over 15 seeds ± standard error) along with an
inset figure showing a possible ground truth maze layout. Right: Learning curves in MP (averaged
over 5 seeds ±95% confidence interval) along with inset figure depicting the agent’s observation.
The agent does not observe the path to goal (left); a red cross is shown as feedback if the agent
deviates off from the path, with the agent being reset to the start tile (right).



interest. Once the agent touches the object, it gets a +1 reward and the borders’ colors changes. The
agent’s goal is to maximize rewards within the fixed time budget. Thus, the agent must remember
the objects’ locations to travel through the maze as quickly as possible. Figure 4 provides an illus-
tration of the Memory Maze environment. We report results on the largest maze size, 15 × 15, with
an episode duration of 4,000 steps. Results for other maze sizes can be found in Appendix H and I.
We trained a GTrXL agent and an AReLiT                          Total
agent, each with 22M learnable parameters, for                  Reward MemoryMaze 15x15
                                                                  25                              GTrXL-256
100M steps using the Async-PPO algorithm
(Petrenko et al., 2020). The GTrXL agent had                      20
a memory size of 256, and the AReLiT agent
                                                                                                   AReLiT
had a feature map η = 4 and an approxima-                         15
tion hyperparameter r = 7. We based our ar-
chitectures for both the policy and the critic                    10
on the work by Petrenko et al. (2020). In this
work, a ResNet (He et al., 2016) is used to ex-                       5
tract the features from the input image, then a
sequence of features are fed into an RNN or                           0
a transformer. We detail the hyperparameters                          0.0   0.2   0.4      0.6   0.8     1.0
used, the architecture sizes, and the tuning strat-                                 Steps              1e8
egy in Appendix G.4.
                                                    Figure 4: Learning curves of GTrXL-256 and
Figure 4 shows the total episodic reward AReLiT in MemoryMaze 15×15. The bold lines
achieved by our AReLiT-based agent compared represent the total episodic reward averaged over
with a GTrXL-based agent. The total episodic an interval of 1M across the three seeds, and the
reward is determined by the number of tar- blurred lines represent the individual seeds. The
gets the agent can find within an episode. The inset plot shows a sample observation.
asymptotic performance of all the three agents
is similar, but the GTrXL-based agent exhibits faster learning early on. Systematic tuning of hy-
perparameters of our AReLiT-based agent was not feasible due to the significant computational de-
mands of MemoryMaze and the network architectures involved; AReLiT could be improved. This
difference could also be an artifact of having few independent runs (three). Regardless, our approach
is competitive in large-scale 3D memory/navigation tasks.
Finally, we looked at the agents’ utilization of the computational resources. We measured the frames
per second (FPS) and the memory usage from 12 AReLiT and GTrXL agents. Overall, AReLiT
achieves 535.63 ± 0.52 FPS while GTrXL achieves 373.63 ± 0.49 FPS, corresponding to a 43.36%
improvement. Further, AReLiT uses 52.37% less memory than the GTrXL agent.


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   R ELATED W ORK
Recurrent neural network architectures (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Gao & Glowacka, 2016)
are a natural inspiration to our work. They have been applied to a wide range of partially observable
RL environments such as Atari 2600 games (Hausknecht & Stone, 2015). However, empirically,
RNNs such as LSTMs trained with backpropagation through time often fail to capture long-range
dependencies (Khandelwal et al., 2018; Bakker, 2001), which we have also shown in our results.
Gating mechanisms such as the one we used in ReLiT and AReLiT are commonly used in RNNs
to control the flow of information and mitigate the impact of vanishing gradients (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997). Often, scalar gating mechanisms have been applied, such as in the Linear
Transformer Peng et al. (2021). However, using a single learned coefficient could be sub-optimal as
it controls the flow of past information from each index location in a recurrent state identically. Our
results in the T-maze suggest that our gating approach can outperform a single scalar value.
The choice of the feature map ϕ can have a significant impact on the overall performance (Schlag
et al., 2021). For example, a non-expansive map based on ELU+1 can be used Katharopoulos et al.
(2020), however, element-wise activation functions are limited in their ability to learn complex non-
linear relationships and using them as a feature map limits the memory capacity of the architecture
(Schlag et al., 2021). Alternatively, random feature maps can be used to approximate a softmax func-
tion (Peng et al., 2021; Choromanski et al., 2020). Although randomized feature maps are equivalent
to softmax function in expectation, they introduce additional variance. Our model is deterministic.
In the context of AReLiT, there are other incremental approaches to approximating large matrices.
Incremental Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) (Brand, 2002; 2006) provides a way to perform
additive modifications to a low-rank singular value decomposition of a matrix. Previous applications
of incremental SVD in RL, however, suggest that sensitivity to the rank parameter is a significant
issue (Pan et al., 2017). The rank-one approximation introduced by Ollivier et al. (2015) uses ran-
dom numbers to approximate a Kronecker delta function producing an unbiased approximation of
a matrix represented as a sum of outer products. The use of random numbers, however, introduces
variance in the approximation (Cooijmans & Martens, 2019).
Similar to our approach, other methods such as RWKV (Peng et al., 2023), LRU (Orvieto et al.,
2023), and S4 (Gu et al., 2021) use recurrent architectures with context-independent inference cost
while leveraging parallelization over a sequence. These approaches, however, were only explored
within language modeling tasks, with significantly different computation constraints than online RL.
Several works have explore using transformers in RL. Parisotto & Salakhutdinov (2021) used trans-
formers to learn policies in an asynchronous setting relying on policy distillation to make interaction
with the environment feasible. Others have explored transformers in model-based, fully-observable
RL, such as the TransDreamer architecture which replaces the GRU used inside Dreamer V2 (Hafner
et al., 2020) with a transformer (Chen et al., 2022). In the offline RL setting, Chen et al. (2021)
re-framed the RL problem as a conditional sequence modeling problem and trained a transformer
architecture on a dataset of trajectories (collected from a source RL algorithm).

7   C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
Transformers have revolutionized many branches of AI research, but their computational require-
ments make extension to other domains, such as online RL, difficult. In this paper, we have intro-
duced two recurrent alternatives of the self-attention mechanism is transformers, called Recurrent
Linear Transformer (ReLiT) and Approximate Recurrent Linear Transformer (AReLiT). We demon-
strate the efficacy of both approaches in a several partially observable reinforcement learning tasks
(e.g., T-Maze, MysteryPath, MemoryMaze). The inference cost of our approach is more than 40%
cheaper while reducing memory use more than 50%. When compared to a state-of-the-art architec-
ture GTrXL.
Future work could explore algorithmic improvements to AReLiT such as, efficient real-time recur-
rent learning (Williams & Zipser, 1989) based updates and using different low-rank approximation
methods, such as SVD. In addition, previous work has found RNN-based approaches are best in
some tasks and transformers better in others. There is much to be understood empirically in par-
tially observable RL.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Bakker. Reinforcement learning with long short-term memory. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2001.
Andrew G. Barto, Sutton, and Charles W. Anderson. Neuronlike adaptive elements that can solve
  difficult learning control problems. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 1983.
Blelloch. Prefix sums and their applications. Technical report, 1990.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018.
Brand. Fast low-rank modifications of the thin singular value decomposition. Linear Algebra and
  its Applications, 2006.
Matthew Brand. Incremental singular value decomposition of uncertain data with missing values.
 In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2002.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Aydar Bulatov, Yury Kuratov, and Mikhail Burtsev. Recurrent memory transformer. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Changgu Chen, Yi-Fu Wu, Jaesik Yoon, and Sungjin Ahn. Transdreamer: Reinforcement learning
  with transformer world models. ArXiv, 2022.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Krzysztof Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea Gane, Tamas
  Sarlos, Peter Hawkins, Jared Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser, et al. Rethinking attention
  with performers. arXiv:2009.14794, 2020.
Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. Fast and accurate deep network
  learning by exponential linear units (ELUs). In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2016.
Tim Cooijmans and James Martens. On the variance of unbiased online recurrent optimization.
  arXiv:1902.02405, 2019.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. arXiv:1901.02860,
  2019.
Devlin, Chang, Lee, and Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan-
  guage understanding. arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. In International conference on machine learning,
  2016.
DI engine Contributors. DI-engine: OpenDILab decision intelligence engine. https://github.
  com/opendilab/DI-engine, 2021.
Yuan Gao and Dorota Glowacka. Deep gate recurrent neural network. In Asian Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2016.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, Malcolm Reynolds, Tim Harley, Ivo Danihelka, Agnieszka Grabska-
  Barwińska, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Edward Grefenstette, Tiago Ramalho, John Agapiou,
  et al. Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic external memory. Nature, 2016.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Re. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Hausknecht and Stone. Deep recurrent q-learning for partially observable MDPs. In The Association
  for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence Symposium Series, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 1997.
Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. Transformers are
  RNNs: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention. In Proceedings of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, 2020.
Khandelwal, He, Qi, and Jurafsky. Sharp nearby, fuzzy far away: How neural language models use
  context. In Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and
 Michael Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open
 problems for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 2018.
Paul Michel, Omer Levy, and Graham Neubig. Are sixteen heads really better than one? In Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2016.
Steven Morad, Ryan Kortvelesy, Matteo Bettini, Stephan Liwicki, and Amanda Prorok. Popgym:
  Benchmarking partially observable reinforcement learning. In The Eleventh International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Arun Nair, Praveen Srinivasan, Sam Blackwell, Cagdas Alcicek, Rory Fearon, Alessandro De Maria,
  Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Mustafa Suleyman, Charles Beattie, Stig Petersen, et al. Massively
  parallel methods for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv:1507.04296, 2015.
Yann Ollivier, Corentin Tallec, and Guillaume Charpiat. Training recurrent networks online without
  backtracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.07680, 2015.
Antonio Orvieto, Samuel L Smith, Albert Gu, Anushan Fernando, Caglar Gulcehre, Razvan Pas-
  canu, and Soham De. Resurrecting recurrent neural networks for long sequences. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.06349, 2023.
Yangchen Pan, Adam White, and Martha White. Accelerated gradient temporal difference learning.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Emilio Parisotto and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Efficient transformers in reinforcement learning using
  actor-learner distillation. ArXiv, 2021.
Emilio Parisotto, Francis Song, Jack Rae, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Siddhant Jayakumar,
  Max Jaderberg, Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Aidan Clark, Seb Noury, et al. Stabilizing transformers
  for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2020.
Jurgis Pašukonis, Timothy P Lillicrap, and Danijar Hafner. Evaluating long-term memory in 3D
  mazes. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bo Peng, Eric Alcaide, Quentin Anthony, Alon Albalak, Samuel Arcadinho, Huanqi Cao, Xin
  Cheng, Michael Chung, Matteo Grella, Kranthi Kiran GV, et al. Rwkv: Reinventing rnns for
  the transformer era. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13048, 2023.
Hao Peng, Nikolaos Pappas, Dani Yogatama, Roy Schwartz, Noah A Smith, and Lingpeng Kong.
  Random feature attention. arXiv:2103.02143, 2021.
Olivier Petit, Nicolas Thome, Clement Rambour, Loic Themyr, Toby Collins, and Luc Soler. U-net
  transformer: Self and cross attention for medical image segmentation. In Machine Learning in
  Medical Imaging, 2021.
Aleksei Petrenko, Zhehui Huang, Tushar Kumar, Gaurav Sukhatme, and Vladlen Koltun. Sam-
  ple factory: Egocentric 3D control from pixels at 100000 FPS with asynchronous reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2020.
Marco Pleines, Matthias Pallasch, Frank Zimmer, and Mike Preuss. Memory gym: Partially observ-
 able challenges to memory-based agents. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
 tions, 2023.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynam-
  ics of learning in deep linear neural networks. arXiv:1312.6120, 2013.
Imanol Schlag, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Linear transformers are secretly fast weight
  programmers. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2021.
Schulman, Wolski, Dhariwal, Radford, and Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Shaojie Bai, Makoto Yamada, Louis-Philippe Morency, and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov. Transformer dissection: A unified understanding of transformer’s attention via
  the lens of kernel. arXiv:1908.11775, 2019.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 2017.
Eric W. Weisstein. Fourier series. From MathWorld–A Wolfram Web Resource.
Ronald J Williams and David Zipser. A learning algorithm for continually running fully recurrent
  neural networks. Neural Computation, 1989.
Yuhuai Wu, Elman Mansimov, Roger B Grosse, Shun Liao, and Jimmy Ba. Scalable trust-region
  method for deep reinforcement learning using kronecker-factored approximation. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Huasong Zhong, Jingyuan Chen, Chen Shen, Hanwang Zhang, Jianqiang Huang, and Xian-Sheng
  Hua. Self-adaptive neural module transformer for visual question answering. IEEE Transactions
  on Multimedia, 2020.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITIES

The computational complexities of ReLiT, AReLiT, GTrXL and Linear Transformer is presented
in Table 1. The computational complexity is for processing a single element in sequence that is
presented in a streaming fashion.

Table 1: Space and time complexity of AReLiT, ReLiT, Linear Transformer and GTrXL for a pro-
cessing a single element in streaming sequence. (M : memory size in GTrXL, d: representation
dimension, dk feature map dimension in Linear Transformer, η: feature map hyperparameter in Re-
LiT and AReLiT, r: approximation parameter in AReLiT, L: number of encoder layers)

                                   Space         Time           Potential Context Length
           GTrXL                  O(M d)       O(M d2 )                  O(LM )
           Linear Transformer     O (dk d)      O (dk d)                   ∞
           ReLiT                  O ηd2        O ηd2                       ∞
           AReLiT                 O(rηd)      O d2 + rηd                   ∞



B    R ECURRENT L INEAR T RANSFORMERS (R E L I T)

 Algorithm 3 shows the self-attention mechanism introduced in ReLiT. The algorithm introduces a
hyper-parameter, η, and a few learnable parameters, Wβ , Wγ ∈ Rd×dh and Wp1 , Wp2 , Wp3 ∈
Rd×η . η controls the size of the recurrent states, Ct and st , and also controls the key and the query
vectors.


Algorithm 3 Recurrent Linear Transformer (ReLiT) Self-Attention
Input: xt ∈ Rd , Ct−1 ∈ Rdh ×ηdh , st−1 ∈ Rηdh
Hyperparameters: η
Parameters: WK , WQ , WV , Wβ , Wγ ∈ Rdh ×d and Wp1 , Wp2 , Wp3 ∈ Rη×d
 1: if t = 0 then
 2:    s0 ← 0, C0 ← 0.
 3: end if
                                                                                     {Calculate Key}
 4: kt ← flatten(relu(Wp1 xt ) ⊗ relu(WK xt ))
                                                                                   {Calculate Query}
 5: qt ← flatten(relu(Wp2 xt ) ⊗ relu(WQ xt ))
                                                                                    {Calculate Value}
 6: vt ← WV xt
                                                                          {Generate Gating Vectors}
 7: βt ← σg (Wβ xt )
 8: γt ← flatten(σg (Wp3 xt ) ⊗ σg (Wγ xt ))

                                                                                   {Update Memory}
 9: Ct ← (1 − βt ) ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙Ct−1 + βt ⊙vt ⊗ γt ⊙kt
10: st ← (1 − γt )⊙st−1 + γt ⊙kt
                                                                        {Calculate Attention Vector}
11: at ← (Ct qt )/(st qt )

Output: at ∈ Rdh , Ct ∈ Rdh ×ηdh , st ∈ Rηdh


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     D ERIVATION OF AR E L I T

In this section, we walk through the derivations to approximate the ReLiT self-attention mechanism.
We first start with deriving an approximation for the Kronecker Delta Function and then use these
approximation results to derive the AReLit self-attention mechanism.



C.1    A PPROXIMATION OF K RONECKER D ELTA F UNCTION

In this section we derive an approximation of the Kronecker delta function. The Kronecker delta
function is defined for integers m and n as:


                                                         1    if m = n
                                          δmn =
                                                         0    if m ̸= n


We use a trigonometric identity that is used in computing Fourier series by relating the Kronecker
delta function to an integral of a product of two cosine functions (Weisstein). The identity is given
by:


                                              Z 2π
                                          1
                                  δmn =              cos(mx) cos(nx) dx.                               (16)
                                          π    0


We use the Trapezoidal rule to approximate the integral in Equation 16. The trapezoidal rule is a
numerical integration method that approximates the integral of a function by dividing the interval
into sub-intervals and approximating the function in each sub-interval with a straight line connecting
the endpoints. For a function f (x) that is integrable on the interval [a, b], the trapezoidal rule is given
by:


                               Z b                 r
                                                   X f (xk−1 ) + f (xk )
                                     f (x) dx ≈                            ∆x,                         (17)
                                a                                  2
                                                   k=1


               b−a
where ∆x =          , xk = a + k∆x, and r is the number of sub-intervals used for the integral and
                 r
it controls the degree of approximation. As r → ∞ the approximation becomes exact. Let δ̃mn
be the Trapezoidal approximation of the integral defined in Equation 16. We can then write δ̃mn as
follows:



                      r−1                                r
                  1X              2πi         2πi     1X          2πi         2πi
           δ̃mn =       cos           m cos       n +       cos       m cos       n                    (18)
                  r i=0            r           r      r i=1        r           r



Further, in the limit we have: limr→∞ δ̃mn = δmn .


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, we will simplify the above equation to combine the two summations above into a single one:
               r−1                                 r
            1X              2πi         2πi     1X          2πi         2πi
     δ̃mn =       cos           m cos       n +       cos       m cos       n
            r i=0            r           r      r i=1        r           r
                                1
         Adding and subtracting (cos(0) cos(0) + cos(2πm) cos(2πn))
                                r
              r−1
           1 X          2πi         2πi
         =        cos       m cos       n + cos(2πm) cos(2πn)
           r i=0         r           r
                  r
               1X          2πi         2πi
            +        cos       m cos       n + cos(0) cos(0)
               r i=1        r           r
               1
            − (cos(0) cos(0) + cos(2πm) cos(2πn))
               r
              r−1
            1 X         2πi         2πi           2πr          2πr
          =       cos       m cos       n + cos       m cos        n
            r i=0        r           r             r            r
                  r
               1X          2πi         2πi
            +        cos       m cos       n + cos(0) cos(0)
               r i=1        r           r
               1
            − (cos(0) cos(0) + cos(2πm) cos(2πn))
               r
               r
            2X           2πi         2πi       1
          =        cos       m cos       n    − (cos(0) cos(0) + cos(2πm) cos(2πn))
            r i=0         r           r        r
         Since m and n are integers
               r
            2X           2πi          2πi        2
         =         cos       m cos        n    −                                                 (19)
            r i=0         r            r         r

We will now present an approximation of the Kronecker delta function that has only the first term
in the right hand side of Equation 19. Equation 19 has two terms in the left hand side. The first
term is a sum of cosine functions and the second term is a constant. We want approximation of the
Kronecker delta function that has only the first term. Let δ̂mn be an approximation of δmn that has
only the first term, such that δ̂mn is defined as follows:
                                         r
                                   . 2X             2πi         2πi
                             δ̂mn =           cos       m cos       n                          (20)
                                      r i=0           r          r

Substituting Equation 20 to Equation 19, we have:
                                                          2
                                          δ̃mn = δ̂mn −                                          (21)
                                                          r

We can further show that in the limit of r, δ̂mn is equal to δmn . Applying limit to both sides of the
above equation, we have:
                                                             2
                                   lim δ̃mn = lim δ̂mn − lim                                     (22)
                                  r→∞        r→∞         r→∞ r

                                            = lim δ̂mn − 0
                                                r→∞



Since, limr→∞ δ̃mn = δmn , we have:

                                          lim δ̂mn = δmn                                         (23)
                                          r→∞


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1.1    U SING T HE K RONECKER D ELTA F UNCTION TO APPROXIMATE R E L I T
We start by start by starting ReLiT recurrent state update which we will then approximate using
the Kronecker delta approximation introduced above. ReLiT recurrent state update is expressed as
follows:

                  Ct = (1 − βt ) ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ Ct−1 + βt ⊙ vt ⊗ γt ⊙ kt                            (24)
We will now use the approximation of the Kronecker delta function in Equation 20 to approximate
the recurrent state update in Equation 24. We start by representing the recurrent state Ct as a sum
of outer products. Starting with Equation 24:


Ct = (1 − βt ) ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ Ct−1 + βt ⊙ vt ⊗ γt ⊙ kt
   Recursively expanding Ct−1

   = (βt ⊙ vt ) ⊗ (γt ⊙ kt ) + (1 − βt ) ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ Ct−1

   = (βt ⊙ vt ) ⊗ (γt ⊙ kt )

      + (1 − βt ) ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ (βt−1 ⊙ vt−1 ) ⊗ (γt−1 ⊙ kt−1 ) + (1 − βt−1 ) ⊗ (1 − γt−1 ) ⊙ Ct−2

   = (βt ⊙ vt ) ⊗ (γt ⊙ kt ) + (1 − βt ) ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ (βt−1 ⊙ vt−1 ) ⊗ (γt−1 ⊙ kt−1 )

      + (1 − βt ) ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ (1 − βt−1 ) ⊗ (1 − γt−1 ) ⊙ Ct−2
Since, (a ⊗ b) ⊙ (c ⊗ d) = (a ⊙ c) ⊗ (b ⊙ d) for arbitrary vectors a, b, c, d, we can rewrite the
above equation as follows:

Ct = (βt ⊙ vt ) ⊗ (γt ⊙ kt ) + (1 − βt ) ⊙ βt−1 ⊙ vt−1 ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ γt−1 ⊙ kt−1

   + (1 − βt ) ⊙ (1 − βt−1 ) ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ (1 − γt−1 ) ⊙ Ct−2
   Recursively expanding further

   = (βt ⊙ vt ) ⊗ (γt ⊙ kt ) +      (1 − βt ) ⊙ βt−1 ⊙ vt−1 ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ γt−1 ⊙ kt−1 +

   +    (1 − βt ) ⊙ (1 − βt−1 ) ⊙ βt−1 ⊙ vt−2 ⊗ (1 − γt ) ⊙ (1 − γt−1 ) ⊙ γt−2 ⊙ kt−2 + . . .
We can introduce variables li and mi , for i = 0, 1, . . . , t to rewrite the above equation as a sum of
outer products:
                                        X t
                                 Ct =        li ⊗ mi                                                (25)
                                            i=0
                                      where
                                             t
                                             Y
                                     li =         (1 − βj ) ⊙ βi ⊙ vi                              (26)
                                            j=i+1
                                             t
                                             Y
                                   mi =           (1 − γj ) ⊙ γi ⊙ ki                              (27)
                                            j=i+1

Next, we introduce the approximate Kronecker delta function in Equation 20 to approximate the
sum of outer products in Equation 25. Continuing from Equation 25, we have:
                                          Xt
                                    Ct =      li ⊗ mi
                                                i=0
                                                t X
                                                X t
                                            =              δij li ⊗ mj
                                                j=0 i=0



                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Replacing δi,j with δ̂i,j we can have an approximation C̃t of Ct as follows:

                                      t X
                                      X t
                   Ct ≈ C̃t =                       δ̂ij li ⊗ mj
                                      j=0 i=0

                                Using Equation 20
                                            t       t       r
                                      2 XXX                            2πk         2πk
                                 =              cos                        i cos       j li ⊗ mj
                                      r j=0 i=0                         r           r
                                                        k=0
                                Rearranging the order of summations
                                      r   t   t
                                   2 XXX               2πk         2πk
                                =                cos       i cos       j li ⊗ mj
                                   r     j=0 i=0
                                                         r          r
                                        k=0


       .       2πk

Let ωk = cos    r        , we then have:

                                            r       t       t
                                      2 XXX
                              C̃t =              cos (ωk i) cos (ωk j) li ⊗ mj
                                      r  j=0 i=0
                                        k=0


Since (ab)(c ⊗ d) = (ac) ⊗ (bd) for scalars a, b and vectors c, d, we can then write:

                                        r       t       t
                                    2 XXX
                            C̃t =              (cos (ωk i) li ) ⊗ (cos (ωk j) mj )
                                    r  j=0 i=0
                                      k=0


Since (a + b) ⊗ c = a ⊗ c + b ⊗ c for vectors a, b, c, we can then write:

        r  t
                                    !           t
                                                                         !
      2X X                                      X
C̃t =         cos (ωk i) li             ⊗               cos (ωk i) mi
      r   i=0                                   i=0
        k=0
   Using Equation 26 and 27
                                                                                                 
         r     t              t                             t               t
      2 X X                 Y                            X                Y
   =             cos (ωk i)      (1 − βj ) ⊙ βi ⊙ vi  ⊗      cos (ωk i)       (1 − γj ) ⊙ γi ⊙ ki 
      r      i=0            j=i+1                          i=0            j=i+1
        k=0
                                                                                                   (28)


Next, we simplify the above equation and rewrite it in a recurrent form. Let ṽtk and k̃kt be defined
as:

                                            t                      t
                                     . X            Y
                                ṽtk =   cos (ωk i)   (1 − βj ) ⊙ βi ⊙ vi                          (29)
                                        i=0                      j=i+1
                                            t                      t
                                     . X            Y
                                k̃kt =   cos (ωk i)   (1 − γj ) ⊙ γi ⊙ ki                          (30)
                                        i=0                      j=i+1


We can then rewrite Equation 28 in terms of ṽtk and k̃kt as follows:

                                                                  r
                                                                2X k
                                                    C̃t =         ṽt ⊗ k̃kt                       (31)
                                                                r
                                                                 k=0



                                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It is possible to regroup the terms in the above equations and derive a recursive relationship of ṽtk
and k̃kt with respect to ṽt−1
                           k
                               and k̃kt−1 as follows:
                      t
                      X                  t
                                         Y
             ṽtk =         cos(ωk i)           (1 − βj ) ⊙ βi ⊙ vi
                      i=0               j=i+1
                                                t−1
                                                X                  t
                                                                   Y
                 = cos(ωk t)βt ⊙ vt +                 cos(ωk i)           (1 − βj ) ⊙ βi ⊙ vi
                                                i=0               j=i+1

                Taking common (1 − βt )
                                                          t−1
                                                          X                    t−1
                                                                               Y
                 = cos(ωk t)βt ⊙ vt + (1 − βt )                   cos(ωk i)           (1 − βj ) ⊙ βi ⊙ vi
                                                           i=0                j=i+1
                                 i
                Replacing with ṽt−1
                                                    k
                 = cos(ωk t)βt ⊙ vt + (1 − βt ) ⊙ ṽt−1                                                     (32)
Similarly,
                      t
                      X                     t
                                            Y
             k̃kt =         cos(ωk i)           (1 − γj ) ⊙ γi ⊙ ki
                      i=0               j=i+1
                                                t−1
                                                X                  t
                                                                   Y
                 = cos(ωk t)γt ⊙ kt +                 cos(ωk i)           (1 − γj ) ⊙ γi ⊙ ki
                                                i=0               j=i+1

                Taking common (1 − γt )
                                                          t−1
                                                          X                    t−1
                                                                               Y
                 = cos(ωk t)γt ⊙ kt + (1 − γt )                   cos(ωk i)          (1 − γj ) ⊙ γi ⊙ ki
                                                           i=0                j=i+1

                Replacing with k̃it−1
                 = cos(ωk t)γt ⊙ kt + (1 − γt ) ⊙ k̃kt−1                                                    (33)

Using recursive relationships in Equation 32 and 33, we can now present the final approximation.
                                                                                                  .
                                               k
For a given r, we maintain recurrent states ṽt−1   and k̃kt−1 for k = 0, 1, 2, . . . , r. For ωk = 2πk
                                                                                                     r ,
                i       i                                                     i           i
and assuming ṽ0 and k̃0 are initialized as zeros, the recurrent updates to ṽt and k̃t and further the
approximation to Ct are given by:
                                        r
                                  2X k      k
                 Ct ≈ C̃t =         ṽt ⊗ k̃t                                                               (34)
                                  r
                                    k=0
                              where, for k = 0, 1, 2, . . . , r we have:
                                 .
                            ṽtk = cos(ωk t)βt ⊙ vt + (1 − βt ) ⊙ ṽt−1
                                                                     k
                                                                                                            (35)
                                 .
                            k̃kt = cos(ωk t)γt ⊙ kt + (1 − γt ) ⊙ k̃kt−1                                    (36)

Since limr→∞ δ̂mn = δmn , it follows that limr→∞ C̃t = Ct . Unlike Equation 24, Equation 35 and
36 define a recurrence over vectors instead of matrices, and if r << d, the recurrence is much more
efficient in space than the recurrence in Equation 24. We leave it to future work to formally derive
the approximation error. In Section E we show the approximation error with a synthetic error under
different values of r.
Lastly, since the current state C̃t could be represented as a sum of outer products in a non-recurrent
manner, we can avoid explicitly calculating C̃t and instead calculate the attention output at as
follows:                                                  ⊺
                                           Pr       k
                                         .    k=0 ṽt    k̃kt qt
                                      at =                                                        (37)
                                                  2r(s⊺t qt )

                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     A PPROXIMATE R ECURRENT L INEAR T RANSFORMER (AR E L I T)
Algorithm 4 shows the Approximate Recurrent Linear Transformer (AReLiT). We highlight changes
from Algorithm 3 in blue. The algorithm maintains a set of vectors k̃0t−1 , ..., k̃rt−1 ∈ Rηdh ,
  0            r
ṽt−1 , ..., ṽt−1 ∈ Rdh , and st−1 ∈ Rηdh as the recurrent state at a given time-step t. The num-
ber of vectors stored could be controlled by modifying the hyperparameter r, which should ideally
be set to a small value. The key, query, and value vectors are calculated similarly to ReLiT. The
recurrent state update is modified to use the approximation in Equation 34. At each time step, the
recurrent vectors are updated using element-wise vector multiplication and addition operations (lines
10-14). The operation on each recurrent vector could be executed in parallel. The attention output
is calculated without ever explicitly calculating C̃t (lines 16-18).


Algorithm 4 Approximate Recurrent Linear Transformer (AReLiT) Self-Attention (Streaming
Data)
Input: xt ∈ Rd , k̃0t−1 , ..., k̃rt−1 ∈ Rηdh , ṽt−1
                                                 0            r
                                                     , ..., ṽt−1 ∈ Rdh , and st−1 ∈ Rηdh
Hyperparameters: η and r.
Parameters: WK , WQ , WV , Wβ , Wγ ∈ Rdh ×d and Wp1 , Wp2 , Wp3 ∈ Rη×d

 1: Assume s0 ← 0, C0 ← 0.
                                                                                               {Calculate Key}
 2: kt ← flatten(relu(Wp1 xt ) ⊗ relu(WK xt ))
                                                                                             {Calculate Query}
 3: qt ← flatten(relu(Wp2 xt ) ⊗ relu(WQ xt ))
                                                                                              {Calculate Value}
 4: vt ← WV xt
                                                                                      {Generate Gating Vectors}
 5: βt ← σg (Wβ xt )
 6: γt ← flatten(σg (Wp3 xt ) ⊗ σg (Wγ xt ))
                                                                                             {Update Memory}
 7: for i ← 0 to r in parallel, do
 8:     ωi ← (2πi)/r
 9:              i
        ṽti ← ṽt−1 ⊙ (1 − βt ) + cos (ωi t) (βt ⊙ vt )
10:    k̃it ← k̃it−1 ⊙ (1 − γt ) + cos (ωi t) (γt ⊙ kt )
11: end for
12: st ← (1 − γt ) ⊙ st−1 + γt ⊙ kt
                                                                                 {Calculate Attention Vector}
           Pr       i   i⊺
13: a ←       i=0 ṽt k̃t qt
                ⊺
14: b ← 2r(st qt )
15: at ← a/b
Output: at ∈ Rdh , k̃0t , ..., k̃rt ∈ Rηdh , ṽt0 , ..., ṽtr ∈ Rdh , and st ∈ Rηdh


E    E FFECT OF r ON THE Q UALITY OF A PPROXIMATION IN AR E L I T
We empirically evaluate the effect of r on the quality of the approximation of the current state
matrix Ct . Ideally, we want to set r to a small value as the space complexity of AReLiT is directly
proportional to r. We consider a synthetic example where the value vt and key kt at each time step
are sampled randomly from a normal distribution. We set the embedding dimension d to 128 and
randomly sample values and keys for 100 timesteps. Instead of using vectors γt and βt for gating
at every timestep, we use a constant value c. We then compare the difference between the current
state matrix Ct computed using the exact method in Equation 5, with the current state matrix C̃t
computed using the approximate method in Equation 34 at the 100th time-step. We use the Frobenius
norm to measure the difference between the two matrices. We repeat the experiment for different


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          1.0

                                          0.8                                            300


                       Gating value (c)
                                          0.6
                                                                                         200
                                          0.4
                                                                                         100
                                          0.2

                                          0.0                                            0
                                                1         8       16       24       32
                                                    Approximation hyperparameter (r)

Figure 5: Error in approximating the current state Ct for different values r and gating at t = 100
for randomly sampled values and keys.


values of r and c. For each configuration, we report the mean error across 50 independent runs.
Figure 5 shows the results of this experiment. We observe that the error in approximation decreases
with increasing value of r. For most values of r and c, the approximation error is low. This is useful
since it allows us to set r to a small value, thereby reducing the space complexity of the model.
In fact, in the largest experiments described in this thesis, we set r to 7. Interestingly, we observe
periodic bands in the error plot. It is possible that this is due to the periodicity of the cosine functions
used in the attention mechanism. We leave further exploration around the theoretical nature of the
error in approximation for future work.


F    PARALLELIZATION OVER AN I NPUT S EQUENCE


Transformers are naturally designed for parallelism over a sequence of input data, as the self-
attention operation does not have dependencies between different parts of the input sequence. It
is essential to consider the parallelizability of transformer architectures, when the input sequence
is presented in a batched fashion. Such a scenario is common in practice, as most existing actor-
critic approaches such as PPO and A2C (Schulman et al., 2017; Mnih et al., 2016) estimate gradient
updates to the actor and critic using batches of trajectories collected through agent-environment
interactions. Furthermore, most modern hardware accelerators, such as GPUs and TPUs, excel in
handling parallelizable algorithms, and parallelization is vital for effectively training large models.
Extension of Algorithm 3 and 4 to accommodate parallelization over a sequence of inputs is straight-
forward, depending on whether the computation has dependencies on the previous state or not. The
majority of the computations in both algorithms, which involve calculating keys, queries, values,
gating vectors, and the attention vector, do not depend on the previous state and can be parallelized
over the sequence. The only part of the algorithm that depends on the previous state is the update
of the current state. In Algorithm 3, this is done from lines 13-14, and in Algorithm 4, from lines
10-15. The update of the current state in both algorithms is implemented as a first order recurrence.
This operation is parallelizable as such recurrences could be expressed as an associtiave binary op-
erations (see Blelloch, 1990). In our implementation, we used the associative scan operation in Jax
to parallelize ReLiT and AReLiT over an input sequence.


                                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

G.1   T-M AZE

Environment Description: The T-Maze environment considered in this paper is similar to the one
proposed by Bakker (2001). Figure 6 shows two possible episodes in the T-Maze environment. At
each timestep, the agent receives a 16-bit binary observation. The first two bits correspond to the
cue signal which is either 01 or 10 at the first timestep of an episode, depending on whether the
reward is located at the left or right turn at the intersection, respectively. The cue bits are zero in
all other timesteps. We consider the largest possible corridor length as 200. To encode the corridor
information, the agent additionally receives 8-bit gray code encoding of its current location. The
gray code encoding is zero at the beginning of an episode and is updated at each timestep. To make
the problem more challenging, we added 6 noisy distractor bits to the observation. The distractor
bits are sampled uniformly at random at each timestep. The agent can take one of the four possible
discrete actions at each timestep: up, down, left, or right. The agent receives a reward of -0.1 at
each non-terminal timestep. At termination, the agent receives a reward of +4 for taking the correct
turn and a reward of -1 for taking an incorrect turn. The reward of +4 is chosen to encourage the
agent to take the correct turn at the intersection. The difficulty of this environment can be increased
by increasing the corridor length. Increasing the corridor length requires the agent to remember the
signal for a longer number of timesteps. Since the agent’s observations include distractor bits, the
agent also needs to learn to ignore the distractor bits and focus on the cue signal.


              +4                  -1                            -1                 +4


                                   Corridor
                                    Length



                               01                                                10
                    Episode A                                         Episode B

Figure 6: The T-Maze environment. The agent has to remember a binary cue (denoted by green
text), shown only at the beginning of the episode, in order to take the correct turn at the intersection
and receive a positive reward. The figure shows two possible episodes and the optimal path an agent
must take. The agent’s current location is provided as gray code encoding in the observation, along
with distractor signals. The corridor length could be varied to increase the difficulty of the problem.


Hyperparameters and Tuning Strategy: We include the architecture configuration for each of the
5 architectures in Table 3. Our hyperparameter tuning strategy is as follows: We train 5 seeds per
architecture for each corridor length in 120-200 and hyperparameter configuration for 5M steps. We
identify the best hyperparameter configuration according to the best mean success rate in the last
100K steps across all corridor lengths.
A few additional details are worth reporting for the purposes of reproducibility. We conducted all
experiments using Python and implemented the agents using the Jax library (Bradbury et al. (2018)).
We used the GTrXL implementation from the DIEngine library (engine Contributors, 2021). Each
agent is trained using 16-core machine with 12GB RAM. The network weights are initialized using
orthogonal initialization (Saxe et al. (2013)). A single run using the slowest architecture takes around
20 hours to complete.


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Table 2: Hyperparameters and sweeps for the T-Maze experiments.

       Hyperparameter                                   Value
       Learning Rate                                    [0.001, 0.0001 0.0005, 0.00001, 0.00005]
       Discount Factor (γ)                              0.99
       Advantage Estimation Coefficient (λ)             0.95
       Entropy Coefficient                              [0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001]
       Value Loss Coefficient                           0.5
       Rollout Len                                      256
       Num of Envs                                      8
       Batch Size (Rollout Len × Num of Envs)           2048
       Actor Layer Dimension                            128
       Critic Layer Dimension                           128


Table 3: Architecture configuration for LSTM, GRU, GTrXL, ReLIT and AReLiT for T-Maze and
MysteryPath experiments.

      Hyperparameter                         LSTM         GRU       GTrXL         ReLiT     AReLiT
      Embedding Dimension (d)                 600         680         128             128     128
      Hidden Dimension                        1200        1360        N/A             N/A    N/A
      Num Heads                               N/A         N/A           4               4       4
      Head Dim (dh )                          N/A         N/A          64              64      64
      Num Layers (L)                            1          1           4               4       4
      Memory Size (M )                        N/A         N/A      [128, 256]         N/A    N/A
      Projection Hyperparameter (η)           N/A         N/A         N/A               4    [4,8]
      Approximation Hyperparameter (r)        N/A         N/A         N/A             N/A       1
      Actor Layer Dimension                    128          -           -               -       -
      Critic Layer Dimension                   128          -           -               -       -



G.2    PARTIALLY O BSERVABLE C ART P OLE

 Table 4 shows PPO hyperparameters used for CartPole experiments. We show additional results for
the partially observable CartPole environment when no noise is added to the observation vector in
figure 7


                                      Partially Observable CartPole (Without Noise)
                        Total
                       Reward
                                400                                          AReLiT



                                300

                                                                                GRU
                                200


                                100


                                       0                 2               4
                                                           Steps             1e6


                        Figure 7: Non-noisy Partially Observable CartPole


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Table 4: Hyperparameters and sweeps for the CartPole experiments.

            Hyperparameter                                 Value
            Learning Rate                                  [0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001]
            Discount Factor (γ)                            0.99
            Advantage Estimation Coefficient (λ)           0.9
            Entropy Coefficient                            0.0
            Value Loss Coefficient                         1.0
            Rollout Len                                    1024
            Num of Envs                                    1
            Batch Size (Rollout Len × Num of Envs)         1024
            Number of Epochs                               10
            PPO Clip Ration                                0.2
            Max Gradient Norm                              0.5


G.3   M YSTERY PATH

Environment Description: Pleines et al. ( 2023) introduced the Mystery Path environment as part
of the Memory Gym benchmark, which aimed to test agents’ abilities to memorize many events
over an episode. The Mystery Path is a 7 × 7 grid environment with pixel-based observations. At
the beginning of each episode, the start position of the agent, the origin, is sampled from the grid’s
borders. Then, the target position is sampled from the grid’s borders on the opposite side of the
origin. A randomly generated path then connects both the origin and the goal. Figure 8a shows an
example of a generated origin, goal, and path. The agent’s observation, shown in Figure 8b, is a
64 × 64 RGB image containing the origin, the target, and the agent. The agent gets a +1 reward
when it reaches the goal and a 0.1 reward when visiting a new tile on the path to the goal. If the agent
falls off the path, as in Figure 8c, a red cross appears as visual feedback, and the agent returns to
the origin. The reward is zero in all other timesteps. We consider two variants of this environment,
MPGrid and MP. MPGrid has maximum episode length of 128, uses grid-like movements and 4
possible actions (left, right, up and down). On the other hand, MP has a maximum episode length
of 512, has smoother movements, and a larger action space that allows diagonal movements.


       Path Goal
                                                                             Feedback



            Agent
                  Start


               (a)                               (b)                                 (c)

                     Figure 8: A visualization of the Mystery Path environment.

Hyperparameters and Tuning Strategy: The architecture sizes used for Mystery Path experiments
are kept same as in Table 3, however, we used actor and critic layer dimension of 256. We detail the
hyperparameters used for the PPO algorithm that used for training the agents in the Mystery Path
environment in Table 5. We tune learning rate and entropy coefficient for the sweeps mentioned in
Table 5. Our hyperparameter tuning strategy is as follows: we train 3 seeds per architecture for each
the hyperparameter configuration for 60M steps in the Mystery Path Grid environment. Finally, we


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Table 5: Hyperparameters and sweeps for Mystery Path experiments.

        Hyperparameter                                         Value
        Learning Rate                                          [0.0025, 0.00025, 0.000025]
        Discount Factor (γ)                                    0.99
        Advantage Estimation Coefficient (λ)                   0.95
        Entropy Coefficient                                    [0.03, 0.003, 0.0003, 0.00003]
        Number of Epochs                                       3
        Rollout Length                                         128
        Sequence Length                                        128
        Number of Env                                          128
        Batch Size (Sequence Length × Number of Env)           16384
        Number of Mini Batches                                 8
        Number of Epochs                                       3
        PPO Clip Ratio                                         0.2
        Max Gradient Norm                                      4
        Value Function Coefficient                             0.5


identify the best hyperparameter configuration according to the best episodic reward in the last 1M
training steps.

G.4    M EMORY M AZE

Environment Description: The Memory Maze environment evaluates an agent’s long-term mem-
ory capabilities in a partially observable RL setting. Figure 9 illustrates this environment. The
agent’s observation at each time-step is an image with 64 × 64 RGB pixels, and the action space is
discrete. In each episode, the agent starts in a randomly generated maze containing several objects
of different colors. The agent’s objective is to find the target object of a specific color, indicated by
the border color in the observation image. Upon successfully touching the correct object, the agent
receives a +1 reward, and the next random object is chosen as the new target. If the agent touches
an object of the wrong color, there is no effect on the environment. The maze layout and object
locations remain constant throughout the episode. Each episode lasts for a fixed amount of time.
Since the maze layout is randomized at each episode, the agent must learn to quickly remember the
maze layout, the target object locations, and the paths leading to them.

                                                          The border indicates the
                                                           object the agent must
                                                                collect next


       9x9               11x11


                                               Objects are placed           The border changes
      13x13              15x15                randomly around the          after the agent collects
   Top down view of the maze layout                  maze                   the matching object

Figure 9: The Memory Maze environment. On the left, we show a possible maze layout for all four
Memory Maze configurations. The maze layout is randomized at each episode. On the right, we
show two sample observations that the agent receives. The agent’s observation at each time-step is
64 × 64 RGB pixels and the action space is discrete. The border color of the observation image
indicates the target object color which the agent needs to find to receive a reward. After collecting
the object, the border color changes, indicating the next target object. The episode lengths are fixed
depending on the Memory Maze configuration, with larger configurations having longer episodes.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hyperparameters and Tuning Strategy: We include the details of the Memory Maze experiments.
All of the experiments in that section were implemented using asynchronous PPO implementation
from Sample Factory library (Petrenko et al. (2020)). We started with the default hyperparameters
for the DMLab lab experiments in Schulman et al. (2015), and finetuned the learning rate and entropy
coefficient. For each of LSTM, GTrXL and AReLiT, to tune the learning rate and entropy coefficient,
we run a sweep for three seeds for 15M steps in the Memory Maze 11×11 environment. We average
the results for the last 1M steps across the three seeds and select the best hyperparameter according
to total episodic reward. Using the best-identified hyperparameter, we generate the final results for
100M steps for each of the three seeds. We detail the hyperparameters along with the sweeps for the
learning rate and entropy coefficient in Table 6. We include the architecture configuration for each
of the 3 architectures in Table 7.


              Table 6: Hyperparameters and sweeps for Memory Maze experiments.

               Hyperparameter                           Value
               Learning Rate                            [0.0025, 0.00025, 0.000025]
               Discount Factor (γ)                      0.99
               Advantage Estimation Coefficient (λ)     0.95
               Entropy Coefficient                      [0.03, 0.003, 0.0003]
               Number of Epochs                         1
               Rollout Length                           200
               Sequence Length                          100
               Batch Size                               3200
               PPO Clip Ratio                           0.1
               PPO Clip Value                           1
               Max Gradient Norm                        4
               Value Function Coefficient               0.5
               Number of Workers                        32
               Number of Envs per Worker                2


   Table 7: Architecture configuration for GTrXL and AReLiT for Memory Maze experiments.

                    Hyperparameter                         GTrXL      AReLiT
                    Embedding Dimension (d)                  512         512
                    Num Heads                                  8           8
                    Head Dim (dh )                            64          64
                    Num Layers (L)                            4           4
                    Memory Size (M )                         256         N/A
                    Projection Hyperparameter (η)            N/A          4
                    Approximation Hyperparameter (r)         N/A           7


                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    A DDITIONAL L EARNING C URVES ON S MALLER M EMORY M AZE
     C ONFIGURATIONS


                                           Oracle                                            Oracle


                                           GTrXL-256
                                           AReLiT
                                                                                             GTrXL-256
                                                                                             AReLiT


                                           Oracle                                            Oracle


                                           GTrXL-256
                                           AReLiT                                            GTrXL-256
                                                                                             AReLiT


Figure 10: Learning curves of GTrXL and AReLiT agents in the Memory Maze environment. The
x-axis represents the number of environment steps, and the y-axis represents the total reward in
an episode. Each agent is trained with 3 different random seeds. The bold lines represent the
mean return across the 3 seeds, and the blurred lines represent the individual seeds. Each point
is the average episodic reward over 1M environment steps. The dotted grey line represents the
performance of an oracle agent that has access to the entire maze layout, target object locations and
paths leading to them.


I   E VALUATING I MPACT OF GT R XL’ S C ONTEXT IN M EMORY M AZE

This experiment evaluates the impact of GTrXL’s context length in the Memory Maze environment.
We showed earlier that GTrXL’s performance is bottlenecked by the memory size in T-Maze. Our
hypothesis is that a similar conclusion should hold in the Memory Maze environment. We expect
that GTrXL with a larger memory size would outperform GTrXL with a smaller memory size. We
should also be able to show that an AReLiT would outperform a GTrXL with a small memory size.
To investigate this, we train two additional GTrXL agents with memory sizes of 64 and 128 in the
Memory Maze 13 × 13 environment.
The learning curves of training the three memory sizes of GTrXL and AReLiT in the Memory
Maze 13 × 13 environment is shown in Figure 11. Asymptotically, all four agents achieve similar
performance. The individual learning curves, however, indicate that the GTrXL-64 agent is slower
to converge than the GTrXL-128 and GTrXL-256 agents.
The results failed to provide sufficient evidence to support our hypothesis. The performance obtained
by the three agents does not appear to be different. This observation leads us to the following
speculation: the Memory Maze environment is too difficult for the agents to be able to utilize their
long-term memory capabilities. The reward signal is sparse, which might make it difficult for the
agent to learn long-term dependencies. It is also possible that learning long-term dependencies in


                                                    26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


navigation tasks is harder, in general, and longer training is necessary for the benefits of long-term
memory to show.


                                                                           GTrXL-256
                                                                           GTrXL-128
                                                                           AReLiT
                                                                           GTrXL-64


Figure 11: Learning curves of GTrXL agents with different memory sizes in the Memory Maze 13×
13 environment. The x-axis represents the number of environment steps, and the y-axis represents
the total reward in an episode. Each agent is trained with 3 different random seeds. The bold lines
represent the mean return across the 3 seeds, and the blurred lines represent the individual seeds.
Each point is the average episodic reward over 1M environment steps.



J   L ATENCY M EASUREMENTS

In this section we provide additional empirical evidence of the computational efficiency of our pro-
posed approach, by comparing the latency of forward pass using GTrXL and AReLiT. We measure
the time required in milliseconds (ms) to do a forward pass in two scenarios: (1) processing single
element in streaming sequence, (2) processing an entire sequence in parallel. We configure the ar-
chitecture sizes of GTrXL and AReLiT according to the values used by Parisotto et al. (2020): 12
layers, 8 heads, dh = 64, d = 256. We collected all data in a single Google Cloud instance with
NVIDIA A100 GPU, 12 CPUs and 80GB RAM.
First, we compare the time required in milliseconds (ms) to do a forward pass using a single element
in streaming sequence. We present the results of these comparisons in Figure 12a. According to
Dai et al. (2019), XL attention used in the GTrXL architecture has a limited context. The context
length of XL attention, how far back in time the transformer architecture can remember, is O(M L),
where L is the number of layers and M is the memory size. We measure the impact of increasing
the context length (varying M ) of GTrXL (x-axis) on the latency to do a single forward pass (y-
axis). AReLiT does not explicit hyper-parameter that allows controlling the context length, and the
use of a recurrent hidden state allows for a potentially unlimited context. Therefore, we consider
three AReLiT architectures with feature map hyper-parameter η ∈ [4, 8, 16], and plot it as a straight
line. We observe that the gap between GTrXL and AReLiT increases dramatically with increasing
context length.
Next, we measure the time required to do a forward pass over a batch, that is process an entire input
sequence in parallel. We present the results of these comparisons in Figure 12b. We vary the length
of the input sequence (x-axis) and measure the time required to do a forward pass over the entire
sequence (y-axis). We consider two GTrXL architectures with memory size M ∈ [128, 512]. We
consider three AReLiT architectures with η ∈ [4, 8, 16]. We observe that the gap between GTrXL
and AReLiT increases dramatically with increasing sequence length.


                                                 27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Single-Step Latency
                     GTrXL                                                           Batch Latency
                     AReLiT (η = 4)                                  300   GTrXL (M = 128)
                     AReLiT (η = 8)                                        GTrXL (M = 512)
            30       AReLiT (η = 16)                                       AReLiT (η = 4)
                                                                           AReLiT (η = 8)
Time (ms)


                                                                     200   AReLiT (η = 16)


                                                         Time (ms)
            20


            10                                                       100



                                                                       0
                        24
                        48
                        96
                          2
                          4
                    15 8
                    30 6
                    61 2
                   12 44
                   24 88
                   49 76
                   98 52
                  19 304
                  39 608
                  78 216
                 15 6432
                         4
                      19
                      38
                      76
                        3
                        7


                      86
                      2
                      5
                      1
                    6
                    3
                   72


                                                                           2
                                                                           4
                                                                           8
                                                                                16
                                                                                32
                                                                                64
                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                24
                                                                                                48
                                                                                                96
                                                                                                92
                                                                                              12
                                                                                              25
                                                                                              51
                                                                                             10
                                                                                             20
                                                                                             40
                                                                                             81
                                Context Length                                       Sequence Length
(a) Time (ms) for processing a single element in se- (b) Time (ms) for processing an entire sequence in par-
quence.                                              allel.

Figure 12: Latency measurements for GTrXL and AReLiT. Each point is averaged over 100 inde-
pendent runs, and the shaded region is the standard error.


K                A BLATION S TUDY
In this section we present ablations for each for each of the three modifications proposed to the
Linear Transformer architecture in AReLiT. We present these ablations in Figure 13. We conducted
each ablation on the T-Maze environment with corridor length set to 200. We use the same hyper-
parameter tuning strategy as described in Section G.1, but select the best hyperparameter only on
corridor length 200. We report the success rate while training an agent for 5M steps, over 50 seeds.
Our first ablation evaluates the impact of different gating mechanisms in AReLiT. We compare
AReLiT’s gating mechanism with scalar gating mechanism proposed by Peng et al. (2021) in Figure
13a. Peng et al. (2021) introduced a scalar gating mechanism to the Linear Transformer architecture
which allows the Linear Transformer to be trained on long sequences in state-full fashion. We
observe that our proposed gating mechanism outperforms the scalar gating mechanism.
The second ablation evaluates the impact of different feature map ϕ in AReLiT. We consider two
alternatives, proposed in the existing literature. The first uses an element-wise feature map ELU +1
(Clevert et al., 2016), which was used originally in the Linear Transformer architecture. The second
is the deterministic parameter free projection (DPFP) introduced by Schlag et al. (2021), which was
shown to outperform exisiting feature map approaches in language modelling tasks. We present
these results in Figure 13b. We observed that our proposed feature map outperform both of these
methods.
The third ablation compares AReLiT’s approximation to an alternative incremental low-rank ap-
proximation method. We consider the rank-1 trick introduced by Ollivier et al. (2015). The rank-1
tricks approximates a Kronecker delta function using random signs drawn from a uniform distribu-
tion. Similar to our proposed approximation approach, the rank-1 trick could be applied to derive
incremental updates to a low-rank decomposition of a matrix. We derived an approximation using
the rank-1 trick and compared it to our proposed approximation (with r = 1) in Figure 5. We
observe that our proposed approximation approach outperforms the rank-1 trick.
Additionally, we compare AReLiT with Linear Transformer in Figure 13d. We consider the state-
full Linear Transformer approach introduced by Peng et al. (2021). We observe that our proposed
approach achieves slightly better performance than Linear Transformer. It is important to note that
AReLiT is more computationally efficient that Linear Transformer as it does not use a matrix as
a recurrent state, and does not require calculating outer products to calculate the updates to the
recurrent state.



                                                    28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               0.6                                                                                0.6
Success Rate


                                                                                   Success Rate
               0.4                                                                                0.4


               0.2                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                         AReLiT
                                                  AReLiT                                                                                 AReLiT with ELU + 1
                                                  AReLiT with scalar gating                                                              AReLiT with DPFP
               0.0                                                                                0.0
                     0        1       2            3          4        5                                 0       1       2           3          4         5
                                          Steps                       ×106                                                   Steps                       ×106
                         (a) Gating mechanisms ablation.                                                       (b) Feature map ablation.



               0.6                                                                                0.6
Success Rate


                                                                                   Success Rate


               0.4                                                                                0.4


               0.2                                                                                0.2

                                       AReLiT                                                                            AReLiT
                                       AReLiT with Rank-1 approximation                                                  Linear Transformer with scalar gating
               0.0                                                                                0.0
                     0        1       2            3          4        5                                 0       1       2           3          4         5
                                          Steps                       ×106                                                   Steps                       ×106
                     (c) Approximation approach ablation.                                               (d) Comparison to Linear Transformers.

Figure 13: Ablations for each of three proposed components in AReLiT. Results are over 50 seeds
and the shaded region represents the standard error.


                                                                              29
