Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ceci n’est pas une pomme: A DVERSARIAL I LLUSIONS
IN M ULTI -M ODAL E MBEDDINGS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

           Multi-modal embeddings encode images, sounds, texts, videos, etc. into a single
           embedding space, aligning representations across modalities (e.g., associate an
           image of a dog with a barking sound). We show that multi-modal embeddings
           can be vulnerable to an attack we call “adversarial illusions.” Given an image or a
           sound, an adversary can perturb it so as to make its embedding close to an arbitrary,
           adversary-chosen input in another modality. This enables the adversary to align
           any image and any sound with any text.
           Adversarial illusions exploit proximity in the embedding space and are thus ag-
           nostic to downstream tasks. Using ImageBind embeddings, we demonstrate how
           adversarially aligned inputs, generated without knowledge of specific downstream
           tasks, mislead image generation, text generation, and zero-shot classification.



1       I NTRODUCTION

Multi-modal embedding models, e.g., ImageBind (Girdhar et al., 2023), encode inputs such as
images, texts, and sounds into a common embedding space. The key advantage of these models is that
encoders for different modalities align the representations (i.e., embedding vectors) of semantically
related inputs. Multi-modal embeddings thus enable downstream applications, including classification
and generation, to operate on inputs independently of their modality.
In this paper, we show that cross-modal alignment in the ImageBind embeddings is highly vulnerable
to adversarially generated illusions. An illusion aligns an input in one modality with another,
adversary-chosen input in a different modality, thus “misrepresenting” the semantic content of the
former to downstream tasks. For example, Figure 1 shows an illusion that aligns an image of
Magritte’s famous “This is Not an Apple” painting with the text of Magritte’s quote “Everything we
see hides another thing.” Downstream tasks—text and image generation, in this case—act on the
perturbed image as if it were the quote and not the original image.
By design, downstream tasks rely on the “organic” alignment between the embeddings of semantically
related inputs from different modalities. As we show, organic alignment corresponds to relatively
weak proximity in the multi-modal embedding space. Given the embedding of a target input, it is
sufficient for the adversary to find any perturbation that places the embedding of the adversary’s input
anywhere in the vicinity of the target’s embedding. This resulting “illusion” will be aligned with the
target and consequently mislead all downstream models.
We generate illusions using standard adversarial perturbations to modify images and sounds so that
they map to similar representations in the embedding space.1 The resulting perturbations make an
input appear similar to the original (as far as the human eye or ear are concerned) but its embedding
is aligned with that of an arbitrary, adversary-chosen input in a different modality.
We demonstrate that even tiny, imperceptible adversarial perturbations are sufficient to align the
representations of unrelated inputs closer than the organic alignment between the representations of
related inputs. Our experiments show that downstream tasks based on ImageBind, including text
generation, image generation, and zero-shot classification, are misled by cross-modal illusions.

    1
        Code at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/adversarial_illusions-ICLR/.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         Downstream Tasks
                                                                             Generate image       What is in the image?
           Target Input
                                               Unmodified image                               The image features a
    Everything we see hides                                                                   painting of an apple, with the
    another thing, we always                                        Image                     words "apple" written in
                                                                   Encoder                    French underneath it. The
    want to see what is hidden
    by what we see, but it is                                                                 apple is depicted in a
    impossible.                                                                               vibrant, colorful manner,
                                                                                              making it an eye-catching
               Text                                                                           and appealing artwork.
             Encoder              Align in
                                 embedding                                                    The image is a collage of
                                   space                            Image                     various photographs, with a
                                                                   Encoder                    focus on a person's face.
                                                                                              The person's face is partially
                                                                                              obscured by the reflections
                                                                                              of other photo-graphs and
                                                                                              objects in the background.
                                             Aligned with target text


           Figure 1: An adversarial perturbation of an image misleads downstream tasks.


2      BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK

Multi-modal embeddings. A multi-modal embedding model θ such as ImageBind (Girdhar et al.,
2023) embeds inputs xm with modalities m ∈ M into the same embedding space. Each modality
m has its own dedicated encoder θm . The ImageBind model is trained on multi-modal tuples
(xm    m2
  i , xi ) that are semantically aligned; the training aims to maximize the dot product of the
    1

embedding representations of each tuple. For example, given a tuple consisting of a picture of a
bird and the text “a singing bird,” the image and the text are embedded into similar representations.
The encoders are trained using contrastive learning (Oord et al., 2018) that pushes embeddings of
semantically similar inputs together and pushes away inputs that are different.
The ImageBind model exhibits “emergent” alignment between modalities. Semantically similar
images and sounds (for example, a picture of a bird and an audio recording of a birdsong) have
similar embeddings, even though the training data does not include image-audio tuples. In this paper,
we focus on images, sounds, and text, and leave other modalities to future work.

Downstream models. Downstream models based on ImageBind embeddings do not need to be
trained on multiple modalities because the embeddings are supposed to align semantically similar
inputs across modalities.
Image generation takes an embedding and performs conditional generation using a diffusion model.
ImageBind’s image encoder is initialized from the CLIP visual encoder model (Radford et al., 2021).
Therefore, diffusion models that operate on CLIP embeddings, e.g., unCLIP (Ramesh et al., 2022),
can also operate on ImageBind embeddings. Text generation can use multi-modal embeddings as
inputs to instruction-following language models, e.g., PandaGPT (Su et al., 2023).
Zero-shot classification matches the embedding of an input to a class embedding, i.e., the mean of all
inputs in a class. With ImageBind embeddings, zero-shot classification can be applied to inputs and
classes that have different modalities, e.g., match an audio to an image class.

Collisions. Prior work considered collisions in NLP models (Song et al., 2020), but—unlike this
work—it targets specific downstream tasks in a single modality (text) and the adversary does not have
arbitrary choice of colliding inputs.

Adversarial perturbations. Adding a perturbation δ to an input x can cause a model θ to assign an
incorrect label y ∗ to this input, i.e., θ(x) = y while θ(x + δ) = y ∗ (Goodfellow et al., 2015). Several
recent and concurrent papers (Carlini et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023; Bagdasaryan et al., 2023) explore
adversarial perturbations in multi-modal chatbots, focusing on jailbreaking and prompt injection. In
concurrent work (Shayegani et al., 2023), adversarial perturbations against CLIP image embeddings
are used to affect specific downstream tasks. The attack is not cross-modal, therefore the adversary
does not have arbitrary choice of inputs and perturbations are very large and visible.


                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Embedding space
                                                                        rial
                                    Organic                        ersa
                                   alignmen                    Adv ment
                                            t                   alig n


                       Text            Image                          Image       Text
                     Encoder          Encoder          align         Encoder    Encoder
                                                       with
                                                     “sheep”
                        “Wolves”                                               “Sheep”


            Figure 2: Cross-modal, adversarial alignment in the embedding space.


Several recent papers (Yu et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023) craft adversarial pertur-
bations against encoders that use contrastive learning. The goal is to prevent perturbed inputs from
being embedded in the vicinity of the original input. These attacks work by increasing contrastive
loss and are necessarily untargeted: the adversary has no control over the placement of the perturbed
input in the embedding place and thus no control over its alignment.
By contrast, we demonstrate for the first time that adversarial perturbations enable cross-modal,
downstream task-agnostic, adversarial alignment of arbitrary inputs in the ImageBind embeddings.

3   C ROSS -M ODAL I LLUSIONS
We demonstrate a new attack, cross-modal illusions, that forces multi-modal embeddings to incorrectly
align inputs from different modalities and thus misrepresent their semantic content to downstream
applications. The adversary has full freedom to choose the misaligned inputs. By design (Girdhar
et al., 2023), downstream applications that use these embeddings do not consider input modalities
and can operate on any vector from the embedding space. Therefore, our attack assumes white-box
access to the embedding model but no access to or even awareness of downstream applications.

Cross-modal perturbations. Given an input xm1 , we say that a perturbation xm
                                                                            a is an illusion if it
                                                                              1

appears similar to xm1 to a human but aligns with an adversary-chosen am2 in the output space of
the embedding model θ.
Given xm1 and an adversary-chosen am2 , we generate an adversarial perturbation δ to obtain
xma =x
    1   m1
           +δ such that θm1 (xm1 + δ) collides with θm2 (am2 )—see Figure 2. Although ImageBind
uses dot product during training, modalities that are not explicitly bound, e.g., audio and text, have
different normalizations. Therefore, we omit norms, use cosine similarity as the metric, and minimize
the following objective:
                               ℓ = 1 − cos(θm1 (xm1 + δ), θm2 (am2 ))                              (1)

We iteratively update perturbation δ with the standard Fast Gradient Sign Method (Goodfellow
et al., 2015). The iterative version of FGSM (I-FGSM) (Kurakin et al., 2017) can be expressed as:
xm
 a0 = x
    1     m1
             , xm        m1
                at+1 = xat − α·sign∇x (ℓ).
                  1



Modality gap. Our attack uses different encoders θm1 and θm2 to process xm1 and am2 , respectively.
Different encoders embed inputs into different sub-spaces, resulting in a modality gap (Liang et al.,
2022). In Section 4, we measure the alignment between semantically related inputs in different
modalities (we call this their organic alignment). We then demonstrate that even tiny, imperceptible
perturbations achieve adversarial alignment that is closer than organic alignment.

Motivating examples. Figures 1 and 4 show images perturbed to align with an adversary-chosen
text. The original and perturbed images appear visually similar, but images and texts generated from
the embedding of the perturbed image are based on the semantics of the adversary’s text.
Figures 3 and 5 show audio illusions against generation and zero-shot classification, respectively.


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         Downstream Tasks
                                          Mel Spectrogram                    Generate image      Can you describe this sound?
                                                                                              In the audio, there is a sound of a
                                                                                              car driving on a road, followed by
                                                             Audio                            the sound of a police car siren. The
                                                            Encoder                           police car is driving down the road,
        Target Input                                                                          and the siren is activated, indicating
                                                                                              that the police are either responding
       birthday party
                                                                                              to an emergency or conducting a
                 Text                    Audio: Police siren                                  traffic stop.
               Encoder       Align in
                            embedding                                                          The sound in the image is a group
                              space                          Audio                             of people, including children and
                                                            Encoder                            adults, gathered in a room and
                                                                                               laughing together. They are
                                                                                               standing around a table with
                                                                                               various items on it, such as cups,
                                        Aligned with target text                               bowls, and a banana.



           Figure 3: “Party time”: an audio illusion against image and text generation.

                                                                                              Downstream Tasks

                                            Unmodified input                    Generate image          What is in the image?

                                                                                                   The image features a man
                                                                    Image                          wearing a suit and tie,
       Target Input                                                Encoder                         standing in a group of
       a man in                                                                                    people. He is the only one
       prison cell                                                                                 wearing a suit

                 Text
               Encoder        Align in
                             embedding
                                                                                                   The image shows a man
                               space                                Image
                                                                                                   standing behind a fence,
                                                                   Encoder
                                                                                                   peeking through a hole in
                                                                                                   the gate. He is wearing a
                                                                                                   white shirt and black pants.
                                          Aligned with target text



         Figure 4: “Schadenfreude”: a visual illusion against image and text generation.


Figure 6 illustrates how increasing alignment between a perturbed sound and the adversary’s chosen
text affects downstream tasks. As cosine similarity between the embeddings increases, the perturbed
audio of a barking dog is interpreted as a classical concert by downstream tasks.

4     E VALUATION

We evaluate our adversarial using two standard multi-modal datasets, ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.,
2015) and AudioCaps (Kim et al., 2019), directly in ImageBind’s embedding space and also on
several downstream tasks: zero-shot image classification, image generation, and audio retrieval. We
find that for even randomly-paired multi-modal tuples, our method surprisingly generates targeted
adversarial examples that (1) are close to their “source” in the input space, (2) are close to the “target”
adversarial text in the embedding space, and (3) fool downstream tasks with high success rate.

4.1   E VALUATION M ETRICS

Alignment. To measure the distance between modalities within a multi-modal dataset D = (X, Y ) ∈
m1 × m2 we define a multi-modal encoder’s alignment on D to be the expected cosine similarity
between the embeddings of the items in each random tuple (x, y) ∼ D. Concretely,
                         align(D) = E(x,y)∼D [cos (Ex = θm1 (x), Ey = θm2 (y))] .                                                      (2)
As a baseline, given two modalities m1 and m2 , we note that ImageBind exhibits relatively high
natural (e.g., image-text) and emergent (e.g., audio-text) alignment on multi-modal datasets D ∈
m1 × m2 . The distinction between natural and emergent alignment is important for the development
of multi-modal embeddings, but, as we demonstrate in the rest of the section, our attack is agnostic to


                                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                              Downstream Tasks
                                                                   Zero-shot                  Can you describe
                                    Mel Spectrogram              (on Imagenet) Generate image   this sound?
                                                     Audio
                                                    Encoder       White wolf,                        The sound is
                                                                  arctic wolf                        a dog barking.


           Text                   Audio: Wolf howling
         Encoder         Align in
                        embedding
                          space                     Audio
                                                   Encoder         ram, tup                          The sound
                                                                   (sheep)                           of a sheep
                                                                                                     bleating.

                                 Aligned with target image


    Figure 5: “Wolf in sheep’s clothing”: an audio illusion against zero-shot classification.



                 Target Input
                   A classical                                                                        Adversarial Illusions
    Audio:          concert            Cosine Similarity between embeddings
 “Barking dog”                          0.2                  0.4                       0.6                     0.8

                  Align in
                 embedding
                   space


      Downstream Tasks

           Generate image



           Can you describe       The sound of the       The sound in the       The sound in the
                                                                                                        The sound in the
                                    wind blowing            image is a           image is a live
           this sound?                                                                                      image is a
                                  through the trees       recording of a        performance of a
                                                                                                         classical music
                                 creates a soothing      person singing a       man singing into a
                                                                                                          performance.
                                     atmosphere.              song.               microphone.


Figure 6: “Symphony of Woofs”: similarity between an adversary-chosen input and the
resulting illusion.


the modalities it operates on. Therefore, we generalize the notions of natural and emergent alignments
by defining an encoder’s organic alignment to be its alignment on datasets D where for all (x, y) ∼ D,
x and y are semantically related (e.g., (audio, caption) pairs in AudioCaps). Similarly, we
define an encoder’s adversarial alignment on D′ to be the alignment between the embeddings of a
perturbed input in one modality and the target input in another.

Perturbation bounds. To control the stealthiness of our attack, we present our results at various
standard perturbation bounds: ∥δ∥∞ ≤ ϵ. Since image perturbations are in bounded image space,
we set ϵ = ϵV /255 where ϵV ∈ {0, 1, 4, 8, 16, 32}. For audio perturbations, we set ϵ = ϵA ∈
{0.0, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5}.

Task-specific metrics. To verify that our adversarial embeddings work, we evaluate them on image
classification, image generation, and audio retrieval. As explained in Section 4.2, image classification
and audio retrieval accuracies are measured in zero-shot fashion, while generated images are classified
using a pre-trained Vision Transformer (ViT-B/16) (Dosovitski et al., 2021). We record the Top-1
(T-1) and Top-5 (T-5) accuracies for our embeddings and their target labels on each task.


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   DATA AND TASKS


Sources and targets. We evaluate our (image, text) and (audio, text) adversarial align-
ment on randomly selected 100-datapoint subsets of permuted versions of the ImageNet and Audio-
Caps evaluation datasets, respectively. Concretely, for dataset D = (X, Y ) we start by computing a
random bipartite matching M : Y → X from the set of labels Y to the set of images X. To measure
ImageBind’s organic alignment on D, we consider a subset of dataset D ⊂ (X, Y ). To measure
adversarial alignment, we consider a subset D′ ⊂ (M (Y ), Y ).
This setup presents the most difficult challenge for adversarial alignment. We randomly pick source
inputs in one modality (image or audio), target inputs in another modality (text), and require the
adversary to produce a perturbation for each source that aligns its embedding with the embedding of
the corresponding target.

ImageNet. ImageNet is a standard image-classification dataset that links images and WordNet
labels. Since ImageBind was trained on (image, text) data, the original dataset is “naturally”
aligned. Before evaluating on the downstream tasks below, each label y is injected into the templates
introduced in (Radford et al., 2021) (i.e., y ← “A photo of a {y}.”).
We use zero-shot classification and generation as downstream tasks.
Zero-shot classification. Unlike traditional classification, there is no downstream model trained to
output label y for image x. Instead, x is assigned the label y whose embedding is closest to the
embedding of x.
Generation. We generate images from embeddings using PandaGPT and evaluate them using a image
classifier. In some cases, downstream generative models fail to generate images correctly even from
the embeddings of unperturbed inputs (i.e., a generated image is not classified to the correct label
even in the absence of the attack). Because these failures are caused not by our attack but by the
limitations of the embedding and/or downstream model, they can confound the measurements of the
attack’s success rates. To remove this confounding, we only evaluate our attack on sources for which
downstream generation produces correctly classified images.

AudioCaps. AudioCaps is a standard video-retrieval dataset that links videos and their text-based
captions. Since ImageBind was not trained on (audio, text) data, this dataset is used to
demonstrate “emergent” alignment.
We use audio retrieval as the downstream task.
Retrieval. This task works similarly to classification, but, instead of classifying an audio input x to a
label, it “retrieves” the closest caption y in the embedding space.


                   Alignment      Perturbation ϵV         Top-1              align(·)
                   Organic                        -        70%      0.2898 ± 0.005
                                                 0          0%      0.1037 ± 0.000
                                                 1         93%      0.5741 ± 0.015
                                                 4        100%      0.8684 ± 0.006
                   Adversarial
                                                 8        100%      0.9241 ± 0.004
                                                16        100%      0.9554 ± 0.002
                                                32        100%      0.9692 ± 0.001


Table 1: On ImageNet, our illusions produce much stronger adversarial alignment than the organic
alignment baseline while maintaining near-perfect downstream accuracy on zero-shot classification
                             ϵV
at low perturbation bounds ( 255 , as described in Section 4.1). The standard perturbation bound is
16/255. Error bars are computed over a 100-sample random subset of ImageNet.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Image                           Generated images           Classification result

                                                   From embedding of
                   Original                           original image
                                   Image
                                  Encoder    Generate
                                                                                       Bee


                                                                                       Bee
                                                    From embedding of
                   Perturbed                         perturbed image
                                   Image
                                  Encoder    Generate
                                                                                   Norwegian
                                                                                   elkhound


                                                                                       Bee

            Aligned with target text
            “Norwegian elkhound”


Figure 7: “Beewulf”: original and perturbed images, images generated from their embeddings,
and their classification.



      Input type                                  Top-1                               Top-5
                                       Original label       Target label   Original label     Target label
      Original image x                          85%                 0%              99%                  0%
      Adversarial illusion xa                   77%                 0%              95%                  0%
      Generated(ImageBind(x))                   42%                 0%              64%                  2%
      Generated(ImageBind(xa ))                  0%               64.%               1%                92.%

Table 2: Classification accuracy for original images, images perturbed to align with randomly-chosen
target labels, and images generated from their embeddings.


4.3    A LIGNING I MAGES W ITH A DVERSARIAL T EXT


Zero-shot classification. As we show in Table 1, our attack significantly outperforms the organic
alignment of around 0.29. With maximum pixel perturbations as small as 1/255, our perturbation-
induced adversarial alignment is nearly twice as strong at 0.5741. The corresponding Top-1 accuracy
is a near-perfect 93%, as well. Furthermore, at the standard perturbation bound in the literature,
16/255, our perturbed images induce an alignment of nearly 0.96 and are classified as the target label
with 100% accuracy.
While ImageBind’s organic alignment on ImageNet is impressive in its own right, boasting an
accuracy of 70% on downstream classification, the sensitivity of the associated encoders makes it
possible to achieve a much stronger adversarial alignment of an image with arbitrary text using
imperceptible perturbations in the image space. Fig. 7 shows an example.

Generation. As we show in Table 2, the classification accuracy of generated images is lower than
the classification accuracy of the original images. Regardless, with maximum pixel perturbations of
16/255, images generated from the embeddings of perturbed images reach 64% Top-1 accuracy and
92% Top-5 accuracy. This is better than the classification accuracy of images generated from the
embeddings of the original images.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Alignment       Perturbation ϵA       Top-1       Top-5              align(·)
             Organic                        -       12%         33%        0.2141 ± .011
                                       0.000         0%          0%        0.0055 ± .001
                                       0.005         1%         10%        0.1263 ± .009
                                       0.010        48%         68%        0.3319 ± .012
             Adversarial
                                       0.050        99%        100%        0.8641 ± .006
                                       0.100        99%        100%        0.9295 ± .005
                                       0.500        99%        100%        0.9578 ± .004


Table 3: On AudioCaps, our illusions also significantly outperform the baseline (org.) at modest
perturbation bounds on emergent (audio, text) alignment. ϵA represents the audio perturbation
bound as described in Section 4.1. Error bars are computed over the 100-sample subset of AudioCaps.


4.4   A LIGNING AUDIO W ITH A DVERSARIAL T EXT

In Table 3, we demonstrate that our attack is effective in creating illusions on audio data as well as
images. In particular, we represent our audio data as MEL spectrograms where decibel levels serve
as audio analogies for pixels. The attack, then proceeds as normal.
For all but our lowest perturbation bound, we find that our audio illusions have considerably higher
adversarial alignment and top-k retrieval accuracies than the baseline. Note that this alignment is
”emergent” because no (audio, text) data was used for training the ImageBind encoders.

5     C OUNTERMEASURES
Conventional defenses for adversarial examples train models so that their outputs—for example,
labels output by classification models—are not sensitive to small perturbations in the input. We
attack embeddings directly and demonstrate that very small adversarial perturbations achieve stronger
alignment than the organic alignment between semantically related inputs. Therefore, a plausible
defense is to train aligned multi-modal encoders so that they are robust in the following sense: if
two inputs are within δ of each other, their respective embeddings should be within γ (using some
suitable metrics for δ and γ over the input and, respectively, embedding spaces).

Adversarial training. One way to ensure that small perturbations do not affect classifier outputs is
add perturbed images with correct class labels to the training data (Madry et al., 2017; Shafahi et al.,
2019). In contrastive learning, adversarial training can use perturbed images as positive samples (Yu
et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023). Effectiveness of this defense depends on the specific
downstream task, since some tasks (e.g., fine-grained classification) may require distinguishing
representations that differ less than γ. Adversarial contrastive training has a negative impact even
on relatively coarse downstream tasks such as CIFAR-10 and -100 (Yu et al., 2022). In multi-modal
contrastive learning, the data are sparse and some modalities are not directly aligned, thus adversarial
training may produce embeddings that significantly degrade the performance of downstream tasks.

Feature distillation. Adversarial perturbations to the input can be considered as features for the
model (Ilyas et al., 2019). To eliminate perturbations, Defense-GAN (Samangouei et al., 2018) uses a
separate GAN to encode each input and generate a supposedly equivalent replacement. This defense
assumes that (a) the adversary cannot craft adversarial perturbations for both the original encoder
and the GAN, and (b) the GAN accurately re-generates all features of the original inputs that are
important for downstream tasks. Non-ML methods like JPEG compression (Liu et al., 2019) can also
remove adversarial perturbations but they are vulnerable to adaptive attacks (Shin & Song, 2017).

Certification. Certified robustness (Raghunathan et al., 2018; Gowal et al., 2018) ensures that any
input modification within a certain bound has only a limited impact on the output of the model.
It is defined for classification tasks and cannot be directly applied to multi-modal encoders in a
downstream task-agnostic way. Given a specific downstream task, it may be possible to perform
interval bound propagation (Gowal et al., 2018) over multi-modal encoders.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robustness to semantics-preserving transformations. Ultimately, embeddings should be trained so
that semantically close inputs, within and across modalities, are encoded into similar vectors in the
embedding space. There is prior work on adversarially robust perceptual similarity metrics (Ghaz-
anfari et al., 2023) but perceptual similarity is insufficient for aligned embeddings. It is based on
the features of a specific image classifier and only captures semantic similarity insofar as images
belong to the same class, i.e., it only aligns images with the labels of that classifier. Alignment in
multi-modal embeddings is supposed to cover much broader semantic similarity.
For text, there exist broad classes of semantics-preserving transformations (e.g., substituting words
with synonyms), and models can be trained to be robust with respect to word substitutions (Jia et al.,
2019; Miyato et al., 2017; Yoo & Qi, 2021). Our attacks exploit adversarial perturbations in images
and audio, where semantic similarity is not as well defined as in text. In the image domain, robustness
under different distance metrics results in vastly different performance (Tramèr & Boneh, 2019).
To ensure that the embeddings of semantically similar inputs are close to each other, the range of
encoders for different modalities should overlap with very fine-grained control over changes in the
embedding given a change in the input. With such control, it is not clear how to prevent an adversary
from crafting inputs that are closer to the target than organically aligned inputs. Anomaly detection
using high-dimensional statistics or enforcing a specific geometry for each modality are interesting
topics for future work.


6   L IMITATIONS

In this work, we used white-box adversarial perturbation techniques. Therefore, our evaluation is
limited to ImageBind, which is the only open-source aligned multi-modal embedding model that is
publicly available at the time of this writing. There exist black-box adversarial examples (Guo et al.,
2019; Ilyas et al., 2018) but it is not clear how to deploy them in a setting where the adversary only
observes outputs of complex downstream models (e.g., diffusion models based on random noise).
For the evaluation, we used currently available downstream generative models. Generative models
based on ImageBind embeddings are a new, rapidly evolving field and publicly available imple-
mentations are limited. Image generation with BindDiffusion (Lin et al., 2023) uses the unCLIP
model (Ramesh et al., 2022) trained on CLIP embeddings (Radford et al., 2021). Therefore, even in
the absence of adversarial perturbations, BindDiffusion fails to generate images from the embeddings
of many images, sounds, and texts. PandaGPT (Su et al., 2023), although trained on ImageBind em-
beddings, was fine-tuned only on image-text pairs. Therefore, in some cases it interprets embeddings
of sounds as if they were images (see Figure 3). Our attack targets embeddings and is agnostic to
downstream models. We expect that improvements in the quality of downstream models will make
the attack more effective.


7   C ONCLUSION

This paper demonstrates that aligned multi-modal embeddings such as ImageBind are highly vul-
nerable to adversarial perturbations that create cross-modal illusions, i.e., inputs in one modality
that are aligned with semantically unrelated inputs in another modality. An adversary can fool
any downstream task by perturbing a benign input from one modality to match, in the embedding
space, an arbitrary, adversary-chosen input from another modality. This attack works across both
natural and emergent alignment (i.e., a perturbed sound of a howling wolf appears as an image of a
sheep to downstream generative and classification tasks) and reliably produces inputs that appear
much closer in the embedding space than semantically similar inputs. Finally, we discuss potential
countermeasures, limitations of our current approach, and propose future work.


E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS

The only purpose of analyzing vulnerability of multi-modal embeddings to adversarial inputs is to
help develop more robust embeddings and motivate research on defenses.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Eugene Bagdasaryan, Tsung-Yin Hsieh, Ben Nassi, and Vitaly Shmatikov. (Ab)using images and
  sounds for indirect instruction injection in multi-modal LLMs. arXiv:2307.10490, 2023.
Nicholas Carlini et al. Are aligned neural networks adversarially aligned? arXiv:2306.15447, 2023.
Alexey Dosovitski et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. In ICML, 2021.
Sara Ghazanfari, Siddharth Garg, Prashanth Krishnamurthy, Farshad Khorrami, and Alexandre
  Araujo. R-LPIPS: An adversarially robust perceptual similarity metric. arXiv:2307.15157, 2023.
Rohit Girdhar, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Zhuang Liu, Mannat Singh, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Armand
  Joulin, and Ishan Misra. ImageBind: One embedding space to bind them all. In CVPR, 2023.
Ian Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In ICLR, 2015.
Sven Gowal et al. On the effectiveness of interval bound propagation for training verifiably robust
  models. In NIPS Workshops, 2018.
Chuan Guo, Jacob Gardner, Yurong You, Andrew Gordon Wilson, and Kilian Weinberger. Simple
  black-box adversarial attacks. In ICML, 2019.
Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Anish Athalye, and Jessy Lin. Black-box adversarial attacks with
  limited queries and information. In ICML, 2018.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Robin Jia, Aditi Raghunathan, Kerem Göksel, and Percy Liang. Certified robustness to adversarial
  word substitutions. In EMNLP, 2019.
Chris Dongjoo Kim, Byeongchang Kim, Hyunmin Lee, and Gunhee Kim. Audiocaps: Generating
  captions for audios in the wild. In ACL, 2019.
Minseon Kim, Jihoon Tack, and Sung Ju Hwang. Adversarial self-supervised contrastive learning. In
 NeurIPS, 2020.
Alexey Kurakin, Ian J. Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial examples in the physical world.
  In ICLR, 2017.
Victor Weixin Liang, Yuhui Zhang, Yongchan Kwon, Serena Yeung, and James Y Zou. Mind the gap:
  Understanding the modality gap in multi-modal contrastive representation learning. In NeurIPS,
  2022.
Zhijie Lin, Lijuan Liu, Yangzihao Wang, and Xiangyu Xu. BindDiffusion: One diffusion model to
  bind them all. https://github.com/sail-sg/BindDiffusion/tree/main, 2023.
Zihao Liu, Qi Liu, Tao Liu, Nuo Xu, Xue Lin, Yanzhi Wang, and Wujie Wen. Feature distillation:
  DNN-oriented JPEG compression against adversarial examples. In CVPR, 2019.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In ICLR, 2017.
Takeru Miyato, Andrew M. Dai, and Ian Goodfellow. Adversarial training methods for semi-
  supervised text classification. In ICLR, 2017.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Xiangyu Qi, Kaixuan Huang, Ashwinee Panda, Mengdi Wang, and Prateek Mittal. Visual adversarial
  examples jailbreak large language models. arXiv:2306.13213, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Aditi Raghunathan, Jacob Steinhardt, and Percy Liang. Certified defenses against adversarial
  examples. In ICLR, 2018.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with CLIP latents. arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet
  large scale visual recognition challenge. IJCV, 2015.
Pouya Samangouei, Maya Kabkab, and Rama Chellappa. Defense-GAN: Protecting classifiers
  against adversarial attacks using generative models. In ICLR, 2018.
Ali Shafahi, Mahyar Najibi, Mohammad Amin Ghiasi, Zheng Xu, John Dickerson, Christoph Studer,
  Larry S Davis, Gavin Taylor, and Tom Goldstein. Adversarial training for free! NeurIPS, 2019.
Erfan Shayegani, Yue Dong, and Nael Abu-Ghazaleh. Plug and pray: Exploiting off-the-shelf
  components of multi-modal models. arXiv:2307.14539, 2023.
Richard Shin and Dawn Song. JPEG-resistant adversarial images. In NIPS Workshop, 2017.
Congzheng Song, Alexander M Rush, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Adversarial semantic collisions. In
  EMNLP, 2020.
Yixuan Su, Tian Lan, Huayang Li, Jialu Xu, Yan Wang, and Deng Cai. PandaGPT: One model to
  instruction-follow them all. arXiv:2305.16355, 2023.
Florian Tramèr and Dan Boneh. Adversarial training and robustness for multiple perturbations. In
  NeurIPS, 2019.
Jin Yong Yoo and Yanjun Qi. Towards improving adversarial training of NLP models. In EMNLP,
   2021.
Qiying Yu, Jieming Lou, Xianyuan Zhan, Qizhang Li, Wangmeng Zuo, Yang Liu, and Jingjing Liu.
  Adversarial contrastive learning via asymmetric InfoNCE. In ECCV, 2022.
Ziqi Zhou, Shengshan Hu, Ruizhi Zhao, Qian Wang, Leo Yu Zhang, Junhui Hou, and Hai Jin.
  Downstream-agnostic adversarial examples. In ICCV, 2023.


                                              11
