Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


PARTITION AND CONQUER : M ULTIMODAL AUTORE -
GRESSIVE LEARNING FOR TIME - ALIGNED AND CON -
TEXTUAL MODALITIES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         One of the main challenges of multimodal learning is the need to combine hetero-
         geneous modalities (e.g., video, audio, text). For example, video and audio are
         obtained at much higher rates than text and are roughly aligned in time. They are
         often not synchronized with text, which comes as a global context, e.g. a descrip-
         tion. Furthermore, video and audio inputs are of much larger volumes, and grow
         as the video length increases, which naturally requires more compute dedicated to
         these modalities and makes modeling of long-range dependencies harder.
         We here decouple the multimodal modeling, dividing it into separate, focused
         autoregressive models, processing the inputs according to the characteristics of
         the modalities. We propose a multimodal model consisting of an autoregressive
         component for the time-synchronized modalities (audio and video), and an au-
         toregressive component for modalities which are not necessarily aligned in time
         but are still sequential. To address the long-sequences of the video-audio inputs,
         we propose to further partition the video and audio sequences in consecutive snip-
         pets and autoregressively process their representations. To that end, we propose a
         Combiner mechanism, which models the audio-video information jointly within
         a timeframe. The Combiner learns to extract audio and video features from raw
         spatio-temporal signals, and then learns to fuse these features producing compact
         but expressive representations per snippet. Our approach achieves the state-of-
         the-art on well established multimodal benchmarks, outperforming much larger
         models. It effectively addresses the high computational demand of media inputs
         by both learning compact representations, controlling the sequence length of the
         audio-video feature representations, and modeling their dependencies in time.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Multimodal models aim to combine the signals from multiple varied sources, which makes them
both universal and useful for practical applications. However, these modalities have diverse charac-
teristics and are challenging to combine uniformly by a single model. For example, video and text
have disparate sampling rates: a video has many frames per second, but text or other similar types of
global context, e.g., a description or title, can be provided once per video, or asynchronously to the
video. Video also takes a larger portion of the input. At the same time, video and audio are naturally
co-occurring and appear (almost) synchronously. They are roughly aligned and complementary.
This co-occurrence in time can contribute to their joint learning and serve as a rich self-supervisory
learning signal, applied more frequently than global text signals. So, ideally, these modalities need
to be processed by differently-synchronized model components, which process more adequately
inputs of different frequencies and allocate more parameters to the more abundant modalities.
Following the success of large language models, where text input sequences are processed autore-
gressively, many recent multimodal models reuse the autoregressive text models, feeding in other
modalities, e.g., as embeddings, (Chen et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2022b; Piergiovanni et al., 2022a;
Li et al., 2021a; 2022b; Alayrac et al., 2022), or by tokenizing the visual inputs to be processed
together with the text token sequence (Wang et al., 2022d; Aghajanyan et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023;
Reed et al., 2022; Zellers et al., 2022)). However, the imbalance of the information volume is large
and models which are well suited to encode/decode text sequences process only highly compressed


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


image or video features (Alayrac et al., 2022; Nagrani et al., 2021). For example, the Flamingo
model (Alayrac et al., 2022), subsamples the video features significantly, dedicating only about 1%
of the parameters to the image and video inputs, leaving the rest for text processing. Alternatively,
methods that process the video running each frame independently through an encoder or tokenizer,
reach an upper bound on the number of frames quickly (Yan et al., 2022; Piergiovanni et al., 2023b).
For longer inputs, these representations are insufficient to properly represent the modalities, which
inherently limits the ability to model fine-grained or long-range dependencies.
We here propose an audio-video-text multimodal model where we decouple the autoregressive mod-
eling into a component for time-aligned modalities, e.g., audio and video, which are processed in
time, autoregressively, and an autoregressive component for non-time-aligned contextual modalities
e.g., text. Cross-attention weights coordinate the learning between these components. This decou-
pling allows for better parameter distribution within the model, allocating sufficient capacity for the
media modalities, and leads to smaller models overall. Furthermore, we propose to partition the
time-aligned modalities into time segments, where audio-video joint representations are learned and
accumulated in time. To that end, we introduce a joint feature learning mechanism for the media
modalities, called the Combiner, which fuses their features and produces a more compact repre-
sentation. We extract low level spatio-temporal representation from the raw media inputs in order
to capture the dynamic nature of videos in a high-level representation and combine it with audio
features within concurrent timesteps. Our model enables consuming multimodal inputs at different
rates and allows for larger inputs for longer videos. The Combiner effectively balances the need for
efficient media representations and ones which are expressive enough to preserve the media content.
It sufficiently represents the events and activities in the videos and other concurrent modalities and
can be handled by subsequent autoregressive models, which allows for learning long-range depen-
dencies. Our contributions are:

      • An autoregressive multimodal model, subdividing learning into autoregressive modeling
        for time-aligned media modalities and non-time-aligned contextual modalities.
      • Joint feature representation learning via the Combiner to balance learning of efficient media
        representations which are also sufficiently expressive to preserve the media content.
      • We demonstrate learning with 128-512 video frames without increase in model parameters.
        This is in contrast to prior works that use 32 (Gao et al., 2023) or 8 frames (Yan et al., 2022).

Our model outperforms the state-of-the-art on multiple benchmarks, with large margins on audio-
video-text datasets and on long video datasets. It outperforms much larger models, as well.

2    R ELATED WORK
Architectures for video-language understanding commonly use a joint transformer, where video in-
puts are fed in together with text tokens and processed autoregressively (Fu et al., 2021; Zellers
et al., 2021)). This is often accomplished with tokenizing the visual inputs. Video-text pretraining
approaches (Miech et al., 2019; 2020; Wang et al., 2022e;c; Li et al., 2023; 2022a) use masked
token modeling and reconstruction (Fu et al., 2021), masking with cross-attention on multimodal in-
puts (Alayrac et al., 2022), or contrastive learning (Wang et al., 2022c; Xu et al., 2023; Zellers et al.,
2021; Dong et al., 2023). Visual synthesis models have extensively used autoregressive models, by
learning to generate pixel-wise predictions (van den Oord et al., 2016), or by learned discrete tokens
from images or videos, e.g., NÜWA (Wu et al., 2022), VideoGPT (Yan et al., 2021), GODIVA (Wu
et al., 2021). In other models, encoder-decoder or decoder-only architectures extend an image-text
model to a video-text one (Wang et al., 2022b; Yan et al., 2022), where video is processed by
individual frames which are then combined. Some architectures instead extract full video signals
(typically as embeddings) before feeding them to the model (Xu et al., 2023). Another option is to
attach a projection or re-tokenization layers e.g., as in Perceiver in Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022),
to reduce the amount of visual tokens added to the model. Our approach differs substantially, as
the media input features have a specifically designed component to learn them jointly and in time,
producing more abstract representations, suitable for modeling long videos.
Multimodal audio-video-text models have also gained popularity: UAVM (Gong et al., 2022) pro-
pose joint learning of audio and video by building invariant transformer module which can be reused
by either signal. Multimodal Transformer (Tsai et al., 2021) proposes cross-attention mechanisms,


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The model architecture consists of an autoregressive model for the time-aligned modali-
ties, such as audio and video, which are partitioned in chunks (left) and an autoregressive model for
the unaligned context modalities, which are still sequential, e.g., text (right). This allows adequate
computational capacity to the video/audio time-synchronized inputs, including processing them in
time autoregressively, before fusing with the autoregressive decoder for unaligned text (right). Joint
feature learning is conducted by the Combiner, balancing the need for compact representations and
allowing sufficiently informative features to be processed in time.

for cross-modal learning on all pairs of video-audio-text data, which Pellegrain et al. (2021) extends
to longer sequences. Zellers et al. (2022) demonstrate joint multimodal audio-video-text learning
but only aligning text and audio. Gong et al. (2023) use contrastive audio-video learning, whereas
Huang et al. use masked autoencoder for audio-video learning. Both approaches tokenize the audio
video inputs independently in 2D patches which are used for further processing. Rouditchenko et al.
(2021) and Korbar et al. (2018), propose contrastive learning for audio-video signals, leveraging the
time-alignment between them. Audio-video late fusion is also common, (Pibre et al., 2022).
Our work is related to long-form video understanding (Wu & Krahenbuhl, 2021; Sun et al., 2022).
Long-form videos have been handled by hierarchical feature learning e.g., the Temporal Window
Attention (Sun et al., 2022) where dependencies are learned locally and then further propagated to
higher level cross-attention modules. Ashutosh et al. (2023) propose contrastive learning at different
hierarchical levels. Gao et al. (2023) segment videos then pool their features into a small represen-
tation. Memory-augmented model for long videos (Wu et al., 2023) accumulate prior context in
learnable ‘memory’, to be referenced at each step of learning. Our work contributes by proposing a
balanced approach of locally learning important features, jointly within the modalities.

3    A PPROACH
Autoregressive models are powerful generative models that are well suited for data which appears
in a sequence, modeling the probability of the current value, conditioned of previous ones. Video
and audio information is sequential but also roughly time-synchronized. At the same time, other
modalities e.g., text, might be provided globally per video as context and applied to the full video
rather than to specific parts1 . To address the challenges of modeling diverse multimodal inputs, we
propose to subdivide the autoregressive modeling by learning separate autoregressive models: one
for the time-aligned modalities (audio-video), Section 3.3, and another one for modalities which are
not necessarily aligned in time but are still sequential, Section 3.4. Learning across these is coordi-
nated by cross-attention mechanisms, where here the media inputs (audio-video) are allocated a lot
more parameters and are properly modeled in time. A learning module, called the Combiner (Sec-
tion 3.2), combines the lower-level signals from video/audio snippets. Here information is processed
spatio-temporally, extracting features particularly relevant to dynamic changes in the inputs.
Architecture overview. At a high level, the architecture consists of two main learning components
(Figure 1): The first one is an autoregressive component which is designed to process (almost)
synchronized multimedia inputs e.g., video+audio and combine their inputs in time (Figure 2, left).
    1
      Text, e.g., ASR, might also appear concurrently with audio/video and can contribute to improved under-
standing of the video content. We leave this to future work.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In order to process the video and audio signals, and to accommodate longer video/audio inputs, they
are partitioned into smaller chunks (roughly synchronized in time) for which a joint audio-visual
representation is learned via the Combiner as described below. The second component processes
the context, or the signals not aligned in time, such as global text information, which are often still
sequential. It is autoregressive as well, and uses the combined latent space as cross-attention inputs.
Problem formulation: We have an input video sequence of N frames v = {v1f , v2f , . . . vN         f
                                                                                                     }, and
                                                  f    f       f
audio wave signal of M timesteps a = {a1 , a2 , . . . aM }, where the audio signal is captured during
the duration of the video and corresponds to the given video input. Additionally we have an input
text sequence t = {tf1 , tf2 , . . . tfP }, which is related to the video/audio and might vary according to
the tasks e.g., it can be a description, a question-answer pair, meta information and etc.
Partitioning of the media inputs: In order to process the video sequence efficiently and to learn the
correlation of features in time, we partition the input video into into T non-overlapping segments or
chunks, with vt and at denoting the video and audio input per segment. Here each chunk captures
all input data between two timestamps (i.e., video and audio snippets), as follows:
   v1f , v2f , . . . , vN/T
                        f      f
                            , vN/T       f                 f             f               f                       f
                                   +1 , vN/T +2 , . . . , v2N/T , . . . v(T −1)N/T +1 , v(T −1)N/T +2 , . . . , vN , (1)
   |           {z          }|               {z                 } |                         {z                      }
            v1                             v2                                           vT
Thus the video is represented by its chunks instead, v = {v1 , v2 , . . . vT }, and more specifically
latent features will be extracted from each chunk to represent the video (as described in Section 3.1).
A similar partitioning is done for the audio signals, where they are partitioned in T chunks to be
synchronized in time to the video chunks, a = {a1 , a2 , . . . aT }. Here too we assume that audio
features will be extracted from the raw audio signal, as described in Section 3.1.

3.1    AUDIO / VIDEO FEATURES

Video features. Prior models captured video information frame-by-frame which lacks the temporal
information, essential to video understanding and might miss dynamic events. Alternatively, 3D
convolutions (Wu et al., 2022), sparse 3D tubes (Piergiovanni et al., 2023a) and others learn spatio-
temporally which can capture key dynamic changes in the videos. We expand on these ideas and
extract sparse 3D tubes (Piergiovanni et al., 2023a) from the videos which span all 3 dimensions
of the video snippet starting at various locations. The sparse 3D tubes, together with standard 2D
patches are processed via a ViT encoder. Rather than applying offsets, the tubes are applied at the
beginning of the snippet. Per video chunk t we denote v̂t as the time-aligned features for this chunk,
and thus v̂ = {v̂1 , v̂2 , . . . , v̂T ) are the time-aligned video representations for the whole video.
Audio features. Audio inputs arrive at a predefined frequency and can be processed in various ways.
We here represent the audio as a spectrogram. The spectrogram is created so that the time bands
match the 25 frames per second used in the videos, and thus can easily be split into snippets aligned
with the video. The spectrogram for each snippet is processed by a ViT model, after an audio input
projection layer. The ViT backbone is the same as the one used for video features. Reusing the
visual component is previously shown to be advantageous (Gong et al., 2022). Similarly to above,
we denote ât to be the audio feature per chunk t and â = {â1 , â2 , . . . , âT ) for the full video.

3.2    M ODALITY C OMBINER

The task of the Combiner module is two-fold: 1) to combine the video (and audio) features at a
specific snippet of time, learning their joint representation and 2) effectively compress the represen-
tation from each video/audio snippet, which allows our model to scale to longer videos.
When partitioning the inputs, the features for each modality, video and audio in this case, are
(roughly) time-aligned latent features v̂ = {v̂1 , v̂2 , . . . , v̂T ) and â = {â1 , â2 , . . . , âT ), where
the maximum timestamp for any data incorporated into v̂t or ât is less than the minimum timestamp
of any data incorporated into v̂t+1 or ât+1 . Explicitly v̂t is composed of f features of size d giving
it a shape of (f, d) and ât is composed of s features also of size d with shape (s, d). The role of
the combiner is to map such time-aligned modal latent features into a smaller set of shared latent
features. Specifically let ĉ = {ĉ1 , ĉ2 , . . . , ĉT } where ĉt = (v̂t , ât ) having size (n, d) and n = f +s
be the set of all time-aligned features from all modalities. The combiner then maps ĉ to a shared
latent feature space x = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT } where xt has shape (m, d) where n >> m.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                               Feature selection



                                                                                                Transformer
                                                                               Video +
                                                                               Audio features



                                                                         (a) Transformer combiner. All features are
                                                                         input to the transformer, a smaller number of
                                                                         m features are selected as combined features.


                                                                                                        MLP


                                                                                   Memory       Read   Process       Write


                                                                                Single step Video + Audio features

                                                                          (b) TTM Combiner. Uses the TTM
                                                                          mechanism to store a memory and compute
                                                                          the m combined features for each time step.
                                                                          This process is repeated for each time step.


      Figure 2: Autoregressive modeling of video and audio in time (left). Combiners (right).


Since the features produced by the combiner are going to be used in the sequential autoregressive
modeling of video/audio, it is important for the combiner to not break causality thus:
                                    xt = Combiner(ĉ1 , ĉ2 , . . . , ĉt )                                                  (2)
We utilize two different architectures for the combiner, a standard Transformer one and a memory
based approach, based on the Token Turing Machines (Ryoo et al., 2023), to reduce memory.

Causal Transformer Combiner. We explore a straightforward version of the Combiner, which
consists of a standard Transformer model, here of K layers (here, 8). For each step t it maps the
original set of features ĉt to xt where xt is of much lower dimensionality, i.e., effectively reducing
the number of tokens (here m = 32) (Figure 2, right). The inputs to the Combiner are the latent
features of the video and audio, which are concatenated before being fed to the Combiner. We
here specifically implement a causal version of the transformer as it masks out inputs from future
timestamps (i.e., t). The attention mechanism of the transformer is modified to mask features at
the time-chunk level as described later in Section 3.3.1 (using Equation 8), thus all features from ĉt
and the previous time steps are used to compute each output feature in xt as in Equation 2. This
effectively applies attention mechanisms to all the modality inputs jointly while respecting causality.

Token Turing Machine Combiner. Token Turing Machine (TTM) (Ryoo et al., 2023) is a re-
current sequential model with Transformers and token-based operations. It maintains an external
‘memory’ Mt as a set of features, and updates it at every time step by reading and writing. Given
inputs ĉt at each time step, it first ‘reads’ features to be processed, from input features as well as
memory features. Such features, zt , are passed to the ‘processor’, which is implemented as a stan-
dard Transformer, generating a set of intermediate output features ot . These intermediate outputs
are then used to update Mt (i.e., memory ‘write’) as well as to produce the final output xt .
                                         zt = Read(ĉt , Mt )                                                                (3)
                                         ot = Process(zt )                                                                   (4)
                                       Mt+1 = Write(Mt , ot , ĉt )                                                          (5)
                                         xt = Output(ot )                                                                    (6)

The key idea is to make the Transformer processor generate the outputs by utilizing memory Mt
instead of the entire history of features {ĉ1 , . . . , ĉt−1 }. Once trained, the differentiable read and
write operations will be optimized to maintain Mt so that it stores important features from the
previous time steps {ĉ1 , . . . , ĉt−1 } and updates it, at every step.
We implement TTM as the Combiner module to sequentially combine ĉ. The function ‘Process’ is
implemented with a standard Transformer with layers of multi-head self-attention and MLPs. The
functions ‘Read’, ‘Write’, and ‘Output’ are implemented with TokenLearner (Ryoo et al., 2021)
(which is similar to Perceiver (Jaegle et al., 2021) and attention pooling (Lee et al., 2019)). Note


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that we are able to separately control the number of features in the memory as well as the number of
‘Output’ function features, allowing efficient combiner computation and feature generation.
The key advantage of the TTM Combiner is its utilization of memory features to sequentially process
ĉt . The number of such memory features are much smaller than the total number of history features
({ĉ1 , . . . , ĉt−1 }) in general (e.g., 256 vs. ∼10k). This not only makes TTM a natural fit for the
model, but also reduces the total time complexity of the TTM Combiner to be constant with respect
to t, instead of O(t) or O(t2 ) in Transformers. We observe that the TTM Combiner saves memory
in both training and inference, about 30% less memory and reduces the runtime by about 18%.

3.3     T IME -A LIGNED V IDEO /AUDIO AUTOREGRESSIVE M ODELING

We describe the autoregressive modeling of time-aligned video and audio. We apply autoregressive
modeling strategy where we condition video/audio representations corresponding to a time interval
on feature representations from previous time intervals. These representations are learned jointly
by the Combiner, as described in Section 3.2. As mentioned, the video is first partitioned in T
smaller video snippets. Each of the snippets itself can be of size 4-64 frames (overlap is possible but
currently not used). We extract spatio-temporal information into latent video features v̂t and audio
features ât from the same video partition, apply Combiner to produce xt . The feature representa-
tions per video chunk xt are then fed sequentially to the autoregressive model, where at each step
we reconstruct the features from the previous step, conditioned on the prior inputs and the latent
vector h which corresponds to the latent representations learned within the autoregressive model:
                                  YT
                        p(v, a) =     p(vt+1 , at+1 |ht )p(ht |xt )p(xt |vt , at )                  (7)
                                      t=1
where {v1 , v2 , . . . vT }, and {a1 , a2 , . . . aT } are the feature representations from the video and
audio, p(xt−1 |vt−1 , at−1 ) is estimated by the combiner, and p(ht−1 |xt−1 ) is estimated by the latent
causal model. This allows for learning from previous representations in the sequence (in time) and
aims to predict the next-step feature representation (Figure 2, left). While autoregressive modeling
has been used for videos and images, it is often done on a pixel-by-pixel basis (Weissenborn et al.,
2020) which is highly inefficient and captures only short-term dependencies. With our approach,
with autoregressive modeling and the Combiner, and we address both shortcomings.
                                                                                     QT
Latent Causal Modeling. The autoregressive latent model estimates:                     t=1 p(ht |xt ). This is
done by applying an autoregressive transformer to x = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT } to produce ĥ =
{ĥ1 , ĥ2 , . . . , ĥT } where the target of ĥt is xt+1 so the difference between x2,...,T and ĥ1,...,T −1 is
used as a loss to control the latent representation of the combiner output x̂. Since we are modeling
data autoregressively in time, care must be taken with the attention mechanism during training, the
transformer uses a modified attention mechanism as described below in Section 3.3.1, Eq. 8.
Modality Reconstruction.              The autoregressive modality reconstruction models estimate
QT                   ˇ
   t=1 p(v t+1 , a   |
                     ˆ
                  t+1 th ). This   is done by applying a separate transformer to ĥ to produce recon-
structions of the audio and video signals v̂ and â, which is added as an optional loss below. To save
on computation, the video input v is down sampled to v small for the reconstruction target, thus the
actual reconstruction is v̂ small .

3.3.1    ATTENTION MECHANISMS FOR AUTOREGRESSIVE MODELING
Since the autoreggressive models are trained in time, masking is done to satisfy causality. We note
that the attention mechanisms within and across chunks need to be modified when masking. This
applies to both the Combiner and the Autoregressive learning (Sections 3.2 and 3.3). When mask-
ing features for autoregressive modeling, the standard pattern of masking each feature individually
would mask features from within the same time-chunk from each other. While this would still satisfy
causality, it unnecessarily restricts the model, preventing features from within the same time-chunk
from interacting based on position within the time-chunk. To allow features in the same chunk to
interact, the autoregressive mask between all features i, which fall in a time-chunk t, and another
feature j is computed as follows (N is the number of features and T the number of time-chunks):

                                    i      0 j <= ceil(t ∗ T /N ) ∗ N/T
                             maskj =                                                              (8)
                                           1 otherwise.

                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Table 1: Video QA results on MSRVTT-QA. Results in gray show VideoQA as classification.

                   Method                                                 Accuracy (%)
                   Just Ask (Yang et al., 2021)                               41.5
                   ALPRO (Li et al., 2022a)                                   42.1
                   MERLOT (Zellers et al., 2021)                              43.1
                   VIOLETv2 (Fu et al., 2023)                                 44.5
                   VindLU (Cheng et al., 2022)                                44.6
                   VideoOFA (Chen et al., 2023b)                              45.4
                   GIT2 (Wang et al., 2022b)                                  45.6
                   Iterative Co-Tok (Piergiovanni et al., 2022b)              45.7
                   VideoCoca (Yan et al., 2022)                               46.3
                   All-in-one (Wang et al., 2022a)                            46.8
                   UMT-L (Li et al., 2023)                                    47.1
                   InternVideo (Wang et al., 2022e)                           47.1
                   Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022)                            47.4
                   M-PLUG2 (Xu et al., 2023)                                  48.0
                   MaMMUT (Kuo et al., 2023)                                  49.5
                   Ours - TTM                                                50.01
                   Ours                                                      50.42


3.4   C OMBINING A LIGNED AND N ON - ALIGNED AUTOREGRESSIVE M ODELING

Text, or other context information, might not necessarily be aligned in time with the video and
audio modalities. It is still sequential. So here it is modeled by a separate autoregressive model,
devoted to text representations and to combining the visual-audio information together. Assum-
ing tokenization for the input text t = {tf1 , tf2 , . . . tfP } is provided, obtaining a tokenized text
sequence t = {w1 , w2 , . . . wL } of length L, we model the text sequentially as conditioned on
audio and video. In order to combine the outputs of the video/audio autoregressive model we use
cross-attention strategy (Alayrac et al., 2022). Here, unlike prior work, all feature representations
ĥ = {ĥ1 , ĥ2 , . . . , ĥT } from the latent causal model are used in the main text model.
                                                L
                                                Y
                                    p(w|ĥ) =         p(wl |wl−1 , ĥ).                             (9)
                                                l=1

The autoregressive text model estimates Eq. 9 by applying a transformer to the input text sequence
w = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wL } and using the latent model output ĥ as cross-attention to produce ŵ. The
loss is the standard cross-entropy loss between target w and output text sequences ŵ. This provides
further feedback to the combiner latent representation h through the cross-attention layer. Of note
is that since all parts of the model are autoregressive, it is naturally applicable to streaming videos.

3.5   M ODEL L OSSES

We use the following losses: Latent space reconstruction loss is the difference between x2,...,T
and ĥ1,...,T −1 in autoregressive setting such that ĥt = xt+1 . We apply a L2 normalization and then
take dot product between the feature vectors as the loss (i.e., cosine similarity). Video reconstruc-
tion loss. Similar to latent space reconstruction above the video reconstruction loss approximates the
difference between v̂ small and v small also in an autoregressive setting such that v̂tsmall = vt+1
                                                                                                small
                                                                                                      .
We use the same distance metric on the video reconstruction as we use on the latent space recon-
struction problem. Unaligned text cross entropy loss is the standard cross-entropy loss between w
and ŵ for the unaligned text output. These losses are weighted to compute the final loss.
3.6   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

Model: Our video+audio model model has 3B parameters; without audio it is 2.9B. A little over
half of the parameters are for the audio+video autoregressive model. Our models work on 128
frames customarily, but can handle more for longer videos (e.g., 512). We use 16 chunks and


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Table 2: Long video results on ActivityNet and NExT-QA. Gray is for classification setting.
              (a) ActivityNet-QA.                                        (b) NExT-QA.
    Method                             Acc %             Method                            (Acc %)
    Just Ask (Yang et al., 2021)       38.9              CLIP (single frame)                 43.7
    MERLOT (Zellers et al., 2021)      41.4              VQA-T (Yang et al., 2021)          52.32
    FrozenBiLM (Yang et al., 2022)     43.2              AIO (Wang et al., 2022a)           50.60
    VideoCoca (Yan et al., 2022)       56.1              ATP (Buch et al., 2022)             54.3
                                                         VGT Xiao et al. (2022)             55.02
    Sing-Temp (Lei et al., 2022)        44.1
                                                         MIST - CLIP Gao et al. (2023)      57.18
    VindLU (Cheng et al., 2022)         44.7
                                                         HiTeA Ye et al. (2022)              63.1
    UMT-L (Li et al., 2023)             47.9
                                                         Ours - 512 frames TTM                 73.2
    Ours - 512 frames TTM              49.85
                                                         Ours - 128 frames                     68.2
    Ours - 128 frames                  48.25
                                                         Ours - 512 frames                     72.0
    Ours - 512 frames                  51.13


         Table 3: Audio-Video results on Kinetics-Sound, VGG-Sound, and Epic-Sound.
        (a) Kinetics-Sound.                    (b) VGG-Sound.                    (c) Epic-Sound..
    Method              Acc. %      Method                      Acc. %     Method                Acc. %
    MBT (A+V)             85.0      UAVM                          65.8     SSAST                    53.47
                                    MMT (Zhu et al., 2022)        66.2     ASF                      53.75
    Ours (Sm, Video)      81.3
                                    MAViL (Huang et al.)          67.1
    Ours (Sm, A+V)        85.0                                             Ours (Audio only)          62.4
                                    ONE-PEACE                     68.2
    Ours TTM (A+V)        88.3                                             Ours (Video only)          72.4
    Ours (A+V)            90.1      Ours TTM (A+V)                66.4     Ours TTM (A+V)             79.4
                                    Ours (A+V)                    69.8     Ours (A+V)                 78.2


Combiner dimension m = 32. We apply random masking to the combiner output features at a ratio
of 0.75% as a form of dropout regularization as we found this stabilizes the causal model latent
reconstruction. Due to the design of our model (partitioning and Combiner), adding more frames,
or increasing the chunk size, number of chunks, etc. lead to only marginal increase in parameters.
Increasing the number of chunks, while not leading to parameter increases, increases memory, which
underscores the importance of the Combiner and particularly the TTM. Model training: The model
is pretrained on the Video-Text Pairs (VTP) dataset which is collected from noisy video-text pairs
from the web (Alayrac et al., 2022). We use only about 12% of the data. All losses are given equal
weight during pretraining. During finetuning the unaligned text loss is increased 10-fold to better
align the training loss with the final evaluation. The model is trained for 10 epochs on MSRVTT-QA,
VGG-Sound, 80 on ActivityNet-QA, 20 on NExT-QA, 8 on Epic-Sound, 4 on Kinetics-Sound.

4     E XPERIMENTS
Below we report results on standard Video Question Answering (VideoQA) benchmarks, on long-
video VideoQA benchmarks and on Audio+Video benchmarks. We report results using the open-
ended text-generative evaluation, following (Li et al., 2021b; Lei et al., 2022). Our model gen-
erates a free-form text response which is compared to the target response for an exact match. This
is more challenging than a classification setting, as our model might generate a correct answer but
which is not among the desired classes. This evaluation is more general and widely applicable.
Video Question Answering. We first report Video Question Answering results on the MSRVTT-
QA VideoQA dataset (Xu et al., 2016), as the most popular Video QA benchmark. The results are
shown in Table 1 alongside the best state-of-the-art (SOTA) performances. Our method outperforms
the SOTA, including the ones with classification evaluation, and models much larger than ours.
Long video Question Answering. We further report Video QA results on long video datasets.
ActivityNet-QA (Yu et al., 2019) contains longer videos of about 160 seconds per video. NExT-
QA (Xiao et al., 2021) is a targeting complex events with long videos of about 44 seconds. We
sample up to 512 frames. Results are in Table 2, showing we outperform the SOTA approaches.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Table 4: Ablation studies.
            (a) Effects of proposed components.                        (b) Combiner types.
      Model                   Frames/Chunks        Acc.         Combiner type      Fr./Ch.    Acc.
      Baseline                      32/4           41.5         Perceiver           32/4      43.1
      + AR                          32/4           43.2         Transf.+CLS         32/4      43.7
      + Combiner                    32/4           42.1         Ours-Transf.        32/4      44.2
      + AR + Combiner               32/4           44.2         Ours-TTM            32/4      44.8
      + Pretraining                 32/4           45.2
      + AR + Comb. + PT             32/4           47.9
           (c) Autoregressive model more frames.                (d) Combiner dimension.
         Model             Frames/Chunks       Acc.        Model       Fr./Ch.   Dim       Acc.
         Baseline                64/1          41.8        Ours-8       32/4       8       42.53
         Ours-Autoreg.           64/8          45.1        Ours-16      32/4      16       43.36
         Ours + BD               64/8          45.1        Ours-32      32/4      32       44.20
         Ours-Autoreg.          128/8          45.8        Ours-64      32/4      64       44.22

Audio-Video Results. Table 3 shows results on three Audio-Video benchmarks: Kinetics-
Sound (Arandjelovic & Zisserman, 2017), VGG-Sound (Chen et al., 2020) and Epic-Sound (Huh
et al., 2023). Since these datasets are Audio-Video classification, we treat the task as open-ended
generation: we input the text ‘Classify the video audio clip.’ and expect the output to be the target
class name e.g., ‘playing drums’. Across all datasets, we outperform the SOTA with large margins,
despite the more challenging open-text generation evaluation. Methods are MBT (Nagrani et al.,
2021) One-Peace (Wang et al., 2023), SSAST, ASF (Huh et al., 2023), UAVM (Gong et al., 2022).
4.1   A BLATIONS
The ablations (Table 4), are conducted with the video and text model in order to understand the main
behaviors of this architecture. We also use a smaller model and configuration, and where applicable,
2x fewer pretraining steps with the same batch size to save compute (details are in the Appendix).
Main model components: We start with ablations where we study the effect of each component
(Table 4a). We find that on top of a baseline model, adding each part, the autoregressive (AR) model,
the combiner, and pretraining, each individually help and the combination of all three further help.
Combiner type ablations: We compare the Combiners: transformer-based (ours, CLS and Per-
ceiver (Alayrac et al., 2022)) and TTM. The CLS-token inspired combiner appends m learnable
features to the end of the sequence and takes their values as the combined features after passing the
whole sequence through the transformer. These are visualized in Figure 3. We use the same settings
for direct comparison. Table 4b shows that our proposed combiners perform best.
Autoregressive modeling in time: We ablate the Autoregressive part of the model. Table 4c shows
that processing the video in chunks autoregressively in time is more advantageous than learning
from the full video at once, with a large jump in performance (first two rows). Not only is our
autoregressive model feasible for longer videos but it is also more beneficial for the same size inputs.
More frames per chunk contribute to the improvements (rows two and four). We also compare to a
bidirectional (BD) model, finding that the performance is the same as the autoregressive portion.
Combiner size ablations. We further compare the number of features output by the combiner per
timestep. We noticed a trend for larger combiner outputs giving better results, lines 3-4 (Table 4d).
We chose 32 as a trade-off between sufficiently compact feature length and sufficiently expressive.

5     C ONCLUSIONS
We propose a multimodal autoregressive model which decouples the autoregressive modeling into a
component, devoted to time-aligned modalities (video, audio) and another one for the non-aligned,
contextual modalities (text). To address long video/audio inputs we propose to partition the media
inputs and learn from them jointly by a Combiner, which allows to control the sequence lengths. The
model can handle 512 frames, without increasing its size. Our approach not only enables working
with long videos effectively but also outperforms SOTA, achieving gains over much larger models.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   E THICS STATEMENT
The model described is trained on video/audio and text data which might be noisy and with inaccu-
rate labeling. This might propagate inaccuracies or biases into the model. We have used the model
for evaluation purposes and to compare to the established benchmarks in the field. We evaluate
on publicly available datasets, which have been previously used for evaluation and benchmarking
purposes. No new datasets are proposed or studies with use of human subjects are conducted.

7   R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The proposed model is based on transformer model architectures, which are widely used and avail-
able. The model implementation details and pretraining specifics are described in Section 3.6. The
model architecture configurations are further described in Section A.3. We note that other model
configurations are also possible and, especially, constructing larger models can produce even better
results; we also experimented with a smaller model for comparison in Table 3a and in the ablation
studies, Table 4; its details are in Section A.3. We have described the parameters for subdividing the
media inputs in Section 3.6. The parameters of the Combiner components, e.g., dimensions, outputs
are also described in Section 3.6.

R EFERENCES
Armen Aghajanyan, Bernie Huang, Candace Ross, Vlad Karpukhin, Hu Xu, Naman Goyal, Dmytro
  Okhonko, Mandar Joshi, Gargi Ghosh, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettlemoyer. CM3: A causal
  masked multimodal model of the internet. In ArXiv:2201.07520, 2022.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan
  Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian
  Borgeaud, Andrew Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo
  Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.14198.
Relja Arandjelovic and Andrew Zisserman. Look, listen and learn. In ICCV, 2017.
Kumar Ashutosh, Rohit Girdhar, Lorenzo Torresani, and Kristen Grauman. Hiervl: Learning hier-
  archical video-language embeddings. In CVPR, 2023.
Shyamal Buch, Cristóbal Eyzaguirre, Adrien Gaidon, Jiajun Wu, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos
  Niebles. Revisiting the” video” in video-language understanding. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2917–2927, 2022.
Honglie Chen, Weidi Xie, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. VGG-Sound: A large-scale
  audio-visual dataset. In ICASSP, 2020.
Xi Chen, Xiao Wang, Soravit Changpinyo, AJ Piergiovanni, Piotr Padlewski, Daniel Salz, Se-
  bastian Goodman, Adam Grycner, Basil Mustafa, Lucas Beyer, , Alexander Kolesnikov, Joan
  Puigcerver, Nan Ding, Keran Rong, Hassan Akbari, Gaurav Mishra, Linting Xue, Ashish Thap-
  liyal, James Bradbury, Weicheng Kuo, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Chao Jia, Burcu Karagol Ayan,
  Carlos Riquelme, Andreas Steiner, Anelia Angelova, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil Houlsby, and Radu Sori-
  cut. Pali: A jointly-scaled multilingual language-image model. In ICLR, 2023a.
Xilun Chen, Lili Yu, Wenhan Xiong, Barlas Oguz, Yashar Mehdad, and Wen-Tau Yih. Videoofa:
  Two-stage pre-training for video-to-text generation. In arXiv:abs/2305.03204, 2023b.
Feng Cheng, Xizi Wang, Jie Lei1 David Crandall, Mohit Bansal, and Gedas Bertasius. Vindlu : A
  recipe for effective video-and-language pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05051, 2022.
Sixun Dong, Huazhang Hu, Dongze Lian, Weixin Luo, Yicheng Qian, and Shenghua Gao. Weakly
  supervised video representation learning with unaligned text for sequential videos. In CVPR,
  2023.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tsu-Jui Fu, Linjie Li, Zhe Gan, Kevin Lin, William Yang Wang, Lijuan Wang, and Zicheng
  Liu. Violet: End-to-end video-language transformers with masked visual-token modeling. In
  arXiv:2111.1268, 2021.
Tsu-Jui Fu, Linjie Li, Zhe Gan, Kevin Lin, William Yang Wang, Lijuan Wang, and Zicheng Liu.
  An empirical study of end-to-end video-language transformers with masked visual modeling. In
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
Difei Gao, Luowei Zhou, Lei Ji, Linchao Zhu, Yi Yang, and Mike Zheng Shou. Mist: Multi-modal
  iterative spatial-temporal transformer for long-form video question answering. In CVPR, pp.
  14773–14783, 2023.
Jort F. Gemmeke, Daniel P. W. Ellis, Dylan Freedman, Aren Jansen, Wade Lawrence, R. Channing
  Moore, Manoj Plakal, and Marvin Ritter. Audio set: An ontology and human-labeled dataset for
  audio events. In IEEE ICASSP, 2017.
Mariana-Iuliana Georgescu, Eduardo Fonseca, Radu Tudor Ionescu, Mario Lucic, Cordelia Schmid,
 and Anurag Arnab. Audiovisual masked autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05922, 2022.
Yuan Gong, Alexander H. Liu, Andrew Rouditchenko, and James Glass. Uavm: Towards unifying
  audio and visual models. In IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS, 2022.
Yuan Gong, Andrew Rouditchenko, Alexander H. Liu, David Harwath, Leonid Karlinsky, Hilde
  Kuehne, and James Glass. Contrastive audio-visual masked autoencoder. In ICLR, 2023.
Po-Yao Huang, Vasu Sharma, Hu Xu, Chaitanya Ryali, Haoqi Fan, Yanghao Li, Shang-Wen Li,
  Gargi Ghosh, Jitendra Malik, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Mavil: Masked audio-video learners.
  In ArXiv:2212.08071.
Jaesung Huh, Jacob Chalk, Evangelos Kazakos, Dima Damen, and Andrew Zisserman. EPIC-
  SOUNDS: A Large-Scale Dataset of Actions that Sound. In IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech, Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2023.
Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andrew Brock, Andrew Zisserman, Oriol Vinyals, and Joao Carreira.
  Perceiver: General perception with iterative attention, 2021.
Bruno Korbar, Du Tran, and Lorenzo Torresani. Cooperative learning of audio and video models
  from self-supervised synchronization. In Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2018.
Weicheng Kuo, AJ Piergiovanni, Dahun Kim, Xiyang Luo, Ben Caine, Wei Li, Abhijit Ogale, An-
 drew Dai Luowei Zhou, Zhifeng Chen, Claire Cui, and Anelia Angelova. MaMMUT: A simple
 architecture for joint learning for multimodal tasks. In Transactions on Machine Learning Re-
 search, 2023.
Juho Lee, Yoonho Lee, Jungtaek Kim, Adam R. Kosiorek, Seungjin Choi, and Yee Whye Teh. Set
  transformer: A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. 2019.
Jie Lei, Tamara L. Berg, and Mohit Bansal. Revealing single frame bias for video-and-language
   learnin. ArXiv:abs/2206.03428, 2022.
Dongxu Li, Junnan Li, Hongdong Li, Juan Carlos Niebles, and Steven Hoi. Align and prompt:
  Video-and-language pre-training with entity prompts. In CVPR, 2022a.
Junnan Li, Ramprasaath Selvaraju, Akhilesh Gotmare, Shafiq Joty, Caiming Xiong, and Steven
  Chu Hong Hoi. Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with momentum
  distillation. NeurIPS, 2021a.
Junnan Li, Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Akhilesh D. Gotmare, Shafiq Joty, Caiming Xiong, and
  Steven C.H. Hoi. Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with momentum
  distillation. In NeurIPS, 2021b.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.12086, 2022b.

                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kunchang Li, Yali Wang, Yizhuo Li, Yi Wang, Yinan He, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. Unmasked
  teacher: Towards training-efficient video foundation models. In ICCV, 2023.

Antoine Miech, Dimitri Zhukov, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and Josef
  Sivic. Howto100m: Learning a text-video embedding by watching hundred million narrated video
  clips. In ICCV, 2019.

Antoine Miech, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Lucas Smaira, Ivan Laptev, Josef Sivic, and Andrew Zis-
  serman. End-to-end learning of visual representations from uncurated instructional videos. In
  CVPR, 2020.

Arsha Nagrani, Shan Yang, Anurag Arnab, Aren Jansen, Cordelia Schmid, and Chen Sun. Attention
  bottlenecks for multimodal fusion. In Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2021.

Daniel S Park, William Chan, Yu Zhang, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Barret Zoph, Ekin D Cubuk, and
  Quoc V Le. Specaugment: A simple data augmentation method for automatic speech recognition.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08779, 2019.

Victor Pellegrain, Myriam Tami, Michel Batteux, and Céline Hudelot. Streamult: Streaming mul-
  timodal transformer for heterogeneous and arbitrary long sequential data. In ArXiv:2110.08021,
  2021.

Lionel Pibre, Francisco Madrigal, Cyrille Equoy, Frédéric Lerasle, Thomas Pellegrini, Julien Pin-
  quier, and Isabelle Ferrané. Audio-video fusion strategies for active speaker detection in meetings.
  In ArXiv:2206.10411, 2022.

AJ Piergiovanni, Wei Li, Weicheng Kuo, Mohammad Saffar, Fred Bertsch, and Anelia An-
  gelova. Answer-me: Multi-task open-vocabulary visual question answering. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.00949, 2022a.

AJ Piergiovanni, Kairo Morton, Weicheng Kuo, Michael Ryoo, and Anelia Angelova. Video ques-
  tion answering with iterative video-text co-tokenization. ECCV, 2022b.

AJ Piergiovanni, Weicheng Kuo, and Anelia Angelova. Rethinking video vits: Sparse video tubes
  for joint image and video learning. CVPR, 2023a.

AJ Piergiovanni, Weicheng Kuo, Wei Li, and Anelia Angelova. Dynamic pretraining of vision-
  language models. In First workshop on Multimodal Representation Learning, International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023b.

Scott Reed, Konrad Żołna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
  Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Giménez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom
  Eccles, Jake Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley Edwards, Nicolas Heess, Yutian Chen, Raia Hadsell,
  Oriol Vinyals, Mahyar Bordbar, and Nando de Freitas. A generalist agent. In ArXiv:2205.06175,
  2022.

Andrew Rouditchenko, Angie Boggust, David Harwath, Brian Chen, Dhiraj Joshi, Samuel Thomas,
  Kartik Audhkhasi, Hilde Kuehne, Rameswar Panda, Rogerio Feris, Brian Kingsbury, Michael
  Picheny, Antonio Torralba, and James Glass. Avlnet: Learning audio-visual language representa-
  tions from instructional videos. In INTERSPEECH, 2021.

Michael S. Ryoo, AJ Piergiovanni, Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, and Anelia Angelova. To-
 kenlearner: Adaptive space-time tokenization for videos. In Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst.,
 2021.

Michael S. Ryoo, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kumara Kahatapitiya, Ted Xiao, Kanishka Rao,
 Austin Stone, Yao Lu, Julian Ibarz, and Anurag Arnab. Token turing machines. In CVPR, 2023.

Yuchong Sun, Hongwei Xue, Ruihua Song, Bei Liu, Huan Yang, and Jianlong Fu. Long-form video-
  language pre-training with multimodal temporal contrastive learning. In Adv. Neural Inform.
  Process. Syst., 2022.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Shaojie Bai, Paul Pu Liang, J. Zico Kolter, Louis-Philippe Morency, and
  Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Multimodal transformer for unaligned multimodal language sequences. In
  ArXiv:2110.08021, 2021.
Aaron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, Oriol Vinyals, Lasse Espeholt, and Koray Kavukcuoglu
  Alex Graves. Conditional image generation with pixelcnn decoders. In arXiv:1606.05328, 2016.
Alex Jinpeng Wang, Yixiao Ge, Rui Yan, Ge Yuying, Xudong Lin, Guanyu Cai, Jianping Wu, Ying
  Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. All in one: Exploring unified video-language pre-
  training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07303, 2022a.
Jianfeng Wang, Zhengyuan Yang, Xiaowei Hu, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin, Zhe Gan, Zicheng Liu, Ce Liu,
   and Lijuan Wang. Git: A generative image-to-text transformer for vision and language. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2205.14100, 2022b.
Junke Wang, Dongdong Chen, Zuxuan Wu, Chong Luo, Luowei Zhou, Yucheng Zhao, Yujia Xie,
  Ce Liu, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Lu Yuan. Omnivl:one foundation model for image-language and
  video-language tasks. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2022c.
Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Junyang Lin, Shuai Bai, Xiaohuan Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Xinggang Wang,
  and Chang Zhou. One-peace: Exploring one general representation model toward unlimited
  modalities. In ArXiv:2305.11172, 2023.
Wenhui Wang, Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Johan Bjorck, Zhiliang Peng, Qiang Liu, Kriti Aggarwal,
 Owais Khan Mohammed, Saksham Singhal, Subhojit Som, et al. Image as a foreign language:
 Beit pretraining for all vision and vision-language tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.10442, 2022d.
Yi Wang, Kunchang Li, Yizhuo Li, Yinan He1, Bingkun Huang, Zhiyu Zhao, Hongjie Zhang, Jilan
  Xu, Yi Liu, Zun Wang, Sen Xing, Guo Chen, Junting Pan, Jiashuo Yu, Yali Wang, Limin Wang,
  and Yu Qiao. Internvideo: General video foundation models via generative and discriminative
  learning. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03191, 2022e.
Dirk Weissenborn, Oscar Täckström, and Jakob Uszkoreit. Scaling autoregressive video models. In
  ICLR, 2020.
Chao-Yuan Wu and Philipp Krahenbuhl. Towards long-form video understanding. In CVPR, 2021.
Chao-Yuan Wu, Yanghao Li, Karttikeya Mangalam, Haoqi Fan, Bo Xiong, and Jitendra Malik amd
  Christoph Feichtenhofer. Memvit: Memory-augmented multiscale vision transformer for efficient
  long-term video recognition. In ArXiv:2201.08383, 2023.
Chenfei Wu, Lun Huang, Qianxi Zhang, Binyang Li, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Guillermo Sapiro, and Nan
  Duan. Godiva: Generating open-domain videos from natural descriptions. In ArXiV:2104.14806,
  2021.
Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Yuejian Fang, Daxin Jiang, and Nan Duan. Nu wa: Visual
  synthesis pre-training for neural visual world creation. In ArXiv:2111.12417, 2022.
Junbin Xiao, Xindi Shang, Angela Yao, and Tat-Seng Chua. Next-qa:next phase of question-
  answering to explaining temporal actions. CVPR, 2021.
Junbin Xiao, Pan Zhou, Tat-Seng Chua, and Shuicheng Yan. Video graph transformer for video
  question answering. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 39–58. Springer, 2022.
Haiyang Xu, Qinghao Ye, Ming Yan, Yaya Shi, Jiabo Ye, Yuanhong Xu, Chenliang Li, Bin Bi,
  Qi Qian, Wei Wang, Guohai Xu, Ji Zhang, Songfang Huang, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou.
  mplug-2: A modularized multi-modal foundation model across text, image and video. In arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.00402, 2023.
Jun Xu, Tao Mei, Ting Yao, , and Yong Rui. Msr-vtt: A large video description dataset for bridging
  video and language. In CVPR, 2016.
Shen Yan, Tao Zhu, ZiRui Wang, Yuan Cao, Mi Zhang, Soham Ghosh, Yonghui Wu, and Jiahui
  Yu. Videococa: Video-text modeling with zero-shot transfer from contrastive captioners. In
  ArXiV:2212.04979, 2022.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wilson Yan, Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Videogpt: Video generation using
 vq-vae and transformers. ArXiv:abs/2104.10157, 2021.
Antoine Yang, Antoine Miech, Josef Sivic, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid. Just ask: Learning to
  answer questions from millions of narrated videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1686–1697, 2021.
Antoine Yang, Antoine Miech, Josef Sivic, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid. Zero-shot video
  question answering via frozen bidirectional language models. ArXiv:abs/2206.08155, 2022.
Qinghao Ye, Guohai Xu, Ming Yan, Haiyang Xu, Qi Qian, Ji Zhang, and Fei Huang. Hitea: Hierar-
  chical temporal-aware video-language pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14546, 2022.
Lili Yu, Bowen Shi, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Benjamin Muller, Olga Golovneva, Tianlu Wang, Arun
  Babu, Binh Tang, Brian Karrer, Shelly Sheynin, Candace Ross, Adam Polyak, Russell Howes,
  Vasu Sharma, Puxin Xu, Hovhannes Tamoyan1, Oron Ashual, Uriel Singer, Shang-Wen Li,
  Susan Zhang Gargi Ghosh, Yaniv Taigman, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Asli Celikyilmaz, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Armen Aghajanyan. Scaling autoregressive multi-modal models: Pretrain-
  ing and instruction tuning. In https://ai.meta.com/research/publications/scaling-autoregressive-
  multi-modal-models-pretraining-and-instruction-tuning/, 2023.
Zhou Yu, Dejing Xu, Jun Yu, Ting Yu, Zhou Zhao, Yueting Zhuang, and Dacheng Tao. Activitynet-
  QA: A dataset for understanding complex web videos via question answering. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019.
Rowan Zellers, Ximing Lu, Jack Hessel, Youngjae Yu, Jae Sung Park, Jize Cao, Ali Farhadi, and
  Yejin Choi. Merlot: Multimodal neural script knowledge models. In Adv. Neural Inform. Process.
  Syst., 2021.
Rowan Zellers, Jiasen Lu, Ximing Lu, Youngjae Yu, Yanpeng Zhao, Mohammadreza Salehi, Aditya
  Kusupati, Jack Hessel, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Merlot reserve: Neural script knowledge
  through vision and language and sound. In CVPR, 2022.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
  risk minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412, 2017.
Wentao Zhu, Jingru Yi, Xiaohang Sun, Xiang Hao, Linda Liu, and Mohamed Omar. Multiscale
 multimodal transformer for multimodal action recognition. In ICLR, 2022.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   DATASETS DETAILS

The following datasets have been used for evaluation in the paper:
MSRVTT-QA (Xu et al., 2016) is a popular Video QA dataset of about 10K video clips and 243K
question-answer pairs. It is derived from the MSRVTT dataet by automatic question-answer pairs
and contains a certain level of noise. Videos are about 14 seconds in length, on average.
ActivityNet-QA (Yu et al., 2019) is a commonly used benchmark for understanding of longer videos.
It contains 5,800 videos and 58,000 question-answer pairs. It has much longer videos which entail
longer and more complex scenes. The video length is about 160 seconds per video on average.
NExT-QA (Xiao et al., 2021) dataset is also addressing long video understanding. It contains 5,440
videos and about 52K manually annotated question-answer pairs. The average length of the videos
is 44 seconds. Apart from questions related to descriptions and in the video, NExT-QA focuses on
questions related to events and sequence of events within the video, e.g., causal (‘Why’ and ‘How’
questions), and temporal - questions related to order of events, or related to concurrent activities and
others.
VGG-Sound (Chen et al., 2020) is a large-scale audio-video dataset, featuring over 200,000 videos
accompanied by audio sounds. The data is formulated as classification tasks with 300 audio classes.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Epic-Sound (Huh et al., 2023) is an audio-video dataset based on the Epic-Kitchens dataset. It has
78.4k examples and 44 target classes.
Kinetics-Sound (Arandjelovic & Zisserman, 2017) is a dataset derived from the popular Kinetics-
400 video recognition dataset. Kinetics-Sound includes audio inputs sampled together with the
video and has 36 classes.
All the abovementioned audio-video datasets used in the paper, have been formulated as datasets for
classification tasks. Here we use the class outputs (which are typically short phrases describing an
activity, instrument or type of sound e.g ’Knocking on a door’) and treat them as open-ended text
generation tasks and thus they are now audio-video-text datasets.

A.2   C OMBINER V ISUALIZATIONS .

In Figure 3, we visualize the different combiners we explored. The Transformer combiner, CLS
combiner and Perceiver combiner are all based on transformers taking input of all the video + audio
features and reducing them to m combined features. We found our main combiner to outperform
the other two in Table 4b. We note that the Perceiver combiner is an adaptation of our combiner by
applying Perceiver resampling (Jaegle et al., 2021). The TTM combiner is conceptually different:
rather than taking all the previous features as input, it takes only the current timestep features as
input and uses a memory mechanism with read and write operations to update it. It then uses a MLP
to produce the m combined output features. This reduces memory and compute use and sometimes
reduces accuracy.

A.3   A DDITIONAL M ODEL AND I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

Model Details. The autoregressive text model contains about 1.3B parameters, 400M are for cross-
attention weights and 400M for the vocab embeddings and following specifications: layers=18,
model dims=1536, hidden dims=12288, heads=12, and head dims=128. About 100M parameters are
for the additional weights associated with audio. The remaining parameters are for the video input
processor, combiner, causal latent model and video reconstruction model (a bit over 1.5B parameters
in total). The combiner, causal latent model and video reconstruction model are transformers with
128M parameters and the following specifications: layers=8, model dims=1024, hidden dims=4096,
heads=16, and head dims=64. The video chunk processor has roughly 630M parameters, following
ViT-Huge. The convolutional tubes have 1.5M parameters and the transformer has 630M parameters
and following specifications: layers=32, model dims=1280, hidden dims=5120, heads=16, and head
dims=80. The total parameter size is 3B parameters.
The smaller model used for ablations keeps the same combiner, causal latent model, and video re-
construction model as the main model. However the autoregressive text model is reduced to 128M
parameters with the same settings as the combiner, and has 20M cross-attention weights and 260M
parameters for the vocab embedding. The audio parameters are held roughly the same. The video
input processor is reduced to ViT-Large which has 300M parameters and the following specifica-
tions: layers=24, model dims=1024, hidden dims=4096, heads=16, and head dims=80. The total
parameter size is 1.15B parameters.
The TTM Combiner, as mentioned implemented by a TokenLearner (Ryoo et al., 2021) function
and a transformer. The output dimension K = 32 is the same as the output dimension for the
standard Transformer Combiner. The output dimensions for the ‘Read’ and ‘Write’ functions are
512 and 256, respectfully. These two parameters can be controlled independently to allow more
or less capacity to the TTM Combiner. The transformer used within the ‘Process’ function is of 2
layers, 128 hidden dimension and 12 heads. These are fixed throughout the paper.
Model Pretraining. The pretraining data is the Video-Text Pairs (VTP) dataset which is collected
from noisy video-text pairs from the web (Alayrac et al., 2022). The main pretraining is done for
the autoregressive, combiner, and the learning components processing the low-level video features
(e.g., video tubes convolutions). The model’s image and text backbones and cross attention layers
are initialized from a contrastively image-text pretrained model, as in CLIP. The text backbone
is frozen during pretraining while the other components including the cross attention weights are
unfrozen. During pretraining, the combiner model, causal latent reconstruction model and video
reconstruction model and video tubes are all randomly initialized. All losses are given equal weight


                                                 15
                             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sive Model


                                     Feature selection

        Combiner
                                                                                                         Transformer
                                                     Transformer
                                    Video +
                                    Audio features                                             Video + Audio features   CLS features

     Video, audio features
         per timestep          (a) Transformer combiner. All features are               (c) CLS combiner. Adds m features to the
    Video         Audio        input to the transformer, a smaller number of            input, then after the transformer, takes those
    Enc.          Enc.
                               m features are selected as combined features.            m features as the combined features.
    Video        Audio


                                                             MLP


                                        Memory       Read   Process       Write                  Cross-Attn Transformer
                                                                                                                                Q: m latent
                                                                                                                                features
                                     Single step Video + Audio features                           K,V: Video + Audio features

                               (b) TTM Combiner. Uses the TTM                          (d) Perceiver combiner. Adds m latent
                               mechanism to store a memory and compute                 features for cross attention to the transformer,
                               the m combined features for each time step.             resulting in m outputs.
                               This process is repeated for each time step.

                             Figure 3: Visualization of the different combiners we explored in this paper. The Transformer
                             combiner, which is the main one we used, simply takes the last m features of the output to represent
                             the combined inputs. We found this to work well. The CLS combiner and Perceiver combiner we
                             found both underperformed the base combiner. The TTM combiner is different, it uses a memory to
                             store the previous representations and has read, process and write operations. We found this method
                             saved memory with some tradeoff for accuracy for some datasets.


                                                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


during pretraining. For pretraining, we used a learning rate of 1 × 10−5 , batch size of 32, image
resolution of 224 × 224, 128 frames.
Fine-tuning. During finetuning all parameters are unfrozen. In addition the unaligned text loss is
given extra weight and increased 10-fold to better align the training loss with the final evaluation,
since the latent space and video reconstruction are not evaluated. The model is trained for 10 epochs
for the MSRVTT-QA dataset and for 80 epochs on ActivityNet-QA and 20 epochs on NExT-QA. For
these datasets, we finetune with a learning rate of 5 × 10−6 , weight decay of 0.01, image resolution
of 448 × 448, batch size of 32. We use 128 frames for the main experiments, except for the long
video benchmarks where we also report performance with 512. Sampling more frames from the
other benchmarks is not porductive as they contain relatively short videos. We used dropout of 0.1,
label smoothing of 0.2
Video-Audio Implementation Details. Since the model is pretrained on VTP data which most
videos lack audio, we try adding a further audio pretraining step here. We use AudioSet-2M (Gem-
meke et al., 2017) and train the model to output the text of the class names. In this step, we freeze
the weights of the model, other than the audio weights, allowing the model to learn to handle the
spectrogram inputs. During fine-tuning on the eval datasets, we fully train the model. During fine-
tuning, we also use Mixup (Zhang et al., 2017), specaugment (Park et al., 2019), dropout and label
smoothing, following the settings of previous works (e.g., (Georgescu et al., 2022)). We use a learn-
ing rate of 1 × 10−5 , with the Adam optimizer (default settings), weight decay of 0.0001, cosine
learning rate decay. We use an image resolution of 448 × 448, batch size of 32, and 128 frames.
Ablation experiments details. The ablation experiments in Tables 4a, 4b, 4c, 4d are conducted with
our small model. The Baseline in Table 4a uses partitioning, as the rest of the approaches tested in
the table, and concatenation of the features to be maximally comparable to others. Experiments
without partitioning are in Tables 4b, 4c, 4d.


                                                 17
