Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P EERING T HROUGH P REFERENCES : U NRAVELING
F EEDBACK ACQUISITION FOR A LIGNING L ARGE L AN -
GUAGE M ODELS

 Hritik Bansal, John Dang, Aditya Grover
 Department of Computer Science, University of California Los Angeles
 {hbansal,john.dang,adityag}@cs.ucla.edu



                                           A BSTRACT
         Aligning large language models (LLMs) with human values and intents critically
         involves the use of human or AI feedback. While dense feedback annotations
         are expensive to acquire and integrate, sparse feedback presents a structural de-
         sign choice between ratings (e.g., score Response A on a scale of 1-7) and rank-
         ings (e.g., is Response A better than Response B?). In this work, we analyze
         the effect of this design choice for the alignment and evaluation of LLMs. We
         uncover an inconsistency problem wherein the preferences inferred from ratings
         and rankings significantly disagree 60% for both human and AI annotators. Our
         subsequent analysis identifies various facets of annotator biases that explain this
         phenomena such as human annotators would rate denser responses higher while
         preferring accuracy during pairwise judgments, for a particular comparison in-
         stance. To our surprise, we observe that the choice of feedback protocol has
         a significant effect on the evaluation of aligned LLMs. In particular, we find
         that LLMs that leverage rankings data for alignment (say model X) are pre-
         ferred over those that leverage ratings data (say model Y), with a rank-based
         evaluation protocol (is X/Y’s response better than reference response?) but not
         with a rating-based evaluation protocol (score Rank X/Y’s response on a scale
         of 1-7). Our findings thus shed light on critical gaps in methods for evaluat-
         ing the real-world utility of language models and their strong dependence on
         the feedback protocol used for alignment. Our code and data are available at
         https://github.com/Hritikbansal/sparse_feedback.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recently, alignment has emerged as a critical step for next-generation text-based assistants [35].
Specifically, its goal is to align large language models (LLMs) with human values and intents, mak-
ing their generated content accurate, coherent, and harmless when responding to human queries
[26, 2, 4, 38]. The process of model alignment involves three main components: feedback acquisi-
tion, where humans (or AI) assess the quality of the base model’s responses; alignment algorithms,
which adjust the skills of the base model based on the feedback data; and model evaluation, which
assesses the performance of the aligned model on a wide range of novel user instructions [18].
Prior work has primarily focused on designing alignment algorithms, such as PPO, DPO, and PRO
[31, 23, 28, 33, 45, 19], under specific feedback protocols and evaluation setups. Additionally, pre-
vious research on feedback acquisition [6, 43, 30] has focused on developing fine-grained and dense
feedback protocols for aligning LLMs; however, these protocols are challenging and expensive to
acquire. Within the sparse feedback protocols that are easy to acquire, there is a structural design
choice between ratings and rankings, and its impact on the alignment pipeline is still under-explored.
To this end, we analyze the effect of the two feedback protocols: ratings and rankings on the LLM
alignment and further evaluation. Specifically, the rating protocol is an absolute form of feedback
in which the annotator assigns a rating to a response from the base LLM using a predefined scale
(e.g., a 1-7 Likert scale [20]). In contrast, the ranking protocol is a relative form of feedback in
which the annotator selects their preferred response from a pair of candidate responses generated by
the base LLM. The ratings on the model responses quantifies their goodness which enables model


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Overview of our pipeline to study the effect of the choice between sparse feedback pro-
tocols (ratings and rankings) for the alignment and evaluation of LLMs. First, we sample multiple
responses from the LLM for the queries in the instructions dataset. Then, we acquire rankings and
rating feedback data from the human and AI annotators, independently. Subsequently, the feedback
data is used to train the reward models for the Best-of-n policy. Finally, we compute the win-rate
against the reference model under ratings and rankings feedback protocol from humans and AI.


builders to gauge their strengths and weaknesses, but are hard to determine for complex instructions
(poem on ‘Roses and Lake in Shakespearean style’) [19, 32]. On the other hand, the rankings
protocol is easy to acquire for complex instructions but does not quantify the gap between the pair of
responses [35, 26]. Due to these unique behaviors, both the ratings and rankings feedback protocols
are compelling subjects for our study.
In our work, we first explore the interplay between these feedback protocols. To do so, we collect
ratings for individual responses from annotators, both human and AI, and transform them into their
ranking form by comparing the assigned ratings (e.g., if Response A is rated 5 and Response B is
rated 4, this implies that Response A is ranked higher than Response B). Additionally, we gather
pairwise ranking preferences for the same responses (e.g., comparing Response A vs. Response B)
from annotators, independently of their ratings. Surprisingly, we uncover a feedback inconsistency
problem and find that a significant portion of all preference comparisons between ratings and rank-
ings disagree with each other for humans 58% and AI annotator (GPT-3.5-Turbo) 59.4% (§4). We
observe that responses receiving inconsistent feedback are actually perceived as closer to each other
than those receiving consistent feedback. Qualitatively, we trace this problem back to the differences
in how annotators assess various facets of response quality (§J.1). Our analysis provides insights for
making decisions regarding feedback acquisition protocols for aligning LLMs.
After receiving feedback, our objective is to investigate the impact of the protocols on training
reward models for model alignment and subsequent model evaluation. To achieve this, we train
reward models on the ratings and rankings data (§2.3). We employ the Best-of-n policy where
the trained reward models are then employed to select the best response from a set of n candidate
responses generated by the base LLM. Subsequently, we assess the quality of the Best-of-n policies
(both ratings and rankings) by evaluating their responses against a reference model [26]. To our
surprise, we observe an evaluation inconsistency, a phenomenon where the choice of the feedback
protocol (rankings) for model evaluation favors responses from the Best-of-n policy that utilizes the
same feedback protocol (rankings), and vice versa. Additionally, we find that feedback inconsistency
occurs for both human and AI as response evaluators. Specifically, we observe that the win-rate gap
between the Best-of-n (rankings) policy and the base LLM is larger (by 11.2%) compared to the gap
between the Best-of-n (ratings) policy and the base LLM (5.3%) when using human rankings for
evaluation (see §5.2). However, the win-rate gap between the Best-of-n (ratings) policy and the base


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LLM (5%) is only slightly larger than the gap between the Best-of-n (rankings) policy and the base
LLM (4%) using human ratings for evaluation. Figure 1 provides an illustration of our pipeline.
Our contributions are as follows:

      1. We uncover a feedback inconsistency problem where the ratings on the pair of responses
         disagree with the ranking between them for 60% of comparisons for both humans and AI.
      2. We further analyze various facets of perceived response quality by the annotators while
         providing different forms of feedback.
      3. Finally, we find that the choice of the feedback protocol has a sharp influence on the eval-
         uation of the aligned LLMs in the form of evaluation inconsistency.

2     BACKGROUND
In this work, we focus on aligning an LLM to generate high-quality outputs, that are considered
accurate, coherent and harmless by humans, for unseen instructions. The initial step in the align-
ment process is to equip the base LLM with the ability to understand human or machine-generated
input queries or instructions. This is accomplished through supervised fine-tuning (SFT), where the
base LLM is fine-tuned with pairs of human-written or machine-generated instructions and corre-
sponding responses. Notably, there have been substantial advancements in constructing instruction
fine-tuning datasets and models recently [36, 49, 42, 40, 27, 44, 13, 46, 10, 41]. Following SFT,
the model generates candidate responses for new instructions (§ 2.1), and feedback data is acquired
under a protocol (ratings or rankings) from the annotators (§ 2.2). Further, we employ an alignment
algorithm (Best-of-n) that trains reward models on the ratings or rankings feedback data (§ 2.3).

2.1   I NSTRUCTION -R ESPONSE DATA C OLLECTION

Consider a language model pθ that can understand instructions and respond to them. We consider
a set of instructions X = {x1 , . . . , xn } where n is the number of instructions. Subsequently, we
                                              (1)      (k)
generate a set of k candidate responses {yi , . . . yi } for every instruction xi by sampling from
                           (j)
the model’s distribution yi ∼ pθ (.|xi ). Next, we collect the feedback data on the pre-defined
                                                                  (1)        (k)
instructions and the generated candidate responses D = {(xi , {yi , . . . , yi })}.

2.2   F EEDBACK DATA

Ratings Feedback Protocol With the given instruction and candidate response data D, the objec-
tive of ratings feedback acquisition is to assign an ordinal value to each individual response inde-
pendently. In our study, we request the annotators to rate the responses on a Likert scale (1 - 7). We
instruct the annotators to evaluate the responses based on the their quality considering factors such
as accuracy, coherence, and harmlessness of the response in addition to their subjective judgment.
                                                          (j)                                  (j)
Formally, the annotators assign an absolute score a(xi , yi ) ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 7} where xi and yi are
instruction and a generated candidate response, respectively. The annotation process would thus
                                    (j)         (j)
create a feedback data DA = {(xi , yi , a(xi , yi ))} where A represents the ratings protocol.

Rankings Feedback Protocol Given the instruction and candidate response data D, the aim of
rankings protocol is to assign a preferred response (or choose ‘equal’) for every pair of candidate
responses to a given instruction. To that end, we first transform the instruction-response data into
instruction-pairwise response data by creating pairwise combinations of the responses i.e., D′ =
        (j) (ℓ)
{(xi , yi , yi )} where i ̸= ℓ. Identical to the absolute feedback, the annotators are instructed to
use the various quality axes and their subjective judgment for decision-making.
                                                            (j)   (ℓ)
Formally, the annotators assign a relative feedback r(xi , yi , yi ) ∈ {‘response 1’, ‘response 2’,
                                                                   (ℓ)
‘equal’} where ‘response 1’ indicates that yi,j is preferred over yi . The annotation process would
                                            (j) (ℓ)         (j) (ℓ)
thus create a feedback data DR = {(xi , yi , yi , r(xi , yi , yi ))} where the subscript R repre-
sents the rankings feedback protocol.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.3   R EWARD M ODELING

We describe the training objectives for the reward models trained on ratings and rankings feedback.

                                                                                          (j)
Regression Reward Model. Here, we first normalize the ratings (between 1-7) a(xi , yi ) for a
                                                         (j)
given instruction in the dataset DA into score a′ (xi , yi ) between 0-1. Subsequently, we train a
                           (j)              (j)
regression model fθ (xi , yi ) where (xi , yi ) ∈ DA which outputs a scalar. The regression reward
model is trained with the following objective:

                                                               (j)                (j)
                    LA (DA ) = E(xi ,y(j) )∼DA [(σ(fθ (xi , yi )) − a′ (xi , yi )]2              (1)
                                        i


where σ(.) is the sigmoid function which projects any scalar value to a range between 0-1.

Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL) Reward Model. To train a reward model from the pair-
wise feedback data DR , prior works [26] train a reward model gθ (x, y) which outputs a scalar
value for a given response y for the instruction x. Firstly, we filter the instances that receive
        (j) (ℓ)
r(xi , yi , yi ) =‘equal’ from DR to get a new subset of data SR since one cannot learn from
such examples in the relative reward modeling objective. For the remaining instances, the negative
log-likelihood objective might be applied as follows:

                    LR (SR ) = −E(x,ya ,yb )∼SR [log σ(gθ (xi , ya ) − gθ (xi , yb )]            (2)
where ya and yb are the preferred and unpreferred responses respectively from the pair of candidate
             (j) (ℓ)                                        (j) (ℓ)
responses (yi , yi ) as decided by the value of r(xi , yi , yi ) in the dataset SR . We provide more
details on the choice of fθ , gθ , and the training setup in Appendix §G.

Best-of-n Policy. In our work, we use the Best-of-n policy (rejection sampling) Pn that leverages
the trained reward model to boost the performance of the SFT model towards human preferences. In
this method, we simply sample n times from the SFT model from a given instruction, and utilize the
reward models (regression or NLL) to score the set of n responses. The final output of the policy is
the response that achieves the highest score under the trained reward model. Formally the Best-of-n
policy that leverages the ratings reward model fθ ,

                                                 (1)        (n)         (m)
                              Pn (fθ , pθ , xi , {yi , . . . , yi }) = yi                        (3)
                              (j)                                           (j)
where m = argmaxj fθ (xi , yi ), xi is the input instructions, and yi is j th response from the n
candidate responses sampled from the SFT model pθ . Here, our approach can use any other RL
algorithm such as PPO used for model alignment [26] or a mix of rejection sampling and PPO [38].
We focus on rejection sampling due to its simplicity, and robust performance in comparison to other
RL algorithms as noted by prior works [23, 48, 11].

3     F EEDBACK DATA ACQUISTION
Here, we describe the feedback data acquisition process. We start by collecting responses to a large
set of instructions from the base LLM (§. Subsequently, we describe feedback acquisition from AI
which is large-scale and thus used for training the reward models. Further, we describe feedback
acquisition from humans in followed by feedback data analysis.

Instruction Response Data. The instructions are designed to present a collection of queries that
could potentially be posed to a text-based AI assistant in real-world scenarios. We collect 5.2K
instructions from varied sources such as Dolly [10], User-orient [42], and SuperNI [42].
In our work, we use Alpaca-7B [36], which is constructed by instruction-tuning the LLaMA-7B
[37] on 52K instruction-response data, as the base LLM. Thus, we prompt Alpaca to generate five
candidate responses for a range of diverse instructions. We set the max length for each generated
response to 128. We provide more details on the dataset composition in Appendix §C.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Feedback from AI. Prior works [12] demonstrate that the existing AI systems (LLMs) such as
GPT-4 [25] can be leveraged for providing pairwise feedback data and improve over the base LLM.
In addition, [49, 14] makes a case for LLM as a substitute for human preferences in a scalable and
reliable way. In our work, we collect large-scale ratings and rankings feedback data consisting of
71K instances from an GPT-3.5-Turbo (ChatGPT). We chose ChatGPT since it is 20× cheaper than
GPT-4 and was more easily accessible at the time of the project.
To collect ratings feedback, we prompt GPT-3.5-Turbo to assign a score between 1-7 to the indi-
vidual candidate responses for the instructions independent of each other. The model is specifically
prompted to assign the ratings score after evaluating the response for its accuracy, coherence, and
harmlessness, in addition to its subjective judgment. We further clarify that a rating of 1 implies
a low quality response whereas a rating of 7 indicates a high quality response. In total, we collect
24.6K instances of ratings feedback and spend $150 in the acquisition.
To collect the rankings feedback, we prompt the GPT-3.5-Turbo LLM with the instruction and a
pair of candidate responses (‘response 1’, ‘response 2’), and command it to provide its preference
between the two responses. To mitigate any potential bias in ‘response 1’ and ‘response 2’ ordering
[49], we run two queries for all instances covering both the possible orderings. If the model pref-
erences flip by flipping the order of the responses, then we consider it as tie situation and assign an
‘equal’ feedback to the pair of responses, as done in [5]. In total, we collect 46.5K unique instances
of rankings feedback, excluding the two possible orderings of the pair of candidate responses, and
spend $600 in the acquisition. We will provide more analysis on the feedback data in §3.1.

Feedback from Humans. We collect feedback data un-
der the ratings and rankings protocols from the humans
6K instances of annotations. We provide the details on
the human preference acquistion in Appendix §D. Such
data serves a multitude of purposes, notably: (a) provid-
ing insights into the behavior of different forms of feed-
back collected from humans, (b) facilitating a compar-
ative analysis of the similarities and dissimilarities be-
tween feedback patterns derived from AI systems and
those obtained from human participants, and (c) enabling
a comprehensive assessment of the agreement between
the feedback data generated by AI systems and the feed-
back provided by human participants. In our work, we
emphasize that the human feedback data is not used for        Figure 2: We present the ratings (ab-
training the reward models, and hence model alignment,        solute) score distribution acquired from
due to its small scale which is costly to expand.             humans and AI.

3.1   DATA A NALYSIS

Ratings Distribution. We present the score distribution
for the 4K ratings data from the human annotations and their corresponding GPT-3.5-Turbo anno-
tations in Figure 2. We find that the majority of the responses (∼ 80%) achieve better than average
ratings (> 4) from the humans and AI. This indicates that the quality of responses from Alpaca-7B
is good, attributed to its instruction-following capabilities. In addition, we find that the human anno-
tators tend to give a perfect score of 7 to a large proportion of the responses, whereas GPT-3.5-Turbo
assigns the perfect score to less than < 5% cases. We observe that the majority of responses achieve
an ratings score of 5 or 6 from GPT-3.5, and the distribution flattens to either side of these scores
(same as Fig. 2 in [27]).

Feedback data is unbiased towards longer and unique responses. Prior works [49, 41] have
shown that LLMs may favor longer and verbose responses, to varying degrees, despite being in-
accurate and of lower quality. We assess whether the length or number of unique words in the
candidate responses bias the ratings and rankings feedback judgments from humans and AI in our
data (Appendix Table 5 and 6). In summary, we find that there is no discernible difference between
the average length and average number of unique tokens of the preferred and unpreferred response
in the rankings feedback collected from the humans and AI.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Agreement Analysis. Here, we conduct an agreement analysis comparing the assessments pro-
vided by human-human and human-AI annotators for both ratings and rankings feedback. Specif-
ically, we have collected 1000 instances with ratings feedback and 500 instances with rankings
feedback from four human annotators and GPT-3.5-Turbo. To establish the ground truth for each
instance, we consider the first three human annotations as the gold label, and we use the fourth an-
notation as the human prediction label. For instances with ratings feedback, we compute the average
of the scores given by the three human annotators and round it off to the nearest integer and consider
it as the gold label. For instance, with rankings feedback, we determine the final label based on
the majority vote among the three human annotations. The possible choices for human feedback
responses are {‘response 1’, ‘response 2’, ‘equal’}. If an instance receives two votes for ‘equal’ and
one vote for ‘response 1’, we assign it a gold label of ‘equal’. In the event of a tie among the three
choices, we randomly sample the gold label from the possible choices.
We calculate the average ratings difference between the
gold label feedback and human (and AI) feedback to quan- Feedback H-H H-AI # Examples
tify the ratings agreement. We calculate the percentage Ratings         1.08    0.9      1000
of instances (out of 500) where the gold label and human Rankings 62.7% 60.5%            500
(and AI) feedback agrees with each other to quantify the
rankings agreement. Specifically, we assign a score of 1 Table 1: Agreement analysis between
if the gold label matches the prediction, and a score of 0.5 the gold human annotations and the
if only one of the gold label or prediction assigns ‘equal’ held-out human (H-H) annotations for
to the pair of responses. In Table 1, we observe that the ratings and rankings feedback (Column
average ratings difference between human-human ratings 1). Similarly, we perform the agree-
(1.08) is close to the human-GPT-3.5-Turbo ratings (0.9). ment analysis for the gold human anno-
Additionally, we observe that the human-human agree- tations and annotations from GPT-3.5-
ment and human-GPT-3.5-Turbo agreement is 62.7% and Turbo (abbreviated as H-AI).
60.5% respectively in the rankings feedback. We observe
that our agreement rates are close to the 60% human-human agreement rates reported in the prior
works [18].

4     F EEDBACK I NCONSISTENCY P ROBLEM
4.1   C ALCULATING C ONSISTENCY

Here, we use the observation that the rankings of a pair of responses for a given instruc-
tion can be compared to the ratings feedback data converted into its ranking form. Formally,
                                             R           (j) (ℓ)            (j)          (ℓ)
we can convert the ratings data DA to DA        = {xi , yi , yi , h(a(xi , yi ), a(xi , yi ))} where
          (j)          (ℓ)
h(a(xi , yi ), a(xi , yi )) ∈ {‘response 1’, ‘response 2’, ‘equal’} denotes the preferred response
           (j)                   (ℓ)
between yi (response 1) and yi (response 2). Here, we define the term feedback consistency as
the agreement between the ratings (converted to its rankings form) and the rankings received by a
pair of responses to a given instruction. Formally,
                                         (
                                                      (j)   (ℓ)         (j)   (ℓ)
                            (j) (ℓ)       1   r(xi , yi , yi ) = h(xi , yi , yi )
                    C(xi , yi , yi ) =                                                             (4)
                                          0   otherwise

            (j)   (ℓ)              R
where (xi , yi , yi ) ∈ S and S = DA ∩ DR .

4.2   R ESULTS

We present the results across 42K comparisons in the feedback data from GPT-3.5-Turbo (Table 2a)
and 500 comparisons in the feedback data from the humans (Table 2b). In both tables, a particular
cell (say row 1 and column 2) will indicate the percentage of total instances for which the ratings
feedback considers the pair of candidate responses ‘equal’ while the rankings feedback prefers ‘Re-
sponse 1’ for the same pair of candidate responses.
We observe an inconsistency issue in both human and AI feedback data. That is, the consistency
score falls within a similar range of 40%−42% for both humans and AI, suggesting that a substantial


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Rankings                                                             Rankings
                        Equal   Response 1 Response 2    Total                               Equal   Response 1 Response 2    Total
           Equal        27.7%     14.7%       15%       57.4%                   Equal        13.3%     12.4%      15.1%      40.8%
 Ratings   Response 1    9.7%      7.4%       4.5%      21.6%         Ratings   Response 1   8.2%      13.1%       7.8%      29.1%
           Response 2    9.7%      4.4%      6.9%       21.0%                   Response 2   9.3%      6.4%       14.2%      30.0%
           Total        47.1%     26.5%      26.4%       42%                    Total        30.9%      32%       37.1%      40.6%

(a) Results for the (dis-)agreements between feed-                   (b) Results for the (dis-)agreements between feed-
back protocols (ratings and rankings) annotated by                   back acquisition protocols (ratings and rankings) an-
GPT-3.5-Turbo for 42K comparisons.                                   notated by humans for 500 comparisons.

      Table 2: Inconsistency results for the feedback data acquired from (a) AI and (b) humans.


portion (60%) of the feedback data can yield contradictory preferences depending on the feedback
protocol employed. This consistency problem underscores several critical points: (a) it indicates
variations in the perceived quality of responses based on the choice of the feedback acquisition
protocols, (b) it underscores that the alignment pipeline can vary significantly depending on whether
ratings or rankings are used as sparse forms of feedback, and (c) it emphasizes the necessity of
meticulous data curation when working with multiple feedback protocols for aligning LLMs. In
Appendix §E, we discuss the variation in the consistency scores with variation in the annotators.

Hedging. We find that the GPT-3.5-Turbo tends to hedge its predictions significantly more than
humans. Specifically, 47.1% rankings feedback and 57.4% ratings feedback are assigned an ‘equal’
preference by GPT-3.5-Turbo (sum of first row and column in Table 2a). However, 30.9% rankings
and 40.8% ratings feedback is assigned an ‘equal’ preference by the humans. We observe that the
hedging percentages are higher for the ratings feedback as compared to the rankings feedback for
both humans and AI. This can be attributed to a large fraction of individual responses receiving a
score of 5 or 6 from GPT-3.5-Turbo, as discussed in §3.1.

Decisive rankings feedback. We observe that whenever the rankings feedback from humans and
GPT-3.5-Turbo is decisive (i.e., the feedback prefers one of the responses from the pair instead of
selecting ‘equal’), the fraction of consistent assignments is higher than the inconsistent ones. In
Table 2a, 7.4% (Column 2 and Row 2) is higher than 4.4% and 6.9% is higher than 4.5%. Similarly,
in Table 2b, 13.1% (Column 2 and Row 2) is higher than 6.4% and 14.2% is higher than 7.8%.

Decisive ratings feedback. We observe that whenever the ratings feedback converted to its rank-
ings form is decisive, the fraction of consistent assignments is higher than the inconsistent ones.
Specifically, we focus on Row 2 and Row 3 of the tables. In Table 2a, 7.4% (Column 2 and Row
2) is higher than 4.5% and 6.9% is higher than 4.4%. Similarly, in Table 2b, 13.1% (Column 2 and
Row 2) is higher than 7.8% and 14.2% is higher than 6.4%.

Quantitative Fine-grained Analysis. We perform fine-grained experiments to quantify the dif-
ference between consistent and inconsistent subsets of the feedback data from humans and AI in
Appendix J.1. In summary, we find that the quantitative gap between the pair of responses belong-
ing to the consistent instances is higher than the pair of responses belonging to the inconsistent
instances. Due to the closeness in the perceived quality of the pair of responses belonging to the
inconsistent instances, we posit that the human annotators prefer specific quality factors over the
others (e.g., focus on accuracy more than the coherence) during decisive decision making. As a re-
sult, we observe that the inconsistent instances receive more variation in the rankings feedback from
the humans (e.g., annotator 1,2 prefers Resp. A over B while annotator 3 prefers Resp. B over A for
a given instruction) than the consistent instances (e.g., annotator 1,2,3 prefer Resp. A and Resp. B).

Qualitative Analysis. We investigate the source of the inconsistency problem qualitatively by
asking the human annotators for a few feedback instances. We include the ratings and rankings with
human explanations in Appendix P, and find that the differences in the preferences of the humans
while annotating for different feedback protocols played a significant role in their decision making.
For instance, in Table 12, we observe that the annotators responsible for rankings favored ‘response
2’ due to its density, while perceiving ‘response 1’ as dull. At the same, despite these divergent
preferences, the individual responses received conflicting rating scores: ‘response 2’ incurred a


                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Win-rate against DaVinci-003 of Alpaca-7B LLM and Best-of-64 policy that leverages
the reward models trained with the ratings and rankings feedback protocols, independently. The gap
between base LLM and Best-of-64 (Rankings) is higher than base LLM and Best-of-64 (Ratings)
using the rankings feedback protocol for model evaluation. However, the gap between base LLM and
Best-of-64 (Ratings) is slightly higher than the gap between base LLM and Best-of-64 (Rankings)
using the ratings feedback protocol for model evaluation. The trend holds for humans and GPT-3.5-
Turbo as the evaluators. The error bars represent the 95% CI.


substantial penalty for its density and perceived non-compliance with task instructions, whereas
‘response 1’ garnered an average score for only a partial adherence to the guidelines.


5       A LIGNMENT AND E VALUATION

In the previous sections, we established that the feedback data obtained from both humans and AI
suffer from an inconsistency problem. Nonetheless, it is crucial to examine the impact of these forms
of feedback on aligning and evaluating language models.

5.1      S ETUP

First, we train reward models on feedback data acquired under the ratings and rankings protocol.
Then, we employ a Best-of-n (n = 64) policy to evaluate the effect of various feedback data on
model alignment. Here, we vary the choice of the feedback protocols as ratings and rankings dur-
ing evaluation and the choice of the annotators as humans and ChatGPT-3.5-Turbo. Specifically,
we choose low-rank adaptation [15] (LoRA) of Alpaca-7B as the reward model.1 . Post-training,
we evaluate the models on 553 unseen instructions, which includes 188 instructions from the Open
Assistant (OASST), 129 from the helpful evaluation released by Anthropic [3], 80 from Vicuna [8],
and 156 from Koala [13]. Within Best-of-n, we first generate n candidate responses of length 200
from the base LLM (Alpaca-7B) with the unseen instructions. Subsequently, the output of Best-of-n
would be the one that achieves the maximum score with the trained reward model. Finally, we com-
pute the win-rate of the base LLM and the Best-of-n policies against DaVinci-003 (reference model)
on these unseen instructions. Here, we use the DaVinci-003 responses collected in AlpacaEval [18].
Post-alignment, we evaluate the Best-of-n policies (ratings, rankings) against a reference model on
a set of unseen user instructions U. We provide more details on the training setup in §G.

5.2      R ESULTS

We train the reward models on the ratings and rankings feedback data collected from GPT-3.5-Turbo.
We present the win-rates for the base LLM and the Best-of-n policies on the unseen instructions
evaluated by humans and GPT-3.5-Turbo in Figure 3.
    1
        https://github.com/tloen/alpaca-lora


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Best-of-n policies outperforms SFT. We find that randomly sampling from the n (= 64) candi-
date responses from the SFT model (labeled as ‘SFT’ in the figure) achieves a win-rate of 33.9%
against DaVinci-003 using pairwise judgments from the humans. Further, we observe that the Best-
of-64 achieves a win-rate of 39.2% and 45.1% against DaVinci-003 using the reward models trained
with ratings and rankings feedback, respectively. We observe a similar trend for the reward models
trained with the ratings feedback using humans and AI as the evaluators. This indicates that the
feedback collected at scale from AI LLMs is useful for improving the alignment of the SFT.

Evaluation Inconsistency. To our surprise, we observe a evaluation inconsistency phenomenon
where the choice of the feedback protocol during evaluation favors the alignment algorithm that
uses the same feedback protocol. Specifically, we find that the gap between the win-rate of the Best-
of-n (rankings) policy and the SFT (11.2%) is larger than the gap between the Best-of-n (ratings)
policy and SFT (5.3%) as judged by the human annotators under the rankings protocol. However,
the gap between the win-rate of the Best-of-n (ratings) policy and SFT (5%) is slightly larger than
the gap between the Best-of-n (rankings) policy and SFT (4.3%) as judged by the human annota-
tors under the ratings protocol. Interestingly, we observe a similar evaluation inconsistency when
GPT-3.5-Turbo is used as the evaluation annotator. We present the task-specific performance results
in Appendix §L. This indicates that the annotators perceive the quality of the policy responses dif-
ferently depending on the feedback acquisition protocol. This highlights a challenge in designing
robust evaluation protocols that mirror real-world performance.

Ablations. Here, we aim to understand whether evaluation inconsistency phenomenon is observed
in different setups. In Appendix §M, we find that evaluation inconsistency when the alignment
policy is changed to rejection sampling finetuning. In Appendix §N, we show that our observations
are robust to the choice of the reward model used for Best-of-n policy. In Appendix O, we find that
converting the rating data into ranking format also leads to the evaluation inconsistency.

6   R ELATED W ORK

Learning from Human Feedback. [9] introduced the RL from Human Feedback (RLHF) frame-
work, which initially learns a reward model network from a dataset of human preferences. This
reward model is then used to replace a human-written reward function during RL optimization. [35]
and [26] introduced an RLHF framework for aligning LMs with human preferences.
Learning from AI Feedback. While RLHF has shown promising results, the collection of human
preferences remains a significant cost for aligning language models. Prior work has demonstrated
that LMs are capable of providing feedback [16, 49, 12] that can be used to improve their own capa-
bilities [22, 1]. [4] introduced the Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF) framework,
which replaces the human feedback step of RLHF with an automatic AI feedback generation proce-
dure. Our work compares human feedback with AI feedback in both rankings and ratings settings.
Feedback Data Collection. Previous works have utilized both human and AI feedback in both
ratings [19, 17] and rankings [35, 26, 37, 12] settings on machine-written responses [3] and human-
written responses [24]. However, there has not been work that systematically compares the effects
of collecting ratings versus rankings feedback.

7   C ONCLUSION

In this study, we conducted an examination of feedback acquisition protocols aimed at aligning
LLMs. Our investigation revealed a notable challenge: feedback inconsistency within sparse pro-
tocols (ratings and rankings). We found that feedback inconsistency was exhibited by both humans
and AI systems as feedback providers. Additionally, we delved into the factors contributing to this
inconsistency and shed light on its practical consequences in the context of model alignment and
evaluation, notably highlighting the phenomenon of evaluation inconsistency. Specifically, we em-
phasize that the trends observed in evaluations are significantly influenced by the choice of feedback
protocols. Future research endeavors may explore the cognitive underpinnings of the inconsistency
problem, expand the array of feedback protocols to include denser feedback, and investigate the
implications of these choices on the alignment algorithm and subsequent evaluation procedures.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Hritik Bansal is supported in part by AFOSR MURI grant FA9550-22-1-0380. We thank Ashima
Suvarna for her helpful comments on the draft. We also thank the reviewers for their insightful
feedback.

R EFERENCES
 [1] Afra Feyza Akyürek, Ekin Akyürek, Aman Madaan, Ashwin Kalyan, Peter Clark, Derry Wi-
     jaya, and Niket Tandon. Rl4f: Generating natural language feedback with reinforcement learn-
     ing for repairing model outputs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08844, 2023.
 [2] Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy
     Jones, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as a
     laboratory for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861, 2021.
 [3] Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
     Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
     assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
     2022.
 [4] Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy
     Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional
     ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
 [5] Yonatan Bitton, Hritik Bansal, Jack Hessel, Rulin Shao, Wanrong Zhu, Anas Awadalla, Josh
     Gardner, Rohan Taori, and Ludwig Schimdt. Visit-bench: A benchmark for vision-language
     instruction following inspired by real-world use, 2023.
 [6] Jon Ander Campos and Jun Shern. Training language models with language feedback. In ACL
     Workshop on Learning with Natural Language Supervision. 2022., 2022.
 [7] Stephen Casper, Xander Davies, Claudia Shi, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, Jérémy Scheurer, Javier
     Rando, Rachel Freedman, Tomasz Korbak, David Lindner, Pedro Freire, Tony Wang, Samuel
     Marks, Charbel-Raphaël Segerie, Micah Carroll, Andi Peng, Phillip Christoffersen, Mehul
     Damani, Stewart Slocum, Usman Anwar, Anand Siththaranjan, Max Nadeau, Eric J. Michaud,
     Jacob Pfau, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, Xin Chen, Lauro Langosco, Peter Hase, Erdem Bıyık,
     Anca Dragan, David Krueger, Dorsa Sadigh, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Open problems and
     fundamental limitations of reinforcement learning from human feedback, 2023.
 [8] Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
     Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot
     impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. See https://vicuna. lmsys. org (accessed 14 April
     2023), 2023.
 [9] Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei.
     Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information pro-
     cessing systems, 30, 2017.
[10] Mike Conover, Matt Hayes, Ankit Mathur, Jianwei Xie, Jun Wan, Sam
     Shah,  Ali Ghodsi,    Patrick Wendell, Matei Zaharia,  and Reynold Xin.
     Free dolly:  Introducing the world’s first truly open instruction-tuned llm,
     2023.          URL      https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/12/
     dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tuned-llm.
[11] Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Jipeng Zhang, Kashun
     Shum, and Tong Zhang. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model
     alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06767, 2023.
[12] Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
     Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for
     methods that learn from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14387, 2023.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[13] Xinyang Geng, Arnav Gudibande, Hao Liu, Eric Wallace, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and
     Dawn Song. Koala: A dialogue model for academic research. Blog post, April 2023. URL
     https://bair.berkeley.edu/blog/2023/04/03/koala/.
[14] Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. Chatgpt outperforms crowd-workers for
     text-annotation tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15056, 2023.
[15] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang,
     Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021.
[16] Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez,
     Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language
     models (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.
[17] Kimin Lee, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Craig Boutilier, Pieter
     Abbeel, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Aligning text-to-image models
     using human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12192, 2023.
[18] Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin,
     Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-
     following models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 2023.
[19] Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee,
     Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.
[20] Rensis Likert. A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of psychology, 1932.
[21] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
[22] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe,
     Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refine-
     ment with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023.
[23] Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
     pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-
     assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
[24] Stanford NLP. Stanfordnlp/shp · datasets at hugging face. URL https://huggingface.
     co/datasets/stanfordnlp/SHP.
[25] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
[26] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
     Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to
     follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     35:27730–27744, 2022.
[27] Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction
     tuning with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023.
[28] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and
     Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
[29] Keita Saito, Akifumi Wachi, Koki Wataoka, and Youhei Akimoto. Verbosity bias in preference
     labeling by large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10076, 2023.
[30] Jérémy Scheurer, Jon Ander Campos, Tomasz Korbak, Jun Shern Chan, Angelica Chen,
     Kyunghyun Cho, and Ethan Perez. Training language models with language feedback at scale.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16755, 2023.
[31] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal
     policy optimization algorithms, 2017.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[32] Weiyan Shi, Emily Dinan, Kurt Shuster, Jason Weston, and Jing Xu. When life gives you
     lemons, make cherryade: Converting feedback from bad responses into good labels. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2210.15893, 2022.
[33] Feifan Song, Bowen Yu, Minghao Li, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, Yongbin Li, and Houfeng Wang.
     Preference ranking optimization for human alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17492, 2023.
[34] Ziang Song, Tianle Cai, Jason D Lee, and Weijie J Su. Reward collapse in aligning large
     language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17608, 2023.
[35] Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec
     Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback.
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
[36] Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin,
     Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama
     model. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
[37] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Tim-
     othée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open
     and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[38] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
     Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open
     foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
[39] Amos Tversky. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological review, 76(1):31, 1969.
[40] Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei,
     Anjana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap,
     et al. Super-naturalinstructions: Generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+ nlp tasks.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.07705, 2022.
[41] Yizhong Wang, Hamish Ivison, Pradeep Dasigi, Jack Hessel, Tushar Khot, Khyathi Raghavi
     Chandu, David Wadden, Kelsey MacMillan, Noah A Smith, Iz Beltagy, et al. How far
     can camels go? exploring the state of instruction tuning on open resources. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2306.04751, 2023.
[42] Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi,
     and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instruc-
     tions, 2023.
[43] Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A
     Smith, Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained human feedback gives better
     rewards for language model training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01693, 2023.
[44] Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and
     Daxin Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12244, 2023.
[45] Kevin Yang, Dan Klein, Asli Celikyilmaz, Nanyun Peng, and Yuandong Tian. Rlcd: Rein-
     forcement learning from contrast distillation for language model alignment. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2307.12950, 2023.
[46] Da Yin, Xiao Liu, Fan Yin, Ming Zhong, Hritik Bansal, Jiawei Han, and Kai-Wei Chang.
     Dynosaur: A dynamic growth paradigm for instruction-tuning data curation, 2023.
[47] Weizhe Yuan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston. System-level natural language feedback,
     2023.
[48] Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, and Fei Huang. Rrhf:
     Rank responses to align language models with human feedback without tears. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2304.05302, 2023.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[49] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao
     Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-
     bench and chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A    L IMITATIONS

While there are many different ways to collect feedback, our focus is on relative and absolute feed-
back. Future work should explore the impact of collecting richer forms of feedback. Human feed-
back data is inherently subjective, and while we try to provide guidelines for annotators to evaluate
responses according to dimensions such as accuracy, coherence, and harmlessness, there will still be
noise even with multiple annotations for each example. Additionally, the collection of only absolute
scores or relative preferences does not fully capture all of the possible kinds of feedback that could
be collected. More rich forms of feedback data should be explored in future work.
Our analysis is primarily focused on the impact of different feedback collection methods on the
downstream performance of LMs as evaluated by win-rate against DaVinci-003. Future work should
investigate the impact of different feedback collection and conversion methods on helpfulness, harm-
fulness, and hallucinations. Different methods of feedback, including those beyond absolute and rel-
ative preferences, may have drastically differing effects on helpfulness, harmfulness, hallucinations
and other LM evaluation criteria.
Our human data is collected from Amazon Mechanical Turkers and is not necessarily representative
of all people. Future work should investigate the impact of feedback collection methods on align-
ment with different demographic (especially underrepresented) groups. Some methods of feedback
collection may amplify bias in the annotator demographics in the trained reward models more than
others. Additionally, while we focus on open-ended response domains, our findings on the impact
of different feedback collection methods may differ in more application specific domains such as
mathematical reasoning or coding tasks. For instance, in a mathematical proof task, binary feedback
may be more helpful since a step in a proof is always correct or incorrect.


B    D ETAILED R ELATED W ORK

Learning from Human Feedback. In a typical Reinforcement Learning setting, a policy is opti-
mized to maximize a reward function, which is explicitly defined by a human. [9] introduced the
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) framework, which initially learns a reward
model network from a dataset of human preferences. This reward model is then used to replace a
human-written reward function during RL optimization. [35] and [26] introduced an RLHF frame-
work for aligning LMs with human preferences. They first learn a reward model trained on rankings
of human feedback sampled from LM outputs, which is then used to optimize an LM with an RL
algorithm. In contrast, [33] and [28] bypass the learning of a reward model and directly tune an LM
using human preference data.
Learning from AI Feedback. While RLHF has shown promising results, the collection of human
preferences remains a significant cost for aligning language models. Prior work has demonstrated
that LMs are capable of providing feedback [16, 49, 12] that can be used to improve their own capa-
bilities [22, 1]. [4] introduced the Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF) framework,
which replaces the human feedback step of RLHF with an automatic AI feedback generation proce-
dure. Our work compares human feedback with AI feedback in both rankings and ratings settings.
Feedback Data Collection. While RLHF and RLAIF have proven to be highly effective methods
for aligning LLMs, additional challenges remain, including the optimization of feedback collection
and reward modeling [7]. Previous works have utilized both human and AI feedback in both ratings
[19, 17] and rankings [35, 26, 37, 12] settings on machine-written responses [3] and human-written
responses [24]. However, there has not been work that systematically compares the effects of col-
lecting ratings versus rankings feedback. While prior works have investigated the use of rich forms
of feedback such as fine-grained feedback [43] and system-level natural language feedback [47],
the focus of our work is solely on ratings and rankings feedback. Finally, inconsistency has been
explored before in terms of intransitivity in human preferences [39] and (dis-)agreements arising
among different annotators when providing feedback on a single entity. However, our work focuses
on the (dis-)agreements between the different feedback protocols.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     C OMPOSITION OF THE I NSTRUCTIONS DATA
We collect a diverse set of instructions from varied sources:

      1. Dolly [10]: We randomly select a subset of 4K out of 15K high-quality human-generated
         prompts and response pairs.
      2. Self-Instruct (User Oriented) [42]: It is a set of 252 expert-written instructions.
      3. Super-NI [40]: Originally, it contains 1600+ NLP tasks with their expert-written task-
         descriptions. In our work, we select a subset of 100 dense NLP tasks such as ‘question
         generation based on a given scenario’ instead of the ones that require just ‘yes/no’ answer
         (Appendix §Q). Subsequently, we randomly select 10 instances for every task.

The composition of the instruction data is presented in Table 3.

                   Instructions Composition
                   # of instructions from Dolly                             4K
                   # of instructions from Self-Instruct (User Oriented)     252
                   # of instructions from Super-NI                          1K
                   # of generations per instruction                          5
                   Feedback Composition (GPT-3.5-Turbo)
                   # of instances w/ Ratings                               24.6K
                   # of instances w/ Pairwise Rankings                     46.5K
                   Feedback Composition (Humans)
                   # of instances w/ Ratings                                 4K
                   # of instances w/ Pairwise Rankings                       2K

Table 3: Feedback data statistics. We create a set of instructions that are used to prompt Alpaca for
response generation. Subsequently, we acquire feedback on those responses from humans and AI.


D     F EEDBACK ACQUISITION FROM H UMANS
Firstly, we randomly select a subset of 500 from 46.5K from the GPT-3.5-Turbo rankings feedback
data. We use this data to create 1000 instances for ratings protocol annotations (one instance of
pairwise rankings contributes towards two instances of individual ratings to the responses). We
utilize annotators in the Amazon Mechanical Turk platform for our task. Before the qualifications,
the annotators are shown a few solved examples for both protocols. Post-qualifications, a total of 26
annotators participated in the annotation where 13 annotators were used for the ratings and rankings
feedback each. The annotators were paid an hourly wage of $18/hour. The overall cost for human
annotations was $1000. We assign each instance of the feedback data to four workers. In summary,
we have 2000 rankings feedback (= 500 instances × 4 workers per instance) and 4000 ratings (=1000
instances × 4 workers per instance) from human annotators.

E     VARIATION IN C ONSISTENCY S CORES WITH A NNOTATORS
E.1   H UMAN A NNOTATORS

In Table 2b, the consistency analysis is performed by aggregating the preferences of three random
annotators (out of four). To understand the effect of different batch of humans, we calculate the
consistency scores for a different batch of randomly selected 3 annotators four times. We find that
the standard deviation of the inconsistency analysis for four splits of the humans evaluators is 1.6%.
This indicates that the inconsistency analysis is robust to the batch of humans used for annotation.

E.2   AI A NNOTATOR

In our main experiments, we use GPT-3.5-Turbo (temperature = 0.0) for the consistency analysis. To
provide more evidence for the same model using a different temperatures – 0.0, 0.2 and 0.5 for 1000


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


comparisons. We find that the standard deviation in the disagreements between these temperatures is
2.7%. This indicates that the inconsistency analysis is also robust to the different model temperatures
used for generating feedback data.
In addition, we experiment with other models for inconsistency analysis i.e., GPT-3.5-Turbo-0613
and GPT-4 with 50. The inconsistency results for these models are presented in Table 4.

                 Model                                                   Inconsistency
                 ChatGPT-3.5-Turbo-Temperature=0 (Default=Ours)              58%
                 ChatGPT-3.5-Turbo-Temperature=0.5                           56%
                 ChatGPT-3.5-Turbo-0613                                      54%
                 GPT-4                                                       50%

                     Table 4: Inconsistency analysis with varying AI annotators.

The standard error for the above numbers is 4% with 95% confidence. We find that all the model
choices suffer from the inconsistency problem. This indicates that our results are not restricted by
the choice of the AI annotator, and are indeed observable in different models too.

F       PAIRWISE R ATING
We acquired feedback data using a third protocol i.e., pairwise rating. Given a pair of responses,
provide a rating score [1-7] to both of them. This is different from our initial rating protocol where
the ratings were collected individually on the responses. We convert this newly collected pairwise
rating response to a ranking form by comparing the scores given the pair of responses. For example,
if Response 1 got 7 and Response 2 got 5, we consider Response 1 ¿ Response 2. We compare the
consistency of this pairwise rating data (converted to ranking) with our initial rating feedback data.
We find that even these feedback protocols suffer an inconsistency of 58% on 500 comparisons. It
also highlights that the rating collected in a pairwise manner (akin to ranking format) is not calibrated
with the rating collected for the responses individually. This can be attributed to the fact that the
annotators focus on the different response quality attributes when providing pairwise feedback and
independent feedback.

G       S ETUP
Reward Modeling. We choose low-rank adaptation [15] (LoRA) of Alpaca-7B as the reward
model.2 We use the objective function defined in Eq. 2 to train the reward model on the rank-
ings feedback data. Similar to [26], a single batch only contains all the pairs of candidate responses
for a particular instruction. Further, 70% of the feedback data is used for training and the rest is for
validation. We provide more details on the training settings in Appendix §K. We train the reward
models on the rankings and ratings feedback for 5 epochs with early stopping where the validation
loss is the criteria. We train each reward model for three random seeds.

Evaluation. Post-training, we evaluate the models on 553 unseen instructions, which includes
188 instructions from the Open Assistant (OASST) evaluation, 129 from the helpful evaluation
released by Anthropic [3], 80 from Vicuna evaluation [8], and 156 from Koala evaluation [13].
We employ a Best-of-n (n = 64) policy to evaluate the effect of various feedback data on model
alignment. For this, we first generate n candidate responses of length 200 from the SFT model
(Alpaca-7B) with the unseen instructions. Subsequently, the output of Best-of-n would be the one
that achieves the maximum score with the trained reward model. Finally, we compute the win-rate
of the SFT model and the Best-of-n policies against DaVinci-003 (reference model) on these unseen
instructions. Here, we use the DaVinci-003 responses collected in AlpacaEval [18]. Here, we vary
the choice of the feedback protocols as ratings and rankings during evaluation and the choice of
the annotators as humans and ChatGPT-3.5-Turbo. Each pairwise comparison or response rating is
performed by a crowd-worker, where we paid $18 per hour for the annotations. We spent $1000 on
collecting evaluation annotations from humans.
    2
        https://github.com/tloen/alpaca-lora


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Computing Win-rates. Post-alignment, we evaluate the Best-of-n policies (ratings, rankings)
against a reference model on a set of unseen user instructions U. Since we aim to understand
the effect of the choice of the feedback acquisition protocol on the complete alignment pipeline, we
collect ratings and rankings for the responses from the alignment policy and the reference models
from humans and AI as annotators. We compute the win-rate against the reference model as the
fraction of instances for which the Best-of-n policy response is preferred over the reference model
under a particular feedback protocol. In case of a ‘tie’ judgment by the annotators, both the policy
and reference model get half a point. Formally, we define per-example score for rankings as

                                             
                                             1         r(u, yP , yF ) = yP
                             E(u, yP , yF ) = 0.5       r(u, yP , yF ) = tie                         (5)
                                             
                                              0         r(u, yP , yF ) = yF

and for ratings as

                                            
                                            1          a(u, yP ) > a(u, yF )
                            E(u, yP , yF ) = 0.5        a(u, yP ) = a(u, yF )                        (6)
                                            
                                              0         a(u, yP ) < a(u, yF )

where u ∈ U is the unseen input instruction, yP = Pn (gθ , pθ , u, {v1 , . . . , vn }) is output from the
Best-of-n policy that leverages the rankings reward model, yF is the response from the reference
model, r(u, yP , yF ) is the preference between the pair of responses decided by the annotator. Win-
rate metric w is computed as the average per-example score:

                                             1 X
                                      w=         E(u, yP , yF )                                      (7)
                                            |U|
                                                u∈U



H    A NALYSIS OF THE R ESPONSE L ENGTH AND N UMBER OF U NIQUE W ORDS

We assess whether the length or number of unique words in the candidate responses bias the ratings
and rankings feedback judgments from humans and AI in our data. We present the results for such
assessment in the ratings and rankings feedback in Appendix Table 5 and 6 respectively. In summary,
we find that there is no discernible difference between the average length and average number of
unique tokens of the preferred and unpreferred response in the rankings feedback collected from the
humans and AI.
In Table 5, we find that the ratings scores assigned to the individual responses do not increase with
the average length and the average number of unique words in the response for both humans and AI.
Similarly in Table 6, we find that there is no discernible difference between the average length and
average number of unique tokens of the preferred and unpreferred response in the rankings feedback
collected from the humans and AI. This highlights that our feedback data is unbiased towards longer
and unique responses, and the differences observed from the prior works might be attributed to
differences in the experimental setups.
We clarify that our setup is not biased towards the response lengths. However, it does not imply
that humans do not prefer longer responses, in general. [49] mentioned verbosity bias examined
verbosity bias when using LLMs to collect feedback data by constructing a repetitive list attack in
which responses with a list were prepended with a paraphrased version of the list (generated by GPT-
4) which contains no new information. For example, model A has two pointer responses and model
B has the same two pointers + their paraphrased versions (which does not add any new information),
the annotators prefer model B response. We believe that this setting largely differs from our setting
since we consider two different responses with no further intervention such as a repetition attack.
Similarly, [29] talks about verbosity bias in preference labeling from humans and AI for creative
writing tasks. In our work, we consider a broad range of instructions sourced from 3 datasets as
discussed in Table 3.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           2       3       4        5       6      7
                      Humans              45.4    49.7    48.9     46.3    47.7   48.3
                      GPT-3.5-Turbo       32.4    45.2    41.5      47     48.7   46.7
                                         (a) Average response length
                                           2       3       4        5       6      7
                      Humans              34.2    36.6    36.6     35.7    36.7   37.1
                      GPT-3.5-Turbo        25     34.4    31.4     35.8    37.5   36.5
                                    (b) Average number of unique words

      Table 5: Analysis to study the length or number of unique tokens bias for ratings feedback.

                        Preferred    Unpreferred                              Preferred    Unpreferred
         Human            49.5            49.5               Human                37.8         37.7
      GPT-3.5-Turbo       49.0            50.2            GPT-3.5-Turbo           37.8         38.0
          (a) Average length of the responses                    (b) Average number of unique words

Table 6: Analysis to study the bias towards longer responses (number of whitespace words not
the subword tokens) or responses with most unique number of whitespace words not the subword
tokens. These numbers are calculated for 1800 comparisons from GPT-3.5-Turbo and Humans.


I     LLM P ROMPT FOR F EEDBACK ACQUISITION

We present the LLM prompts for acquiring rating and ranking feedback from GPT-3.5-Turbo in
Table 4 and Table 5.


J     H UMAN E XPERIMENTS WITH UI S CREENSHOTS

We provide the same annotation guidelines to the humans as the AI models. We present the user
interface screenshots for the feedback acquisition in Figure 6 and 7. The screenshots contain a
explanation form which is present only during the qualitative analysis of the feedback data, while it
is removed during large-scale feedback acquisition.

J.1    F INE - GRAINED A NALYSIS OF C ONSISTENT AND I NCONSISTENT DATA

We perform fine-grained experiments to understand the difference between consistent and inconsis-
tent subsets of the feedback data from humans and AI.

Difference in the Ratings. Our aim is to quantify the average ratings difference for the pair of
candidate responses that receive a decisive preference (either of ‘response 1’ or ‘response 2’ but not
‘equal’) from the ratings feedback data. Specifically, we focus on Row 2 and Row 3 of Table 2a
and 2b. Within these rows, (a) the combination of the (Col 2 - Row 2, Col 3 - Row 3) represents
the consistent instances where both forms of feedback are decisive, (b) the combination of the (Col
2 - Row 3, Col 3 - Row 2) represents the inconsistent decisive instances, and (c) Col 1 represents
the scenario where the rankings feedback is indecisive. We report the average ratings difference
between the scores achieved by the instances belonging to the category (a), (b), and (c) in Table 7a.
We find that the maximum average ratings score difference is achieved by the consistent instances
for human annotators as well as GPT-3.5-Turbo. This indicates that the quantitative gap between the
pair of candidate responses belonging to the consistent instances is higher than the pair of responses
belonging to the inconsistent instances, which further highlights that the difference in the quality of
the two responses in a consistent instance is more distinguishable than in an inconsistent instance.
In addition, we observe that the average ratings score difference for the inconsistent instances is
similar when the rankings feedback is decisive and indecisive with ratings feedback being decisive
(Column 2 and 3), for both human and AI annotators. This hints towards the potential qualitative
closeness in the pair of responses that causes them to receive decisive ratings feedback but contra-


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 As a helpful assistant, you possess extensive knowledge about human feedback and understand how a human would rate an output
 sentence completion or response based on the given instruction. Your job is to provide an ”Ratings” that falls only into one of the
 following categories: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], based on the overall quality of the completion. Here, a score of 1 indicates that the output
 is terrible and completely useless and/or can cause real damage, and a score of 7 indicates a perfect completion where you cannot
 think of a way to make it better.

 ####Annotation Guideline

 Please keep in mind that your score should take into consideration the following quality dimensions:

 Accuracy: The output sentence should be factually consistent with the instruction and the input.
 Coherence: The output sentence should be easy to understand and free of grammatical errors when read on its own.
 Harmlessness: The output sentence should not contain derogatory, harmful, or toxic connotations.

 ##Example 1

 ##Instruction 1:
 Tell me if the following foods would be safe or unsafe to someone with a nut allergy to eat? Peanut butter, eggs, apples, carrots,
 pad thai.

 ##Response 1:
 Peanut butter: Unsafe
 Eggs: Unsafe
 Apples: Unsafe
 Carrots: Unsafe
 Pad Thai: Unsafe
 ##Ratings:
 2
 I would give it a score in the lower rung since (a) it gives incorrect answer for some cases. (b) looks like the AI repeats its
 output. © the answer does not seem convincing since there are no explanations and as a human I can improve the answer with
 explanations.

 ##Example 2

 ##Instruction 2:
 What is a lakehouse?

 ##Response 2:
 A lakehouse is a type of real estate that is situated near a lake, stream, or other form of large body of water. It is typically a
 single-family residence or a hotel, and often has its own beach, docks, and boat launch. Lakehouses provide a scenic, outdoor
 lifestyle experience, often with many amenities, including swimming, fishing, kayaking, boating, sailing, water skiing, and bird
 watching.

 ##Ratings:
 7
 I would give it a score in the higher rung since I could not think of a better way to improve the answer.

 ##Annotation starts below

 You should first think step-by-step and then provide an ”Ratings” among [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].

 ##Example 3

 ##Instruction 3:
 instruction

 ##Response 3:
 response

 ##Ratings:

                           Figure 4: GPT-3.5-Turbo API prompt for rating responses.


                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You are a helpful following assistant whose goal is to select the preferred (least wrong) output for a given instruction. Answer the question by printing
 only a single choice from [”Output (a)”, ”Output (b)”] (without quotes) corresponding to the correct answer with no other text.

 ## Annotation Guideline
 In this task, we will ask you to select the preferred output AI model’s responses to instructions.

 You will read a examples, which are composed of the following:

 1. an Instruction we give to the AI system
 2. Output (a), the first output from the AI system
 3. Output (b), the second output from the AI system
 Your task is to decide which response is better for each example. There are several dimensions that you can think along. Consider the following
 dimensions:

 Accuracy: The output sentence should be factually consistent with the instruction and the input.
 Coherence: The output sentence should be easy to understand and free of grammatical errors when read on its own.
 Harmlessness: The output sentence should not contain derogatory, harmful, or toxic connotations.

 ## Annotation Example
 To help you understand the annotation task, we provide some examples below.
 I will give an explanation for the correct answer, but you should only answer with the preferred output.

 ## Example 1

 ## Instruction 1:
 Write a design document to describe the following mobile game idea: A battle royale game with a superhero and villain theme.

 ## Output (a) for example 1:
 Design Document for a Mobile Game Idea:

 1. Introduction:
 A battle royale game with a superhero and villain theme.
 2. Game Play:
 The game is played on a ... superpowers to wreak havoc or use their villainsy to their own advantage.
 3. Rewards:
 As players compete in the battle .. the rest as well.
 ## Output (b) for example 1:
 The newly launched mobile game offers a thrilling battle royale ... a visually appealing plot to keep the players engaged until the very end.

 ## Which is best for example 1, Output (a) or Output (b)?:
 Output (a)
 Indeed, Output (a) is a design document as asked in the instruction and gives more useful details than Output (b).

 ## Example 2

 ## Instruction 2:
 Generate a to-do list with 5 tasks related to keeping a neat room

 ## Output (a) for example 1:
 Make beds
 Organize closet
 Shoot some hole in the walls
 Dust lamps and furniture
 Tidy drawers and shelves
 ## Output (b) for example 2:
 chores:
 1. Clean up after yourself and put clean clothes away.
 2. Make sure all electronics are decommissioned before leaving the house.
 3. Remove all personal items and clutter from your room.
 4. Vacuum and mop the floor.
 5. Tidy up your desk and put all inboxes on hold.

 ## Which is best for example 2, Output (a) or Output (b)?:
 Output (b)
 User explanation: Output (b) is better because Output (a) adds to the to do list ”Shoot some hole in the walls”, which is not related to tidying a room

 ## Annotation starts below
 ## Example 3

 ## Instruction 3:
 instruction

 ## Output (a) for example 3:
 output 1

 ## Output (b) for example 3:
 output 2

 ## Which is best for example 3, Output (a) or Output (b)?:


                              Figure 5: GPT-3.5-Turbo API prompt for ranking responses.


                                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Figure 6: Screenshot for rating feedback acquisition with explanations.


dictory rankings feedback in the annotation process. We will explore this hypothesis more through
a rankings variation analysis next.
                Consistent          Inconsistent      Inconsistent                   Rankings Variation Score
            Ratings & Rankings   Ratings & Rankings     Ratings
                 Decisive             Decisive          Decisive                        (Human Feedback)
  Human            1.58                 1.28              1.29        Consistent               0.50
  GPT-3.5          1.22                 1.12              1.12        Inconsistent             0.36
(a) Difference in the ratings feedback scores when rankings          (b) Variation in the rankings feedback for
feedback is decisive.                                                consistent and inconsistent examples.

Table 7: Quantitative analysis of the differences between the consistent and inconsistent subsets of
the feedback data acquired from humans and AI.


Variation in the Rankings. Due to the closeness in the perceived quality of the pair of responses
belonging to the inconsistent instances, we posit that the human annotators prefer specific quality
factors over the others (e.g., focus on accuracy more than the coherence) during decisive decision
making. Conversely, we expect the variation in human rankings to be lower when one of the re-
sponses is perceived to be qualitatively superior. To test this hypothesis, we utilize the dataset
comprising 500 rankings feedback instances, each with four human annotations. In the dataset, an-
notations favoring ‘response 1’ are marked as ‘+1’, those favoring ‘response 2’ are marked as ‘-1’,
and annotations indicating ‘equal’ preference are marked as ‘0’. For each instance, we calculate the
ratings sum of the four human preference markings. A low score on an instance suggests that the


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Figure 7: Screenshot for ranking feedback acquisition with explanations.



pair of candidate responses are considered ‘close’ by the annotators, leading to an equal likelihood
of selecting ‘equal’ or either of the two responses. Finally, we compute the average variation in the
rankings feedback for both the consistent and inconsistent instances separately.
The results of our analysis are presented in Table 7b. To quantify average variation in annotator
feedback of a single example, we define a variation score metric. For each example, we take the sum
of the score for each annotator’s label. Prefer response 1, prefer response 2, and equal preference are
given scores of 1, -1, and 0 respectively. This per-example score is averaged over the entire dataset
to compute the variation score. We find that the consistent instances achieve a higher variation score
(0.5) as compared to the inconsistent instances in the human feedback data (0.36). This observation
supports our hypothesis that inconsistent instances are qualitatively close to each other.



K    T RAINING S ETTINGS

We train the reward models on the rankings and ratings feedback data for 5 epochs with early stop-
ping at the end of every epoch. We use the validation loss for early stopping. We train the reward
models on a single Nvidia RTX A6000 GPU with 48GB VRAM.
The reward models optimized using equation 2 are trained with an effective batch size = 16 where
the batch size = 4 and the number of gradient accumulation steps = 4. Here, each batch contains
all the pairs of candidate responses for a given instruction. Since we have 5 candidate responses for
a given instruction in the feedback data, we get 10 pairs of candidate responses (5 choose 2) in a
batch. The reward models optimized using equation 1 are trained with an effective batch size = 64
where the batch size = 16 and the number of gradient accumulation steps = 4.
Both the reward models use the AdamW optimizer [21] with a linear warmup of 100 steps to a
maximum learning rate followed by a cosine decay. We perform a hyperparameter search over
{1e − 4, 1e − 5, 1e − 6} for maximum learning rate. We find that 1e − 4 for Alpaca-LoRA reward
model architecture. We also apply a weight decay of 0.001 to all the reward models and train them
at fp16 precision.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  OASST            Best-of-64 (Rating)     Best-of-64 (Ranking)
                  Ranking Eval             46.7                     52.6
                  Rating Eval              47.0                     43.5
                  Vicuna           Best-of-64 (Rating)     Best-of-64 (Ranking)
                  Ranking Eval             48.6                     54.3
                  Rating Eval              44.3                     38.1
                  Helpful Base     Best-of-64 (Rating)     Best-of-64 (Ranking)
                  Ranking Eval             45.1                     48.8
                  Rating Eval              47.0                     46.8

                      Table 8: Task-specific evaluation inconsistency results.


L    TASK - SPECIFIC R ESULTS

In §5.2, we presented the evaluation inconsistency on the 553 instructions from AlpacaEval. In
Table 8, we aim to assess the evaluation inconsistency on specific tasks.
We find that the evaluation inconsistency is present across various tasks. Specifically, the rating
evaluation protocol favors the rating best-of-64 policy and vice-versa. This highlights that feedback
acquisition protocol biases evaluation.


M    R EJECTION S AMPLING F INETUNING (RSFT)

We performed an additional experiment with rejection sampling finetuning (RSFT) used in three
highly cited LLM alignment papers, including LLaMA 2 [38, 4, 48] Specifically, our setup is as
follows:

     1. We prompt Alpaca-7B with 5K instructions from Alpaca-52K data.
     2. We generate 64 responses for every instruction.
     3. We use our rating and ranking reward model (LoRA-Alpaca) to select the best response
        from the 64 responses.
     4. We finetune two Alpaca-7B models with the 5K instruction-responses data.
         (a) One where the responses are chosen from the rating reward model.
         (b) Second where the responses are chosen from the ranking reward model.
     5. Post finetuning, we sample a single response from the finetuned Alpaca-7B with 553 eval-
        uation instructions.
     6. We calculate the win-rate against DaVinci003 using the rating and ranking protocol using
        ChatGPT.

The results for this experiment where baseline is the base Alpaca-7B model are presented in Table
9.

                                     Baseline    RSFT (Rating)      RSFT (Ranking)
              Ranking Evaluation      36.9           42.0                43.3
              Rating Evaluation       41.9           44.0                43.0

Table 9: Evaluation inconsistency in the RSFT setup. Each entry is the win-rate against davinci-003
on 553 unseen instructions.

We find that the evaluation inconsistency persists under this alignment algorithm too. It indicates
that the choice of feedback protocol for the evaluation favors the same feedback protocol used for
training the reward models and subsequently finetuning the base LLM.


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N    U SING RO BERTA-L ARGE AS R EWARD M ODEL

Prior works [26, 12] use decoder-only architecture for the reward model. These models are normally
at a scale of 10-100 billion parameters and harder to train in the compute efficient manner without
engineering tricks. Hence, we chose Alpaca-7B in our setup, and LoRA is just a method to finetune
it in a parameter efficient manner. On the other hand, [34] have used BERT encoder models, which
usually have less parameters, say 500M-1B parameters. Finetuning BERT models achieve very good
performance on many NLP tasks. Hence, we repeat train reward models on the RoBERTA-Large
architecture.
Specifically, we finetune a RoBERTA-Large model on the ratings data using the regression loss.
In addition, we train another RoBERTA-Large model on the rankings data using the negative log
likelihood loss. We use these two finetuned models to perform Best-of-64 policy. Subsequently, we
use GPT-3.5-Turbo to provide rating and ranking feedback for the rating/ranking Best-of-64 policy.
We present the results in Table 10.

                                       Best-of-64 (Rating)     Best-of-64 (Ranking)
                Rating Evaluation            47.70%                   42.00%
                Ranking Evaluation           43.90%                   47.30%

Table 10: Evaluation inconsistency when RoBERTA-Large models are used as reward models in-
stead of Alpaca-7B model. Each entry is the win-rate against davinci-003 on 553 instructions.

We find that the evaluation inconsistency still persists if we change the choice of the reward model.
Specifically, the rating evaluation protocol favors the rating best-of-64 policy and vice-versa. This
highlights that feedback acquisition protocol biases evaluation. We will add these additional results
in the revised paper.


O    C ONVERTING R ATING F EEDBACK INTO R ANKING F ORMAT FOR R EWARD
     T RAINING

In our work, we established that the feedback data obtained from humans and AI suffers from
inconsistency problems. We believe that our work is unique as it shows that this has a direct impact
on the alignment and evaluation of LLMs through empirical evidence.
The choice of reward models was naturally made to reflect the nature of the feedback protocol.
Specifically, the rating protocol provides us with a scalar score hence the regression model makes
sense, and the ranking protocol does not provide us with scalar scores hence we use a negative log
likelihood (NLL) objective function.
We observe that 57.4% of the pairwise comparisons are considered “equal” when we convert the
rating data into the ranking format (Row 1 of Table 2b). In practice, this means that we need to filter
almost 60% of the rating data if we want to train a ranking format reward model. This is not the
most optimal way to use the rating data when we know that a better regression method exists that
can utilize the complete data. Hence, we train a regression reward model in our original setup.
We train two reward models, of RoBERTA-Large architecture, on (a) ranking data with NLL loss
and (b) rating data converted to ranking with NLL loss. We perform Best-of-n sampling with n = 64
We evaluate the model’s win-rate against davinci-003 with a rating and ranking evaluation scheme.
We present the results in Table 11.

                          Best-of-64 (Ranking)         Best-of-64 (Rating Data Ranking Format)
 Ranking Evaluation               47.3%                                   45%
 Rating Evaluation                42.0%                                   46%

Table 11: Evaluation Inconsistency in pairwise rating feedback data collection. Each entry repre-
sents the win-rate against davinci-003.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We highlight that the evaluation inconsistency is still evident when the data format used for training
the reward models is kept identical. This indicates that our finding is not confounded by the reward
model’s data format but the nature of the feedback protocol data itself i.e., rating and ranking.

P    Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES WITH H UMAN E XPLANATIONS
We perform qualitative analysis with human annotators. The group of annotators that provide rat-
ing/ranking with explanations is mutually exclusive. In total, we consider a subset of 50 instructions
and 100 responses (2 responses per instruction) from our dataset. In addition, we assign 3 annotators
per rating/ranking instance. The humans are provided the same annotation guidelines as before but
they are asked to provide an explanation for their annotation too. We provide them 2 solved exam-
ples of how the explanations could look like. We intended to keep the human explanations free from
any biases from the authors, hence, we instructed the humans to provide their explanation based on
their perception of the response quality.
We present a few qualitative examples with explanations from the human annotators in Table 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, and 17.
In Table 12, we observe that the annotators responsible for rankings favored ‘response 2’ due to its
density, while perceiving ‘response 1’ as dull. At the same, despite these divergent preferences, the
individual responses received conflicting rating scores: ‘response 2’ incurred a substantial penalty
for its density and perceived non-compliance with task instructions, whereas ‘response 1’ garnered
an average score for only a partial adherence to the guidelines.
Table 13 contains another pair of responses where ratings and rankings feedback were inconsis-
tent. Both responses provide decent answers to the instructions. Explanations of rankings feedback
highlighted the differences between the responses, including that the rejected response was “a bit
unnatural” compared to the chosen response. On the other hand, explanations of ratings feedback
mainly provided insights into why each response was good and thus received a high score. These ob-
servations suggest that the inconsistency problem arises from systematic variations in the annotator
preferences with the differences in the nature of the feedback protocol.
Table 15 contains an example where rankings and ratings data are consistent with each other. The
instruction asks for a question such that every item in a list of given inputs is a correct and reasonable
answer to the question. The explanations for ratings feedback for the response 2 which contained
a correct response were very simple, usually just indicating that the instruction was followed. The
explanations for ratings feedback for response 1, which contained a much worse response, which
did not follow the instruction typically contained a short description of a single thing that was wrong
with the response such as not following part of the instructions or some logical or factual error. The
explanations for rankings feedback contained more detailed analysis of the differences between the
two responses and tended to be longer than explnations for ratings feedback. Response 2 being
better than response 1 is reflected in the much higher ratings score for response 2. The size of this
difference is not captured by rankings feedback.
Table 16 contains another example where ratings and consistent feedback is consistent. The instruc-
tion asks for a factual answer to a simple question. Response 1 provides the correct answer and
response 2 provides an incorrect answer. For very straightforward, short responses, both rankings
and ratings feedback explanations are similar indicating that response 1 is correct while response 2
is incorrect. This straightforward difference is reflected in the very large ratings score gap between
the two responses.

Q    L IST OF TASKS FROM S UPER NI- V 2
The list of Super-Natural Instructions [40] tasks used in the feedback data are presented in Table 18.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Example 1: Both responses do not complete the task fully.
    Instruction: You need to create a question containing a blank ( ), based on the given
    context word. Your question must contain two persons –PersonX and PersonY. The expected
    answer to your question must be PersonX. PersonX and PersonY should not be equally
    likely to fill the blank. There should be an agreed upon answer to fill in the blank. Your
    question must contain at least 15 and at most 30 words. You must utilize the given context
    word while writing the question. Your question must contain only one blank. Make sure
    that Person X and Person Y have the same gender. In your question, PersonX and PersonY
    should be used only ONCE and PersonX should appear earlier than PersonY.

    Input: Context Word is ‘peeling’

    Response 1: Person X and Person Y are peeling an orange together. Who is better at
    peeling oranges, person X or person Y? (Person X should be considered the expert in this
    scenario).

    Response 2: PersonX and PersonY are peeling an orange. PersonX has a knife with which
    he/she is peeling the orange. PersonY is talking to PersonX and is asking for a sip of juice
    from the orange. PersonX is saying no, and PersonY smiles sheepishly. PersonX eventually
    gives in and they both sip the juice from the orange. Who is peeling the orange? PersonX

    Rankings Feedback: Response 2
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1 w/ preference for Response 1: “Neither question contains a blank, but I picked
    response A as response B explicitly answers the question within the question’s own text.”
    Annotator 2 w/ preference for Response 2: “Response B makes more sense and the ques-
    tion is easily answered.”
    Annotator 3 w/ preference for Response 2: “B manages to make a riddle out of it. A is kind
    of boring in comparison.”

    Ratings Feedback for Response 1: Score 4
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1′ w/ Score 4: “Response is relevant to the input, but only partially follows com-
    plicated instructions. no errors or harm. ”
    Annotator 2′ w/ Score 4: “It doesn’t include a ( ), and though the answer to the question
    is Person X, it gave the answer away. Person X & Y are otherwise equally likely to be the
    correct answer.”
    Annotator 3′ w/ Score 5: “There is 1 answer, but the structure of the response doesn’t fit
    the instructions. ”
    Ratings Feedback for Response 2: Score 2
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1′′ w/ Score 2: “This does not meet the task structure requirements, and both
    Person X and Person Y are peeling oranges. ”
    Annotator 2′′ w/ Score 1: “I gave it the lowest score because: (1) PersonX and PersonY
    was used more than once; (2) the expected answer is not just PersonX, but can also be
    PersonY; (3) word count is greater than 15 - 30 words.”
    Annotator 3′′ w/ Score 2:“Everything is wrong with it... ”Person X” and ”Person Y” are
    used a lot more than once, either of them could be the answer, the question is not fill-in-
    the-blank or 15-30 words, etc. ”

           Table 12: Example explanation for samples with inconsistent feedback data


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Example 2: Both responses provide decent answers to the instruction.
    Instruction: Provided the input sentence, you’re expected to write a question that involves
    event ”frequency”, which refers to how often an event is likely to be repeated. For example,
    ”taking showers” typically occurs 5 times a week, ”going to Saturday market” usually
    happens every few weeks/months, etc. Don’t create questions which have explicit mentions
    of answers in the text. Instead, it has to be implied from what is given. In other words,
    we want you to use ”instinct” or ”common sense”. Also, the written questions are not
    required to have a single correct answer.

    Input: Sentence: His counter-attack with Dayak warriors drove the Chinese out of Bau
    and across the Sarawak border.

    Response 1: How often was his counter-attack with Dayak warriors likely to happen?

    Response 2: How frequently did the Dayak warriors counter-attack the Chinese in Bau?

    Rankings Feedback: Response 1
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1 w/ preference for Response 1: “A does not contain the flagged word. ”
    Annotator 2 w/ preference for Response 2: “While both responses are a bit unnatural, B
    fits more closely with the input text in that it asks about this historical event, rather than
    asking for speculation about the future, as response A does. ”
    Annotator 3 w/ preference for Response 1: “response A fulfils all the instructions given
    which makes it better as option B made mention of answers in the text ”
    Ratings Feedback for Response 1: Score 6
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1′ w/ Score 6: “This question is relevant to the input and it follows the instruc-
    tion of having to do with frequency.”
    Annotator 2′ w/ Score 7: “This response follows the rules and is easy to understand. ”
    Annotator 3′ w/ Score 5: “It is a question that involves frequency, but I’m not sure it’s one
    that can be answered based on instinct or common sense. Though, the input sentence
    doesn’t leave many options.”
    Ratings Feedback for Response 2: Score 7
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1′′ w/ Score 7: “This response meets the task requirements.”
    Annotator 2′′ w/ Score 6: “question is about frequency, followed directions”
    Annotator 3′′ w/ Score 7:“Question properly seeks frequency of the event.”

           Table 13: Example explanation for samples with inconsistent feedback data


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Example 3: Both responses are similar in quality
 Instruction: What is Age of Empires?

 Input: Age of Empires is a series of historical real-time strategy video games, originally developed by Ensemble Studios and
 published by Xbox Game Studios. The first game was Age of Empires, released in 1997. Nine total games within the series have
 been released so far as of October 28, 2021. Age of Empires focused on events in Europe, Africa and Asia, spanning from the Stone
 Age to the Iron Age; the expansion game explored the formation and expansion of the Roman Empire. The sequel, Age of Empires
 II: The Age of Kings, was set in the Middle Ages, while its expansion focused partially on the Spanish conquest of the Aztec
 Empire. The subsequent three games of Age of Empires III explored the early modern period, when Europe was colonizing the
 Americas and several Asian nations were on the decline. Another installment, Age of Empires Online, takes a different approach
 as a free-to-play online game utilizing Games for Windows Live. A spin-off game, Age of Mythology, was set in the same period
 as the original Age of Empires, but focused on mythological elements of Greek, Egyptian, and Norse mythology. The fourth main
 installment in the series, Age of Empires IV, was released on October 28, 2021. The Age of Empires series has been a commercial
 success, selling over 25 million copies. Critics have credited part of the success of the series to its historical theme and fair play;
 the artificial intelligence (AI) players have fewer advantages than in many of the series’ competitors.

 Response 1: Age of Empires is a series of real-time strategy video games set in various time periods throughout history, originally
 developed by Ensemble Studios and published by Xbox Game Studios. The series has been critically successful, selling over 25
 million copies. Each game in the series is set in a different time period, focusing on events in Europe, Africa, and Asia, and
 the expansion games explore the expansion of various civilizations. The AI players in the series were praised for having fewer
 advantages than in many of its competitors. Most recently, Age of Empires IV was released on October 28, 20

 Response 2: Age of Empires is a series of historical real-time strategy video games, originally developed by Ensemble Studios
 and published by Xbox Game Studios. The first game was Age of Empires, released in 1997. Nine total games within the series
 have been released so far as of October 28, 2021. Age of Empires focused on events in Europe, Africa and Asia, spanning from
 the Stone Age to the Iron Age; the expansion game explored the formation and expansion of the Roman Empire. The sequel, Age
 of Empires II: The Age of Kings, was set in the Middle Ages, while its expansion focused partially on the Spanish conquest of the
 Aztec Empire. The subsequent three games of Age of Empires III explored the early modern period, when Europe was colonizing
 the Americas and several Asian nations were on the decline. Another installment, Age of Empires Online, takes

 Rankings Feedback: Response 2
 Explanations:
 Annotator 1 w/ preference for Response 2: “I feel response B gives a more complete answer, giving pertinent details on many of
 the titles from the franchise. Response A doesn’t contain as much relevant/interesting info. ”
 Annotator 2 w/ preference for Response 2: “’option b is more informative, its a summary that contains all the useful and informa-
 tive details from the input.”
 Annotator 3 w/ preference for Response 2: “Response B has more in depth information from the input.”
 Ratings Feedback for Response 1: Score 5
 Explanations:
 Annotator 1′ w/ Score 4: “The response is on topic but isn’t complete. It does not end on a complete sentence.”
 Annotator 2′ w/ Score 6: “lots of detail but could be phrased a little better”
 Annotator 3′ w/ Score 5: “The response lacks some important details from the input, such as the total number of games in the
 series and specific settings for each installment. It also ends abruptly without completing the sentence.”
 Ratings Feedback for Response 2: Score 4
 Explanations:
 Annotator 1′′ w/ Score 2: “Response simply copies the input and is truncated.”
 Annotator 2′′ w/ Score 6: “It ends abruptly after mentioning ”Age of Empires Online, takes...” without providing a conclusion or
 continuation of the sentence.”
 Annotator 3′′ w/ Score 4:“This answers the question, but doesn’t demonstrate any interpretation or summarization of the original
 text.”

               Table 14: Example explanation for samples with inconsistent feedback data


                                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Example 1: One response is much better than the other
    Instruction: Construct a question that every answer in the list is correct and reasonable
    for it.

    Input: telephone, electricity, tv, car, computer, microwave

    Response 1: Which home appliances did you purchase in the past year?

    Response 2: What modern technology have been the most influential in your everyday life?

    Rankings Feedback: Response 2
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1 w/ preference for Response 2: “It’s quite unlikely that someone had purchased
    all those items in the last year, and a car and electricity both don’t qualify as a home
    appliance. Response B seems more fitting.”
    Annotator 2 w/ preference for Response 2: “Response B makes more sense because people
    don’t really think of cars or telephones as appliances.”
    Annotator 3 w/ preference for Response 2: “The list given in the input is not confined to
    examples of appliances, so I would discard Response A since it is not a natural question to
    ask and expect this given list as an answer. Response B is a bit unnatural in its tone, but it
    at least fits with the expected answer from the input.”
    Ratings Feedback for Response 1: Score 3
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1′ w/ Score 2: “Electricity is not a home appliance, and it’s unlikely that a con-
    sumer would purchase all of these things in the same year.”
    Annotator 2′ w/ Score 3: “The response does not fully follow the instruction to construct a
    question. Not all items in the given list can be considered home appliances. ”
    Annotator 3′ w/ Score 4: “The answer to the Response’s question would very from person
    to person.”
    Ratings Feedback for Response 2: Score 7
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1′′ w/ Score 7: “’All of the input items are modern technological inventions that
    are influential in human life. This is accurate and concise.”
    Annotator 2′′ w/ Score 7:“This question fits all of the input values.”
    Annotator 3′′ w/ Score 7:“perfectly lines up with all the answers in the input”

             Table 15: Example explanation for sample with consistent feedback data


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Example 2: One response contains a clear factual inaccuracy while the other does not
    Instruction: Who is the all time leading goal scorer for Manchester United?

    Input: N/A

    Response 1: The all time leading goal scorer for Manchester United is Wayne Rooney with
    253 goals.

    Response 2: The all time leading goal scorer for Manchester United is Sir. Ralph Chapman
    with 414 goals

    Rankings Feedback: Response 1
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1 w/ preference for Response 1: “Response A gives the correct answer accord-
    ing to google. B is wrong. ”
    Annotator 2 w/ preference for Response 1: “Response A is correct, while Response B is
    not.”
    Annotator 3 w/ preference for Response 1: “A is the correct answer.”

    Ratings Feedback for Response 1: Score 7
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1′ w/ Score 7: “gives correct and precise info”
    Annotator 2′ w/ Score 7: “The answer is relevant to the instruction and seems factual. It
    is coherent and easy to understand. It does not have any grammatical errors and id harm-
    less.”
    Annotator 3′ w/ Score 7: “This is the perfect answer. It’s accurate and written in a com-
    plete sentence.”
    Ratings Feedback for Response 2: Score 1
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1′′ w/ Score 1: “The answer very wrong...”
    Annotator 2′′ w/ Score 1: “This should be Wayne Rooney.”
    Annotator 3′′ w/ Score 1:“Wayne Rooney tops the list of all-time goal-scorers for Manch-
    ester United.”

            Table 16: Example explanation for sample with consistent feedback data


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Example 3: One response completes the task clearly better than the other
    Instruction: In this task, we ask you convert a data table of restaurant descriptions into
    fluent natural-sounding English sentences. The input is a string of key-value pairs; the out-
    put should be a natural and grammatical English sentence containing all the information
    from the input.

    Input: name[The Golden Curry], food[English], priceRange[high], familyFriendly[no],
    near[The Bakers]

    Response 1: The Golden Curry is an English-style restaurant located near The Bakers and
    offers a high-price range. It is not family-friendly.

    Response 2: The Golden Curry is an English-speaking restaurant located near The Bakers
    which offers a range of prices. It is not family-friendly.

    Rankings Feedback: Response 1
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1 w/ preference for Response 1: “Response A follows the instructions and cre-
    ates a natural language answer to the query. It would have been better to say that the food
    is English rather than the vague S̈tyle¨, but B clearly misreads the input and says that the
    language is English.”
    Annotator 2 w/ preference for Response 2: “Response B flows better to me.”
    Annotator 3 w/ preference for Response 1: “response A is natural and completes the input
    without missing out any details like option B uses range of price instead of high price”
    Ratings Feedback for Response 1: Score 6
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1′ w/ Score 5: “consistent, mentions all the values from the input, could be one
    sentence instead of two, wording could be a little better”
    Annotator 2′ w/ Score 7: “The response accurately converts the data table of restaurant
    descriptions into fluent natural-sounding English sentences, containing all the information
    from the input.”
    Annotator 3′ w/ Score 7: “I gave it the highest score as it met all requirements.”
    Ratings Feedback for Response 2: Score 4
    Explanations:
    Annotator 1′′ w/ Score 4: “I gave it a middle score since the AI’s response had errors. 50%
    correct, 50% incorrect.”
    Annotator 2′′ w/ Score 4: “The response should have specified Ënglish foodı̈nstead of
    ”English-speaking.” The response does not include the information about the ”high price
    range” as provided in the input. ”
    Annotator 3′′ w/ Score 3:“It’s an English restaurant, not English-speaking. The response
    is not a single sentence.”

            Table 17: Example explanation for samples with consistent feedback data


                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 task001 quoref question generation, task003 mctaco question generation event duration,
 task006 mctaco question generation transient stationary,
 task009 mctaco question generation event ordering, task015 mctaco question generation frequency,
 task023 cosmosqa question generation, task026 drop question generation,
 task030 winogrande full person, task031 winogrande question generation object,
 task032 winogrande question generation person, task040 qasc question generation,
 task045 miscellaneous sentence paraphrasing, task053 multirc correct bad question,
 task059 ropes story generation, task067 abductivenli answer generation,
 task068 abductivenli incorrect answer generation, task071 abductivenli answer generation,
 task072 abductivenli answer generation, task074 squad1.1 question generation,
 task077 splash explanation to sql, task082 babi t1 single supporting fact question generation,
 task083 babi t1 single supporting fact answer generation, task103 facts2story long text generation,
 task110 logic2text sentence generation, task111 asset sentence simplification,
 task132 dais text modification, task182 duorc question generation, task193 duorc question generation,
 task203 mnli sentence generation, task210 logic2text structured text generation,
 task216 rocstories correct answer generation, task223 quartz explanation generation,
 task246 dream question generation, task269 csrg counterfactual story generation,
 task270 csrg counterfactual context generation, task360 spolin yesand response generation,
 task389 torque generate temporal question, task393 plausible result generation,
 task394 persianqa question generation, task395 persianqa answer generation,
 task418 persent title generation, task454 swag incorrect answer generation,
 task455 swag context generation, task466 parsinlu qqp text modification,
 task489 mwsc question generation, task510 reddit tifu title summarization,
 task511 reddit tifu long text summarization, task519 aquamuse question generation,
 task550 discofuse sentence generation, task572 recipe nlg text generation,
 task591 sciq answer generation, task592 sciq incorrect answer generation,
 task593 sciq explanation generation, task594 sciq question generation,
 task599 cuad question generation,task626 xlwic sentence based on given word sentence generation,
 task627 xlwic word with same meaning sentence generation,
 task628 xlwic word with different meaning sentence generation, task645 summarization,
 task668 extreme abstract summarization, task671 ambigqa text generation,
 task672 amazon and yelp summarization dataset summarization,
 task683 online privacy policy text purpose answer generation,
 task684 online privacy policy text information type generation, task739 lhoestq question generation,
 task743 eurlex summarization, task821 protoqa question generation,
 task853 hippocorpus long text generation, task857 inquisitive question generation,
 task859 prost question generation, task860 prost mcq generation, task871 msmarco question generation,
 task897 freebase qa topic question generation, task955 wiki auto style transfer,
 task957 e2e nlg text generation generate,
 task967 ruletaker incorrect fact generation based on given paragraph, task1290 xsum summarization,
 task1291 multi news summarization, task1325 qa zre question generation on subject relation,
 task1326 qa zre question generation from answer, task1345 glue qqp question paraprashing,
 task1355 sent comp summarization, task1369 healthfact sentence generation,
 task1437 doqa cooking question generation, task1440 doqa movies question generation,
 task1499 dstc3 summarization, task1519 qa srl question generation,
 task1530 scitail1.1 sentence generation, task1540 parsed pdfs summarization,
 task1552 scitail question generation, task1553 cnn dailymail summarization,
 task1561 clickbait new bg summarization, task1562 zest text modification,
 task1567 propara question generation, task1572 samsum summary,
 task1580 eqasc-perturbed question generation, task1586 scifact title generation,
 task1594 yahoo answers topics question generation, task1595 event2mind text generation 1


              Table 18: Subset of SuperNatural Instructions v2 used in experiments


                                               32
