Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A RE MACHINES AUTOMATING MORALITY ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         The advent of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning has ignited a pro-
         found inquiry into the morality of machines. In a quest for efficiency, pleasure,
         comfort, we delegate and automate more and more decisions and actions to AI-
         based systems. In this paper, we delve into the complex interplay between artificial
         intelligence and morality. We thus address the fundamental question of whether
         machines possess morals and if machine learning systems can learn about moral
         values. As automated systems increasingly take on decision-making roles in our
         lives, ethical concerns are growing among researchers and philosophers. Mak-
         ing an ethical decision has always been connected to human agency. We try to
         highlight the prevailing utilitarian ethics found in the tech-centric Silicon Valley
         culture and its influence on the development of such automation. As machines
         make more and more decisions, they consequently express a certain morality. In
         this paper we highlight the emergence of the idea of “moral machines” to describe
         machine learning systems, for instance in the context of autonomous vehicles,
         where AI-based systems must take ethically challenging decisions - we thus dis-
         cuss the pertinence of the well-known “trolley problem” as an illustrative example
         to explore the utilitarian aspect of these ethical dilemmas, it applies to any domain
         where machines make moral choices based on patterns and data. Calling those
         machines “moral” underline the fact that AI systems make moral choices without
         any human intervention. However this term is not confined to autonomous vehi-
         cles. This paper examines the implications of this automated morality and how it
         can affect individuals’ sense of responsibility raising the questions about the fu-
         ture of morality. Automated values challenge the idea of responsibility and moral
         agency. We then call for a thoughtful and critical examination of ethical and po-
         litical implications of automated systems shaping our moral background. In the
         age of technological disruption, ethical questions surrounding automated morality
         must be addressed to safeguard our ethical compass.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning are reshaping the landscape of our daily lives. As
they do so, questions emerge: Do machines have morals? Can they learn about morality? And what
would then be the consequences of this automatically-produced morality? As we increasingly del-
egate decision-making tasks to AI-based systems, concerns about the ethical implications of these
systems have gained importance among researchers and philosophers. Some have come to the con-
clusion that it may be impossible to achieve genuine morality in a machine (Coeckelbergh, 2010).
We start by introducing the key difference between “morality” and “ethics”. Derived from the Greek
word ”ethos” meaning ”way of life; habit; manners; state of mind”, ethics is a branch of philosophy
concerned with human behavior and, more specifically, the conduct of individuals in society. On the
other hand, “morality” has a roman etymology of the same word (from the latin “moralis” meaning
“relating to manners”). In everyday life, the two words are synonymous. However, ethics, unlike
morality, are situated in the conduct of action and not in the action itself. Actions that can be judged
as morally wrong can be carried out for ethical reasons (Garcia, 2016). We could say that morality
is a set of obligations to be respected if one does not want to get into trouble with the law, colleagues
or relatives.
Morality is by essence an universal judgment. Ethics are more personal, and have to do with one’s
behavior. In addition, ethics can be specific to an industry and depend on the goal one is pursu-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ing. We will use both terms in this paper. We consider here that the ethics of automated systems
represents the way to achieve a behavior considered as ”moral” with regard to the considerations
of various human societies. Historically, ”moral universalism” is opposed to ”moral relativism”,
according to which it is important to be able to consider that morality is also relative to a society, a
region of the world, a religion... We will not enter into this debate here. However it seems important
to mention that the notion of universalism is at the core of many questions in moral philosophy. His-
torically, the French Revolution’s Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen was universal
in scope (Sepinwall, 2005). The French signatories of the time considered that the moral values
defended by this Declaration were not intended to be called into question or considered relative to
France at the end of the 18th century.
Another distinction concerns the ”absolute” or “non-absolute” character of a moral law. It is possible
to consider that the purpose of the moral law is to be able to be applied for all and at all times,
whatever the consequences (Kant & Korsgaard, 1998). Some moral traditions, such as utilitarianism
are universalists as they tend to be applied universally but are non-absolutist since they are concerned
with the context and the consequences of an action (Salvat, 2020).
In this paper, we focus on the moral values expressed - or not - in the automatic decisions made
by a model – whether we consider “algorithms”, “AI-based systems”, “machine learning systems”.
These three terms cover different meanings, but share the reality of a more or less autonomous
automation of various human processes. While the principle of algorithms is an established feature,
the particularity of machine learning is that a model now has the ability to automatically learn
patterns not defined manually, and on such a scale that it becomes uninterpretable by its designers
(Campolo & Crawford, 2020). The question of model interpretability has become a pressing issue
as learning methods have become more complex, to the point of creating what are known as ”black
boxes” , i.e. models whose inner workings are obscure and opaque. We are aware that not all existing
models are affected by this phenomenon, although many of today’s most popular models are.
Our starting point is an observation : at every moment, at every decision, we, as moral agents,
express our moral principles. If humans and the world were as they should be, there would be
no need for morality. It is then based on the discrepancy between how things are and how they
should be. Morality is therefore based on the assessment of this disparity, which is only possible
within this gap between reality and what an individual can wish for. Questioning morality consists
in evaluating whether the individual thinks that its action, judgment, can be made universal (Kant
& Korsgaard, 1998). Hence, questioning whether our actions are morally good, refers to the idea
of universalisation and of the ”absolute” quality of our personal ethical preferences. Ethics theories
were developed at times when philosophers assumed that individuals - as a group or a sole person
- were the main - if not the only - moral agent (Gordon & Nyholm, 2022). However, nowadays,
we rely on machines, and we can expect to depend even more on machine learning intelligence in
the future. Therefore, we, as individuals delegating part of our decision-making process, need to be
confident that the decisions that are supposedly being made on our behalf are actually beneficial to
our well-being.
To question the ”morality of machines” is to ask whether the decisions ”made” by them - we can con-
sider any decision resulting from an automated process - reflect moral values, and whether ”learning
machines” can be considered as moral agents defending particular moral values. The goal of this
paper is then to study how machines learn about morality and thus to exhibit the current and future
automation of our moral standards. Being more and more autonomous, machines will require some
kind of a “moral framework to guide their action” (Rubin, 2011, pg. 51). The moral question here
is therefore closely related to interpretation, and the possibility of understanding how a model can
produce a certain moral result.
The current issue arising from machine learning is whether these ”machines” could autonomously
develop their own ethical values. We would like to point out the limits of this argument: as a
matter of fact those machines automate morality but some researchers argue that they cannot take
any ethical decision as they ignore what an ethical debate and an ethical decision are (McDermott,
2020). They are not consciously making a decision. Those machines could be compared to an
individual ignoring the causes that push her or him to act in a certain way and therefore expressing
some moral preferences. They are rather the representations, the traces, of their origin and of the
goals pursued by their creators and the organizations that use them.



                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We proceed as follows. First, we wish to take a step back on moral dilemmas in order to look at
what philosophy says about ethics and morality, in particular in our modern era. We then highlight
the rise of utilitarian ethics within the technological landscape and the ethical concerns this raises.
Introducing the notion of ”moral machines”, we examine how AI-based systems appear to de facto
automate moral choices, particularly in the context of autonomous driving scenarios. Our discussion
then extends to the challenges and disruptions this automation causes. We seek to highlight the
ethical implications of decisions made by those systems, and conclude by addressing the political
and democratic dimensions inherent in the automation of morality. Our aim is to encourage in-depth
reflection on the societal implications of technological innovation, while seeking to show the role of
ideological, economic and political motivations behind these processes.

2    A BRIEF HISTORY OF MORALITY

The history of morality is deeply linked with the history of philosophy. Morality has been a food
for reflection and debate from the Greek philosophers 2,500 years ago all the way to Enlightenment
thinkers and our modern times. For many philosophers, morality was the goal of the human being.
Despite a diverse array of theories and approaches, philosophers have all tried to understand and
display the foundations of morality, the criteria for ethical behavior, and the implications of moral
principles for human conduct and society. According to the Kantian categorical imperative first
developed by Kant in Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals, “act only in accordance with
that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it become a universal law” (Kant &
Korsgaard, 1998, pg. 31), an action would be morally good if, and only if, it could be universal
and absolute. Kantian ethics are often a very useful tool to solve moral dilemmas as their goal is to
find a supreme principle of morality. Kant’s idea of universalism and absolutism of moral action, of
the good deed, foreshadows the automatic conception of morality developed by automated systems.
By definition, morality is meant to be universal and absolute and therefore automatable. Following
Kant’s maxim, we could argue that this is the only way to guarantee its value. An action is moral if it
is automatable. As a result, designing learning machines partly comes down to wondering whether
the maxim of the machine’s action can be universalized to determine its moral value. This moral
issue is comparable to the broader quest of machine learning research for a generalizable model.
This is morality in the strict sense of the term. However, philosopher David Hume explains that
the approval of acts that conform to the rule induces a second obligation, which he calls moral
obligation, with its own additional force (Saltel, 2019). Hume’s originality lies in linking all systems
of social and political obligation to the goal of the proper execution of justice. This is true of the most
important of them, allegiance to government, but it is also true of other systems of artificial morality,
established for the convenience of social life, thereby consolidating property relations through the
manifestation of good intent: constancy in friendship, ”good manners”, but also the particular rules
of such and such community or corporation.
For most part of the history of moral philosophy, human beings were considered the only moral
agents, thus the only ones responsible for their actions and decisions. However, the rapid deployment
of automatic decision-making solutions based on machine learning is transforming this historical
consideration. An individual’s decision is the mirror image of his or her moral convictions. As a
result, the more so-called artificial intelligence solutions are used in place of individuals, the more it
will be possible to consider these systems as moral agents.

An utilitarian AI
French philosopher and theologian Jacques Ellul showed that modern technology is characterized by
certain properties. Firstly, it tends to become independent with regard to all norms, like traditional
morality, to hinder its mathematical march towards its result. Technology, in a broader sense, loves
nothing nor respects anything, but it has only one role which is to strip away and to clarify. The aim
of technology is to rationalize and to transform everything into a means (Ellul, 1988). Sacralized by
human beings, technology has ceased to be a means to an end and has become an end in itself (Ellul,
1980).
Technology is often described as neutral. However, while it’s mistaken to regard technology as such
(Stinson, 2022) - every means implicitly serves an end and carries a certain vision of the world and
how it should be, ”the essence of technology is by no means anything technological” (Heidegger,


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1977, pg. 4) - it is interesting to note that it is closely linked to the morality of modernity. Technical
progress has been part of the history of modernity since the scientific and philosophical revolution
that began in the 16th century. From then on, the simple fact of developing ever more sophisticated
technical tools, with the proclaimed aim of eliminating suffering, improving human life and even
augmenting the actual human being, is part and parcel of a certain form of morality. Modernity is
perpetual change and growth. It is the “tradition of the new” (Rosenberg, 1994).
Strongly established in the Anglo-Saxon tradition since Jeremy Bentham in the 18th century, con-
sequentialist morality, and more specifically utilitarian ethics, has dominated debates and infused
current technological developments (Salvat, 2020). As a result, utilitarianism has become the domi-
nant morality in Silicon Valley and, by extension, in the innovations that are emerging there. From
this point of view, the aim of technology would therefore be to eliminate all suffering and produce
the most rational and objective results possible. The moral value of an action would then depend
exclusively on the result of the action. From this point of view, utilitarianism is anti-Kantian. Con-
sequentialist morality objects to Kant that there is no such thing as the good in itself. Everything
depends on the usefulness of a particular action in a particular context.
The increasingly widespread delegation of our decision-making process to machine learning solu-
tions has real-world ramifications in various industries. The ubiquity of artificial intelligence in our
lives is undeniable, affecting sectors such as law, healthcare and finance, while influencing our per-
sonal and professional choices (Schrage, 2020). However, this expansion has concentrated power
in the hands of a few digital giants (Campolo & Crawford, 2020). Yet the moral consequences of
decisions - partly or fully - delegated to AI systems is a pressing issue, as there is concern that they
may disproportionately benefit or harm certain social groups (Barocas & Selbst, 2016). For exam-
ple, credit applications are often biased, favoring certain demographic groups and disadvantaging
others (O’neil, 2017). Even worse, an algorithm used in court to “predict” recidivism turned out
to be racist (Angwin et al., 2022). The utilitarian perspective is no stranger to these excesses. By
design, a model is utilitarian in the sense that it is built with an objective in sight. Consequently, it
adapts its functioning to this objective. Discriminatory consequences stem from the failure to define
such an objective. If we take the example of the algorithm used to predict the risk of recidivism, its
objective, ”by design”, was not to be non-racist, but to provide the most accurate estimates. Racist
bias is an unintended but real consequence.


3    M ORAL MACHINES

The culmination of this utilitarian morality is materialized in the evolution of how a decision is made.
Machine learning models are supposed to support human management processes and in many cases
replace human decision-making. When indicators and other numerical data are no longer used to
advise decisions, but to make those decisions, the concept of decision-making changes. The idea
is not to entrust everything to human intuition, whose flaws are well documented (Fry, 2018), but
to avoid falling into a ”governance by numbers” (Supiot, 2015) where the use of numerical data
considered impartial by nature - despite the numerous cases of discriminatory bias that constantly
remind us of the fragility of such systems (Brous & Janssen, 2020) - becomes the norm. Neverthe-
less, such indicators are increasingly used today, including to modify and influence the behavior of
the agents they are supposed to describe. This pushes societies towards an ”algorithmic governmen-
tality” (Rouvroy & Berns, 2013). Applied to the automation of moral systems, we can say that we
are facing an automated algorithmic morality.
In particular, this is what happens in autonomous driving. Since we may no longer be responsible for
the actions of autonomous vehicles, for example, machine learning systems would make these moral
choices for us using an utilitarian framework. The aim of any autonomous vehicle is to replace the
human act of driving. Thus, human decision-making is being replaced by machine learning systems.
A common way to explain and present the ethical dilemmas that autonomous vehicles are facing
according to many researchers and philosophers is the well-known “trolley problem”. Formulated
before AI, trolley problems in AI come in all shapes and sizes, and while decisions don’t necessarily
have such fatal consequences, the actions AI makes can cause problems for individuals, and society
as a whole (McKendrick & Thurai, 2022). Comparing ethical dilemmas taking place for real with
the philosophical and psychological example of the Trolley problem is quite controversial among
philosophers who have written about this (Nyholm & Smids, 2016). However it does offer a pretty


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


good general illustration of what is an ethical dilemma and what is an ethical decision despite its
weakness, for instance because we tend to compare how a human would react in front of a panicking
situation and an autonomous vehicle, whereas we can consider that it will not react the way a human
being would react in such scenario.
This “problem” tends to test the utilitarian side of the surveyed individuals. In the case of au-
tonomous cars, it is necessary to develop an artificial driving system, that is to say a software that is
used to make driving decisions for the car while the driver is doing something else - at least not driv-
ing. Should an autonomous car give priority to humans over pets, to passengers over pedestrians, to
more lives over fewer lives, to women over men, to the young over the old, to the healthy over the
sick, to higher social status over lower social status, to honest citizens over lawbreakers? Finally,
should the car swerve (action) or stay on course (inaction)? All of those theoretical dilemmas tend
to test our sense of morality.
Autonomous vehicles are frequently referred to as “moral machines”, a term used in a study con-
ducted by researchers at the MIT Media Lab (Awad et al., 2018). The website created for such
research in 2014 - moralmachine.net - lists all cases of dilemmas that an autonomous car would face
in case of a malfunction of the driving system enforcing it to “make” a choice. As those AI-based
systems act, they play out a certain morality, thus automating moral choices. Therefore, we could
consider that they have morals. We will show later on that this claim may be an overstatement.


4   T HE INDIVIDUALS ARE UNCONSCIOUS OF THE PHENOMENON

We argue here that individuals struggle to really consider what it means to automate morality when
it comes to automated systems. Is it the end of human morality ? According to Jurgen Habermas
(2014, pg 56), “morality will ensure the freedom of the individual to lead his own life only if the ap-
plication of generalized norms does not unreasonably lace in the scope for choosing and developing
one’s life-project”. Automating morality therefore has an impact on people’s perception of freedom,
but also on their perception of responsibility. ”Algorithms provide a kind of convenient source of
authority. an easy way to delegate responsibility; a shortcut that we take without thinking” (Fry,
2018, pg. 18). However, the ability to hold each other accountable for our moral choices is a crucial
consideration in the functioning of society. Habermas (2014) argues that individuals who engage
in moral judgment and action acknowledge complete accountability toward one another, ascribe the
ability for self-governance to both themselves and others, and anticipate mutual solidarity and equal
respect. The individual must be morally responsible for his or her life choices (Cohen, 2017).
Technical developments and the increasingly widespread use of probabilities in organizations -
which is what machine learning systems are based on today - initially lead modern times to a form
of ”reflexive madness” (Sloterdijk, 2006), permanently short-circuiting the psyche. Now, faced
with digital technical innovations, this reflexive madness is becoming a ”new ordinary madness”
(Stiegler, 2016). French philosopher Bernard Stiegler argues that our modern society is a society of
disruption, a term he defines as what moves faster than any will, whether individual or collective.
The aim is to disrupt everything, to go faster and faster. The result is a never-ending chase between
innovation, which constantly creates legal loopholes, and the law. This cult of radical, disruptive
innovation results in a kind of dissolution of the State, which must be constantly ”reformed”. This
loss of reason is precisely the strongest attack on the principles of modernity and independence of
thought. Alienated by technology, individuals sink into madness. It is as if we were delegating our
moral responsibility for the simple reason that we may no longer be fully capable of exercising our
own moral sense. This loss of morality as a guide to our actions, replaced by efficiency, novelty and
profit, is a loss of our human reason (Stiegler, 2016). Human morality ends up copying the moral
values represented by machine learning-based systems. Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer al-
ready announced in 1944 that the mathematical process has been transformed, so to speak, into a
ritual of thought (see (Horkheimer & Adorno, 2002) for more information).


5   D ISCUSSION

In this paper, we have attempted to provide an overview of the moral and ethical issues raised by the
increasing presence of automated systems in various decision-making processes. In what follows,


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we will focus on the changes this brings about, as well as on what we consider to be real limits to
the consideration of an ”automatic morality” specific to machines.


5.1   N EW MORAL AGENTS

For most part of the history of moral philosophy, human beings were considered the only moral
agents, thus the only ones responsible for their actions and decisions. However, the rapid deployment
of automatic decision-making solutions is transforming this historical consideration. An individual’s
decision is the mirror image of his or her moral convictions. As a result, the more so-called artificial
intelligence solutions are used in place of individuals, the more it will be possible to consider these
systems as moral agents.
In machine learning, models learn automatically from the discovery of patterns, recurring motifs in
the data sets they process. As such models are used to support and guide human decisions, they
learn from the patterns they notice. Automatic morality is not just about autonomous vehicles. In all
areas where we wish to delegate decisions to automatic systems, we will end up with identical moral
consequences. Which resume to choose between two candidates? To whom should we give priority
for a bank loan? Who should we vaccinate first? Who should receive state aid? Who should die in
a car accident? With each moral question addressed by automated systems, we delegate part of our
moral authority, especially when it becomes difficult to interpret the outcome. In the case of black
boxes, the potential uninterpretability of the decision (Szegedy et al., 2014), and therefore the loss of
understanding, leads to a sort of de facto moral autonomization of the machine. Consequently, the
more opaque the functions of an automated system, the less explicable its results.Nowadays, neural
networks with millions of parameters are very difficult to interpret. Instead, they can be justified a
posteriori.
We would like to draw attention to one particular risk of this automation. Indeed, delegating moral
values means no longer wishing to change a society’s practices; it means considering that from now
on, these choices are no longer choices at all, and become a metric of the technical and technocratic
environment in which individuals live. Automated systems extend bureaucracy.
We have tried so far to display that moral values are becoming automated in certain specific sec-
tors. Does this open the possibility of a general automation of morality? Or even to the extension
of algorithmic morality to human morality ? In the future, individuals could become more and
more dependent on automated systems making moral decisions for them. Therefore, this automated
morality could become the only moral values represented within society. Individuals may no longer
have a choice of values, since this automated morality would have become sufficiently widespread
for individuals to have little choice but to model themselves on it. Sometimes, a technological tool
can even end up encouraging behavior that runs counter to the values and norms it was designed to
promote. For example, the answering machine was originally designed to make the individual more
available, but in practice it is used to make oneself unavailable when desired (De Mul, 2009).


5.2   T HE ISSUE OF FREEWILL

Transferring some of our decision-making processes to automated systems means assuming that
the only goal of all decisions is to apply strict so-called rationality, more precisely algorithmic
rationality. Since the scientific and philosophical revolution of the 17th century and philosophers of
the Enlightenment, we have built our political systems on the basis of freedom, progress, justice and
rationality (Strauss, 1975). We could then believe that AI-based systems could achieve this goal.
However, even if the question of free will is not entirely our subject here, we feel it is necessary
to point out that the adoption of moral actions requires free will and independence of thought -
something a machine obviously lacks. “For a machine to know that a situation requires an ethical
decision, it must know what an ethical conflict is” (McDermott, 2020, pg. 7). Agents (individuals or
machines) must have free will precisely because they must make decisions in order to be ethical. It is
also a question of responsibility. Assuming free will means that an agent is responsible for a decision
or an action. Therefore, even if machine learning systems outperform humans in pursuing maximal
utilitarian optimization, it may be impossible to build truly moral agents without consciousness
(Anderson & Anderson, 2007).


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.3   A RE MACHINES REALLY CAPABLE OF MORAL CHOICES ?



Automating morality means that potentially the whole world would share the same morals, or at
least the same moral machines. This raises the question of the generalizability of machine learn-
ing moral models. Blaise Pascal (2007, 294) famously said “A strange justice that is bounded by a
river! Truth on this side of the Pyrenees, error on the other side.” in order to highlight the cultural
differences regarding truth and the notion of justice. Pascal had taken his inspiration directly from
Montaigne’s Essays, who was, in his eyes, the most coherent radical skeptic philosopher. Indeed,
Montaigne (1993, pg. 653) had already formalized something similar: ”What kind of truth can be
limited by a range of mountains, becoming a lie for the world on the other side!”. Again with Mon-
taigne (1993, pg. 231), we can even broaden the subject of cultural confrontation: ”every man calls
barbarous anything he is not accustomed to”. Morality appeals to the deep soul of peoples, places
and countries and seems very contextual. What do machines consider barbaric? The composition of
the database has a major influence on the results of machine learning systems. How will a machine
behave when confronted with out of distribution ”moral data” - usually from countries or popula-
tions underrepresented in datasets? Will it force the application of Western morality in a foreign
country? Or will it lose all sense of morality?
The problem is therefore quite acute today. The ”moral machines” study conducted by MIT reveals
something fundamental about morality around the world, and how difficult it could prove to propose
automatic morality on a global scale (Awad et al., 2018). To the question, ”Should an autonomous
car spare a baby or an elderly person?”, East Asian countries such as Japan, China and South Korea
clearly answer that the elderly person should be saved. Here we can see the Confucian influence
and the respect due to elders, which is very strong in these cultures. In contrast, Western countries
answer in the average range, or clearly in favor of sparing the baby. These individualistic cultures,
which accord equal dignity to all individuals, favor babies who have their lives to live. These results
show that despite globalization, despite worldwide interconnection, ethical and moral preferences
differ greatly between civilizations, and remain rooted in their cultural matrices (Confucianism,
Christianity, etc.). These findings also have very concrete ethical consequences: Should Volkswagen
or Tesla program their autonomous cars differently depending on the country, so as to spare the
young in France and the elderly in China?
The large-scale development of autonomous vehicles in fact faces the problem of the complexity
of decision-making, due in part to the persistence of human actions that are statistically unavoid-
able yet difficult to predict. We need to distinguish between an autonomous vehicle operating in
an open environment and the automatic metro lines that have been operating for several years in
closed environments, most often in underground tunnels. In reality, in all sectors where automatic
systems are used and exert a greater or lesser influence on the decision-making process, they always
do so in accordance with - more or less exhaustive - predefined rules. It is therefore essential to
carefully examine those environments in which sufficient control has been established to authorize
the integration of automatic systems. Forecasting all scenarios is crucial due to the need to manage
the potentially irrational aspect of human behavior (Hu et al., 2019) as well as challenging weather
situations that can affect sensors (Zang et al., 2019) or which, in the case of a human driver, would
involve a violation of the rules laid down for ordinary situations.
Even if we imagine a well-disciplined population respecting all the rules, it’s impossible to elimi-
nate total unpredictability. Machines have great difficulty in making instantaneous and improvised
decisions, just as individuals can react in a matter of seconds in critical situations. This introduces
an element of uncertainty that machines cannot handle the same way (Nyholm & Smids, 2016). The
freedom of decision available to individuals is a dimension that is absent in the field of automated
systems. In the case of indecision, which can be a decision in itself, machines do not possess the
ability to recognize this option, or at least they are not given the opportunity to possess it.
This area of uncertainty, which is difficult to grasp, raises questions about the ability of AI to make
autonomous, moral decisions outside a fully controlled environment in which moral issues do not
arise. It suggests that the only way for an automated system to make genuine moral decisions would
be if it could make them in an open, uncontrolled, environment. Arguing that machines automate
morality means forgetting the human will - ideological, political, economic - at work in their design
and use.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This moral automation is thus the work of individuals who design environments which encourage
control. This control can be simply a physical one, as in an underground subway system, but it can
also be political, on the scale of an entire society. We have argued that a controlled environment
was necessary to implement an automated system. In the opposite direction, the establishment of an
automated system can help with controlling an environment. On this matter, the Chinese example of
the social credit system demonstrates the totalitarian risk present in this technical control (Creemers,
2018).


5.4   M ORALS ARE POLITICAL : WHO DEFINES MORALITY ?

We must never forget that all these models need data to train and operate. A recent study by six
researchers from different universities suggests that training data may eventually be missing (Vil-
lalobos et al., 2022). This would imply a limitation in the learning of moral values. This type of
research reveals the fragile nature of automation, regardless of its nature. Automated systems de-
pend on the ability of models to process large quantities of data, and therefore on the capacity to
harvest them. The question then arises of the limits that governments, international institutions and
parliaments may or may not impose.
Therefore, this debate - and, more generally, all questions relating to technological innovations - can
be summed up in Shoshana Zuboff (2019)’s three questions: What to decide? Who decides? Who
decides who decides? These are eminently political and moral questions. The practical problems
arising from the automation of morality are therefore related to political and democratic issues.
The utilitarian injunction to consider only the result of an action encourages us to focus solely on
the superficial, directly visible results of technological advances, without seeking to study them in
detail. Silicon Valley’s new mantra is WYSIWYG: ”what you see is what you get” (Alloa & Soufron,
2019). This suggests a preference for immediate, visible results over a comprehensive understanding
of the wider implications, ethical considerations and potential consequences associated with these
innovations. By brandishing WYSIWYG as its sole political horizon, Silicon Valley delegitimizes
in advance any critical reflection on technological innovations and the meaning attached to them.
In essence, Silicon Valley’s utilitarian vision raises concerns about the potential consequences of
a technological culture that privileges immediate, observable results to the detriment of in-depth
reflection on the ethical, social and cultural dimensions of innovation. Except that today, a large
proportion of technological innovations and automated systems emerge from this technological and
economic environment. The utilitarian principle should therefore not be the only guide, insofar as
it prevents deeper reflection on the functioning and the future of technology. Therefore, it prevents
asking political questions.
However, the political question has always been present in the technological environment, and in
Silicon Valley in particular. If it is a geographical location, it is also a place of political and ide-
ological influence and power. In 1996, British sociologists Andy Cameron and Richard Barbrook
spoke of a ”Californian ideology” in which left-wing ideas and economic liberalism converge Bar-
brook & Cameron (1996). The Silicon Valley tech-environment does not just develop technological
innovations; it also pursues a political agenda nourished by utopian components, while receiving
substantial public subsidies (Alloa, 2019).In a similar, albeit fundamentally different, way, the Chi-
nese state plays a key role in China’s technological development (Băzăvan, 2019).
The implementation of automated systems raises the question of what kind of democratic control
they are submitted to (De Mul, 2009). Granted, AI-based systems may very well do better than
humans by targeting maximum utilitarian optimization, however transferring part of our decision-
making process to automated systems means that we consider the sole objective of each decision to
be the application of a supposedly rational utilitarian morality. So the problem of moral delegation
increases when we have to define the extent to which individuals can be allowed to ignore the de-
cisions of these machine-learning-based systems. We advocate accountability mechanisms and the
necessary political control by citizens. An explanation and a certain transparency must accompany
the decision that allows individuals to understand why they received such an outcome (Wang et al.,
2022). Behind every decision there must be an individual or an organization appointed to be re-
sponsible for that decision, and to whom individuals can turn. Those are the minimal conditions for
legitimacy.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   C ONCLUSION
Will our values hold? The dangerous property in the ”technological state of emergency” in which
we live is the impossible return to normalcy (Tesquet, 2021). Invasive technological tools are over-
turning our conception of morality, but their seemingly inevitable trivialization is keeping us from
thinking about it. Technology, through habituation, always ends up going without saying (Hei-
degger et al., 1986). Technology becomes part of routine. In a 1977 interview with a journalist,
Gunther Anders explained the birth of his critique of technology with the bombing of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki. He responded to the accusation that technocritical philosophers were merely “panic-
mongers”. Rather than questioning this accusation, he embraced it (Anders & Greffrath, 2001). We
subscribe to this dynamic. One of the most necessary moral tasks today is to make as many people
as possible understand that there is cause for concern, or at least for questioning. The delegation of
morality to automatic systems must legitimately give rise to debate. As Anders says, ”most people
are not in a position to create the fear that is needed today. We must therefore help them” (Anders
& Greffrath, 2001, pg. 92).
Our ignorance of the moral consequences of the intrusion of moral machines into the spectrum of
our actions allows the designers and the users of these automated machines to profit from this sys-
tem. However, the hype surrounding artificial intelligence needs to be seen for what it is. Machine
learning systems are not yet capable of making the final decisions in real-life situations that require
global and subjective reasoning capacity. Decision-making aided by such systems based on histori-
cal data and learning can be applied in certain fields. However, they lack the empathy that a human
being can bring to the ultimate choice. We still need to have individuals in the decision-making
process. It is not about delegating responsibility. It is precisely because we do not question the
authority we willingly confer on these systems that we suffer the negative consequences.
Here, like in many other areas, we need to turn these technological concerns into political issues.
Moral automation, a goal unconsciously pursued by many through the development of automated
processes, will be achieved through control. It is therefore crucial to limit the extent of this control
in society.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Alloa. L’égalitarisme automatisé: sur l’idéologie de la silicon valley. Esprit, 2019(5):
  51–62, 2019.
Emmanuel Alloa and Jean-Baptiste Soufron. L’idéologie de la silicon valley: introduction. Esprit,
  2019(5):32–35, 2019.
Günther Anders and Mathias Greffrath. Et si je suis désespéré, que voulez-vous que j’y fasse?
  Editions Allia, 2001.
Michael Anderson and Susan Leigh Anderson. Machine ethics: Creating an ethical intelligent agent.
 AI magazine, 28(4):15–15, 2007.
Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. Machine bias. In Ethics of data and
  analytics, pp. 254–264. Auerbach Publications, 2022.
Edmond Awad, Sohan Dsouza, Richard Kim, Jonathan Schulz, Joseph Henrich, Azim Shariff, Jean-
  François Bonnefon, and Iyad Rahwan. The moral machine experiment. Nature, 563(7729):59–64,
  2018.
Richard Barbrook and Andy Cameron. The californian ideology. Science as culture, 6(1):44–72,
  1996.
Solon Barocas and Andrew D Selbst. Big data’s disparate impact. California law review, pp. 671–
  732, 2016.
Adrian Băzăvan. Chinese government’s shifting role in the national innovation system. Technologi-
  cal Forecasting and Social Change, 148:119738, 2019.
Paul Brous and Marijn Janssen. Trusted decision-making: Data governance for creating trust in data
  science decision outcomes. Administrative Sciences, 10(4):81, 2020.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexander Campolo and Kate Crawford. Enchanted determinism: Power without responsibility in
  artificial intelligence. Engaging Science, Technology, and Society, 2020.
Mark Coeckelbergh. Moral appearances: emotions, robots, and human morality. Ethics and Infor-
 mation Technology, 12:235–241, 2010.
Gerald A Cohen. Where the action is: On the site of distributive justice. In Theories of Justice, pp.
  205–232. Routledge, 2017.
Rogier Creemers. China’s social credit system: an evolving practice of control. Available at SSRN
  3175792, 2018.
Jos De Mul. Des machines morales. Cités, 39(3):27–38, 2009.
Jacques Ellul. The Technological System (New York, volume 33. Continuum, 1980.
Jacques Ellul. Le bluff technologique. Paris, Hachette, 1988.
Hannah Fry. Hello World: How to be Human in the Age of the Machine. Random House, 2018.
Tristan Garcia. La vie intense: une obsession moderne. Autrement, 2016.
John-Stewart Gordon and Sven Nyholm. Kantianism and the problem of child sex robots. Journal
  of Applied Philosophy, 39(1):132–147, 2022.
Jürgen Habermas. The future of human nature. John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Martin Heidegger. The question concerning technology. New York, Harper and Row, 1977.
Martin Heidegger, Rudolf Boehm, De Alphonse Waelhens, and Francois Vezin. Etre et Temps.
 Gallimard, 1986.
Max Horkheimer and Theodor W Adorno. Dialectic of enlightenment. Stanford University Press,
 2002.
Yeping Hu, Liting Sun, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Generic prediction architecture considering both
  rational and irrational driving behaviors. In 2019 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Con-
  ference (ITSC), pp. 3539–3546, 2019.
Immanuel Kant and Christine M. Korsgaard. Kant: Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals.
  Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Drew McDermott. Why ethics is a high hurdle for ai. In Machine Ethics and Robot Ethics, pp.
  267–274. Routledge, 2020.
Joe McKendrick and Andy Thurai. Ai isn’t ready to make unsupervised decisions. Harvard Business
  Review, 15, 2022.
Michel de Montaigne. Michel de Montaigne - The Complete Essays. Penguin Classics, reprint
 edition, 1993.
Sven Nyholm and Jilles Smids. The ethics of accident-algorithms for self-driving cars: An applied
  trolley problem? Ethical theory and moral practice, 19(5):1275–1289, 2016.
Cathy O’neil. Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases inequality and threatens
  democracy. Crown, 2017.
Blaise Pascal. Blaise Pascal: Thoughts, letters, and minor works, volume 48. Cosimo, Inc., 2007.
Harold Rosenberg. The tradition of the new. Da Capo Press, 1994.
Antoinette Rouvroy and Thomas Berns.          Gouvernementalité algorithmique et perspectives
  d’émancipation. Réseaux, 177(1):163–196, 2013.
Charles T Rubin. Machine morality and human responsibility. The New Atlantis, pp. 58–79, 2011.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Philippe Saltel. Découvrons david hume. Le Grand Continent, 2019.
Christophe Salvat. L’utilitarisme. La Découverte, 2020.
Michael Schrage. Recommendation engines. MIT Press, 2020.
Alyssa Goldstein Sepinwall. The Abbé Grégoire and the French Revolution: The making of modern
  universalism. Univ of California Press, 2005.
Peter Sloterdijk. Le Palais de cristal, À l’intérieur du capitalisme planétaire, trad. Olivier Mannoni,
  Paris: Maren Sell Éditeurs, 2006.
Bernard Stiegler. Dans la disruption: Comment ne pas devenir fou? Éditions les liens qui libèrent,
  2016.
Catherine Stinson. Algorithms are not neutral: Bias in collaborative filtering. AI and Ethics, 2(4):
  763–770, 2022.
Léo Strauss. Political Philosophy: Six Essays. Traditions in philosophy. Pegasus, 1975.
Alain Supiot. La Gouvernance par les nombres. Essais. Fayard, 2015.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks, 2014.
Olivier Tesquet. Etat d’urgence technologique. Premier Parallèle, 2021.
Pablo Villalobos, Jaime Sevilla, Lennart Heim, Tamay Besiroglu, Marius Hobbhahn, and Anson Ho.
  Will we run out of data? an analysis of the limits of scaling datasets in machine learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.04325, 2022.
Angelina Wang, Sayash Kapoor, Solon Barocas, and Arvind Narayanan. Against predictive op-
  timization: On the legitimacy of decision-making algorithms that optimize predictive accuracy.
  Available at SSRN, 2022.
Shizhe Zang, Ming Ding, David Smith, Paul Tyler, Thierry Rakotoarivelo, and Mohamed Ali Kaafar.
  The impact of adverse weather conditions on autonomous vehicles: How rain, snow, fog, and hail
  affect the performance of a self-driving car. IEEE vehicular technology magazine, 14(2):103–111,
  2019.
Shoshana Zuboff. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New
  Frontier of Power. Profile Books, 2019.


                                                   11
