Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N OISE - FREE S CORE D ISTILLATION
 Oren Katzir1∗                Or Patashnik1∗             Daniel Cohen-Or1             Dani Lischinski2

            1                                      2
                Tel-Aviv University                    The Hebrew University of Jerusalem



                                               A BSTRACT

            Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) has emerged as the de facto approach for text-
            to-content generation in non-image domains. In this paper, we reexamine the SDS
            process and introduce a straightforward interpretation that demystifies the neces-
            sity for large Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) scales, rooted in the distillation of an
            undesired noise term. Building upon our interpretation, we propose a novel Noise-
            Free Score Distillation (NFSD) process, which requires minimal modifications to
            the original SDS framework. Through this streamlined design, we achieve more
            effective distillation of pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models while using a
            nominal CFG scale. This strategic choice allows us to prevent the over-smoothing
            of results, ensuring that the generated data is both realistic and complies with the
            desired prompt. To demonstrate the efficacy of NFSD, we provide qualitative ex-
            amples that compare NFSD and SDS, as well as several other methods.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Image synthesis has recently witnessed significant progress in terms of image quality and diver-
sity (Yu et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2021; Gafni et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2022; Kang et al., 2023;
Chang et al., 2023). Specifically, text-to-image models are rapidly improving, with diffusion-based
methods leading the way (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Rombach et al., 2022; Balaji et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022). Seeking to project the great power
of such diffusion-based text-to-image models to other domains beyond images, Score Distillation
Sampling (SDS) was introduced. In their seminal work, DreamFusion, Poole et al. (2022) introduce
the SDS loss which utilizes the strong prior learned by a text-to-image diffusion model to optimize
a NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020) based on a single text prompt. Other works have shown that this
mechanism can also be used to optimize other representations, such as meshes (Chen et al., 2023),
texture maps (Metzer et al., 2022; Tsalicoglou et al., 2023), fonts (Iluz et al., 2023; Tanveer et al.,
2023), and SVG (Jain et al., 2023).
Despite the widespread adoption of the SDS loss in various domains and representations, there is
still a gap in visual quality between images generated by the standard denoising diffusion process
(ancestral sampling) and those resulting from an SDS-based optimization process. Specifically, as
noted by previous works (Poole et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b; Zhu & Zhuang, 2023), SDS tends to
produce over-smoothed and over-saturated results, exhibiting limited ability to generate fine details,
a trait where modern text-to-image models typically excel. Furthermore, the SDS loss remains
intriguing, as it is still not fully understood.
In this paper, inspired by SDS (Poole et al., 2022), we present a general framework that allows us-
ing a pretrained diffusion model to optimize a differentiable image renderer. Treating the diffusion
model as a score function (Song et al., 2020), we propose a formulation that decomposes the score
into three intuitively interpretable components: alignment with the condition, domain correction,
and denoising. Based on insights gained by viewing the score function in light of our new decompo-
sition, we introduce a new Noise-Free Score Distillation (NFSD) loss, and show that it outperforms
SDS without incurring any additional computational costs.
To demonstrate the general nature of our framework, we show that our novel formulation sup-
ports and provides a more concise and straightforward explanation for recent methods, such as
VSD (Wang et al., 2023b) and DDS (Hertz et al., 2023), which have shown improvements over SDS.
    ∗
        Denotes Equal Contribution


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Results obtained with our Noise Free Score Distillation (NFSD). Top: two learnt NeRFs
(movies of these and many other examples are included in the supplementary materials). Bottom: a
gallery of images optimized with NFSD.

We validate our formulation and approach by utilizing Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) as
our score function with a focus on images and NeRFs as our representations. A few example re-
sults are showcased in Figure 1. Through careful design, our Noise-Free Score Distillation (NFSD)
addresses some of the issues present in SDS and leads to improved visual results.

2   BACKGROUND
In this section, we provide the necessary background regarding diffusion models and the SDS loss
(Poole et al., 2022) that enables text-to-3D generation by optimizing the parameters of a differen-
tiable image generation function.
Diffusion models Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) are a family of
generative models that are trained to gradually transform Gaussian noise into samples from a target
distribution pdata . Starting from an initial noise zT ∼ N (0, I), at each diffusion timestep t, the
model takes as input a noisy sample zt , and predicts a cleaner sample zt−1 , until finally obtaining
z0 = x ∼ pdata . Thus, such models effectively learn the transitions p(zt−1 |zt ).
Commonly, diffusion models are parameterized by a U-net ϵϕ (zt , t) (Ho et al., 2020), which predicts
the noise ϵ that was used to produce zt from x = z0 , rather than predicting x or zt−1 directly. This
is known as ϵ-prediction. Previous works (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) have also observed that
ϵϕ (zt , t) is proportional to the predicted score function (Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005) of the smoothed
denisty ∇zt log pt (zt ), where pt is the marginal distribution of the samples noised to time t. The
score function is a vector field that points towards higher density of data at a given noise level. Thus,
intuitively, taking steps in the direction of the score function gradually moves the sample towards
the data distribution.
In this work, we focus on diffusion models that strive to generate samples aligned with a given
condition y (e.g., class, text prompt). To this end, the diffusion process is conditioned on y. This
is typically achieved via classifier-free guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2022), where the condi-
tioned prediction ϵϕ (zt ; y, t) of the noise is extrapolated away from the unconditioned prediction
ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) by an amount controlled by a scalar s ∈ R:
                ϵsϕ (zt ; y, t) = ϵϕ (zt ; y = ∅, t) + s (ϵϕ (zt ; y, t) − ϵϕ (zt ; y = ∅, t)) ,     (1)


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ∅ indicates a null condition (unconditioned). CFG modifies the score function to steer the
process towards regions with a higher ratio of conditional density to the unconditional one. However,
it has been observed that CFG trades sample fidelity for diversity (Ho & Salimans, 2022).
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) Over the last two years, text-to-image diffusion meth-
ods (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2023) have
achieved unprecedented image generation results by incorporating textual encoder outputs as a con-
dition to the diffusion model. These powerful models are trained on billions of text-image pairs,
and such extensive data is currently not available for other domains. The recent introduction of
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) (Poole et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a) enables leveraging the
priors of pre-trained text-to-image models to facilitate text-conditioned generation in other domains,
particularly 3D content generation.
Specifically, given a pretrained diffusion model ϵϕ , SDS optimizes a set of parameters θ of a differ-
entiable parametric image generator g, using the gradient of the loss LSDS with respect to θ:
                                                                       ∂x
                             ∇θ LSDS = w(t) ϵsϕ (zt (x); y, t) − ϵ        ,                        (2)
                                                                       ∂θ
where x = g(θ) is an image rendered by θ, zt (x) is obtained by adding a Gaussian noise ϵ to x
corresponding to the t-th timestep of the diffusion process, and y is a condition to the diffusion
model. In practice, at every optimization iteration, different values of t and Gaussian noise ϵ are
randomly drawn. The parameters θ are then optimized by computing the gradient of LSDS with
respect to x and backpropagating this gradient through the differentiable parametric function g.
Poole et al. (2022) formally show that LSDS minimizes the KL divergence between a family of
Gaussian distributions around x and the distributions p(zt , y, t) learned by the pretrained diffusion
model. Intuitively, Equation 2 can be interpreted as follows: since x = g(θ) is a clean rendered
image, Gaussian noise is first added to it in order to approximately project it to the manifold of
noisy images corresponding to timestep t. Next, the score ϵsϕ (zt (x); y, t) provides the direction in
which this noised version of x should be moved towards a denser region in the distribution of real
images (noised to timestep t and aligned with the condition y). Finally, before the resulting direction
can be used to optimize θ, the initially added noise ϵ is subtracted. We interpret this last step as an
attempt to adapt the direction back to the domain of clean rendered images.
While SDS provides an elegant mechanism for leveraging pretrained text-to-image models, SDS-
generated results often suffer from oversaturation and lack of fine realistic details. These issues
were, in part, attributed to the use of a high CFG value (Wang et al., 2023b), which Poole et al.
(2022) empirically found to be necessary to obtain their results. Several derivative approaches have
emerged to address these challenges (Metzer et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2023).
One effective approach for improving the generation quality is time annealing, which gradually
reduces the diffusion timesteps t drawn by the optimization process, as it progresses (Lin et al.,
2023; Zhu & Zhuang, 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2023). Recently, VSD (Wang et al.,
2023b) and HiFA (Zhu & Zhuang, 2023) reformulated the distillation loss. HiFA uses a denoised
image version instead of the noise prediction, while VSD offers a variational approach, matching the
prediction of noisy real images with that of the noisy rendered images via an additional fine-tuned
diffusion model. In image editing, DDS (Hertz et al., 2023) observed artifacts when applying SDS
to edit real images, which was attributed to a bias in SDS. To mitigate this bias, DDS employs a
subtraction of two SDS terms.
In the next section we propose our novel interpretation of SDS via decomposition of the predicted
score function into three interpretable components. The insights gained from this decomposition
lead us to propose a simple yet effective improvement to SDS, which we call Noise-Free Score
Distillation (NFSD), in Section 4. Furthermore, this decomposition enables a simple and unified
interpretation of the recent progress in SDS, as discussed in Section 5.

3   S CORE D ECOMPOSITION
As discussed earlier, the noise predicted by a trained diffusion model aims to be proportional to the
score function ∇zt log pt (zt ), where pt is the marginal distribution of the samples noised to time t.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    t = 100         t = 200          t = 300         t = 500          t = 700        t = 1000

Figure 2: Visualization of δC . The images in the left column are generated by Stable Diffusion (SD
version 2.1-base) with the prompts “A photo of a horse in a meadow” and “A statue of Buddha”. The
other columns visualize δC for added noise ϵ with magnitude corresponding to different diffusion
timesteps t. As can be seen, δC is fairly clean and concentrated around the main object in the
image. (The visualization is done by decoding each δC using the VAE decoder of SD, please refer
to Appendix A.1 for more details).
In order to gain a better understanding of SDS, it is helpful to examine the decomposition of the
score direction into several intuitively interpretable components.
First, consider the difference δC = ϵϕ (zt ; y, t) − ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) in Equation 1. While ϵϕ (zt ; y, t)
ideally points towards a local maximum in the probability density of noisy real images conditioned
on y, ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) points towards a denser region in the distribution of unconditioned noisy images.
Thus, the difference δC between the two predictions may be thought of as the direction that steers
the generated image towards alignment with the condition y, and we henceforth refer to it as the
condition direction.
The condition direction δC is empirically observed to be uncorrelated with the added noise ϵ and hav-
ing its significant magnitudes around the condition-specific image regions. As demonstrated in Fig-
ure 2, δC is consistently aligned with the condition y for noise corresponding to different timesteps
t of the diffusion process. This observation is consistent with the inspiration behind CFG (Ho &
Salimans, 2022): classifier-guidance of an implicit classifier ∇zt log pi (y|zt ). Extending this ratio-
nale, such a classifier, trained on noisy data zt , should be invariant to the additive noise ϵ, and its
gradients with respect to the input image zt should focus on details in zt that are most relevant to y.

Rewriting Equation 1 using the condition direction δC defined above, we obtain:
          ϵsϕ (zt ; y, t) = ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) + s(ϵϕ (zt ; y, t) − ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t)) = ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) + sδC .        (3)

By the nature of its training, the unconditional term ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) is expected to predict the noise ϵ
that was added to an image x ∼ pdata to produce zt . However, in SDS, zt is obtained by adding
noise to an out-of-distribution (OOD) rendered image x = g(θ), which is not sampled from pdata .
Thus, we can think of ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) as a combination of two components, ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) = δD + δN ,
where δD is the domain correction induced by the difference between the distributions of rendered
and real images, while δN is the denoising direction, pointing towards a cleaner image. Intuitively,
we expect δD to be correlated with the content of x(θ), while no such correlation is expected for δN .
We are not aware of any general way to explicitly separate ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) into these two compo-
nents. Nevertheless, we attempt to isolate the two components for visualization purposes in Fig-
ure 3. The idea is to examine the difference between two unconditional predictions ϵϕ (zt (xID ); ∅, t)
and ϵϕ (zt (xOOD ); ∅, t), where zt (xID ) and zt (xOOD ) are noised in-domain and out-of-domain im-
ages, respectively, that depict the same content and are added the same noise ϵ. Intuitively, while
ϵϕ (zt (xOOD ); ∅, t) both removes noise (δN ) and steers the sample towards the model’s domain (δD ),
the prediction ϵϕ (zt (xID ) mostly just removes noise (δN ), since the image is already in-domain.
Thus, in Figure 3 we use the latter to visualize δN (column (c)) and the difference between the two
predictions to visualize δD (column (d)), effectively assuming that δN is shared between xID , xOOD .
As can be seen, δN indeed appears to consist of noise uncorrelated with the image content, while δD
is large in areas where the distortion is most pronounced and adding δD to xOOD effectively enhances
the realism of the image (column (e)). More details about this process can be found in the appendix.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           (a) xID         (b) xOOD      (c) δN     (d) δD    (e) xOOD + δD

Figure 3: Visualization of δN and δD (at t = 400). Columns (a) and (b) show a pair of in-domain
(xID ) and out-of-domain (xOOD ) images, both depicting the same underlying content. We add the
same noise to both images, and use the pre-trained diffusion model to predict the score. Intuitively,
the noised xID image requires no domain correction, and thus the predicted score consists of only
δN , shown in (c). Subtracting δN from the prediction for the noised xOOD image gives us the domain
correction δD , shown in (d). Indeed, adding δD to xOOD produces a more realistic image (e).
zt
ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) − ϵ


                     t=1         t = 100       t = 200   t = 300   t = 500   t = 700       t = 1000
Figure 4: Visualization of δN − ϵ. Top row: noise ϵ corresponding to different diffusion timesteps
t is added to an in-domain image of a horse (as indicated below each column). Bottom row: the
residual ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) − ϵ between the network prediction and the actual noise. Since the original
image is in-domain (generated by SD), δD ≈ 0, and therefore, ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) ≈ δN . For visualization
purposes, the residual is decoded and clamped between -1 and 1. Although we do not expect the
residual δN − ϵ to be correlated with the image, it may be seen that some correlation in fact exists,
and furthermore, the residual becomes progressively noisier at smaller timesteps t.
To summarize so far, using the components discussed above, we can rewrite the CFG score as:
                                    ϵsϕ (zt ; y, t) = δD + δN + sδC .                               (4)
Poole et al. (2022) define the SDS loss using the difference between the CFG score and the noise ϵ
that was added to the rendered image x to produce zt , i.e.,
                                                     ∂x                            ∂x
                ∇θ LSDS = w(t)(ϵsϕ (zt ; y, t) − ϵ)      = w(t)(δD + δN + sδC − ϵ) .                (5)
                                                     ∂θ                            ∂θ
Note that while both δD and δC are needed to steer the rendered image towards an in-domain image
aligned with the condition y, the residual δN − ϵ is generally non-zero and noisy, and this issue
becomes increasingly pronounced when smaller time steps, responsible for the formation of fine
details, are employed, as visualized in Figure 4. This residual may explain, in part, the lower quality
images generated using SDS, compared to ancestral sampling: at each optimization step, the opti-
mized parameters θ are guided at a random direction depending on δN − ϵ, resulting in an averaging
effect. While higher level semantics are roughly less affected, fine and medium level details, from
lower diffusion times t tend to be over-smoothed. Previous works (Hertz et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2023b) have also observed that the subtraction of ϵ indeed leads to blurry results.
Importantly, our decomposition in Equation 5 explains the need for using a large CFG coefficient
in SDS (e.g., s = 100), as this enables the image-correlated sδC term to dominate the loss, making


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       s=1             s=4             s = 7.5          s = 15           s = 30         s = 100

Figure 5: The impact of CFG on ancestral sampling. We generate all images using the same prompt
“A photo of a horse in a meadow” with the same seed and different values of the CFG parameter s.
As can be seen, large values of s lead to over-saturated and less realistic results.

the noisy residual δN − ϵ relatively negligible. However, high CFG coefficients are known to yield
less realistic results as demonstrated in Figure 5, typically leading to over-saturated images and
NeRFs. Although high CFG coefficients have also been held responsible for lack of result diversity,
we demonstrate in Figure 11 that this assertion is not accurate.

4   N OISE F REE S CORE D ISTILLATION
As discussed above, ideally only the sδC and the δD terms should be used to guide the optimization of
the parameters θ. While δC is simply the difference between the conditioned and the null-conditioned
predictions, δD is more challenging to separate from δN , as they are both part of the predicted noise
ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t).
To extract δD , we distinguish between different stages in the backward (denoising) diffusion process.
First, note that the noise variance, i.e., the magnitude of the noise to be removed, is monotonically
decreased in the backward process. Thus, for sufficiently small timestep values t, δN becomes small
enough to be neglected, and the score ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) = δN + δD is approximately δD . Specifically, we
apply this approximation for t < 200.
As for the larger timestep values, t ≥ 200, we propose to approximate δD by the difference
ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) − ϵϕ (zt ; y = pneg , t), where pneg = “unrealistic, blurry, low quality, out of focus,
ugly, low contrast, dull, dark, low-resolution, gloomy”. Here, we are making the assumption that
δC=pneg ≈ −δD , and thus ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) − ϵϕ (zt ; y = pneg , t) = −δC=pneg ≈ δD .
To conclude, we approximate δD by

                            ϵ (z ; ∅, t),                            if t < 200
                     δD = ϕ t                                                                      (6)
                            ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) − ϵϕ (zt ; y = pneg , t), otherwise,
and use the resulting δC and δD to define an alternative, noise-free score distillation loss LNFSD ,
whose gradients are used to optimize the parameters θ, instead of ∇θ LSDS :
                                                              ∂x
                                ∇θ LNFSD = w(t) (δD + sδC )       ,                             (7)
                                                              ∂θ
In Figure 7 and Figure 8 we show that these seemingly small changes in the definition of the loss lead
to a noticeable improvement in the quality of generated images, as well as NeRFs. Note, that while
in the results of SDS we use s = 100, in our results we use the commonly used value of s = 7.5.
The reason for this is that by taking the measures described above to approximately eliminate the δN
component, it is no longer necessary to resort to a large value of s to make the δC term dominant.

5   D ISCUSSION
Our score decomposition formulation can be used to explain previous works that were proposed to
improve the SDS loss. This demonstrates the wide scope and applicability of our formulation.
DDS. Hertz et al. (2023) propose an adaptation of the SDS loss for image editing task. Specifi-
cally, instead of randomly initializing the optimization process as in SDS, it is initialized with the
(in-domain) input image. DDS optimizes the input image according to the text condition, while pre-
serving image attributes that are irrelevant to the edit task guided by the input prompt. The gradients
used by DDS are defined by
                        ∇θ LDDS = ∇θ LSDS (zt (x), y) − ∇θ LSDS (z̃t (x̃), ỹ),                    (8)


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Figure 6: NeRFs optimized with NFSD.
where z̃t (x̃), ỹ denote the noisy original input image and its corresponding prompt, respectively.
Here y denotes the prompt that describes the edit, and x, x̃ are noised with the same noise ϵ. Incor-
porating our score decomposition into Equation 8 yields
 ∇θ LDDS = w(t)(δD + δN + sδCedit − ϵ) − w(t)(δD + δN + sδCorig − ϵ) = w(t)s(δCedit − δCorig ). (9)
Our formulation helps to understand the high-quality results achieved by DDS: the residual compo-
nent which makes the results in SDS over-smoothed and over-saturated is cancelled out. Moreover,
since the optimization is initialized with an in-domain image, the δD component is not effectively
needed and cancelled out. The remaining direction is the one relevant to the difference between the
original prompt and the new one.
ProlificDreamer. Wang et al. (2023b) tackle the generation task, and propose the VSD loss, which
successfully alleviates the over-smoothed and over-saturated results obtained by SDS. In VSD,
alongside the pretrained diffusion model ϵϕ , another diffusion model ϵLoRA is trained during the
optimization process. The ϵLoRA model is initialized with the weights of ϵϕ , and during the opti-
mization process it is fine-tuned with rendered images x = g(θ). Effectively, the rendered images
during the optimization are out-of-domain for the original pretrained model distribution, but are
in-domain for ϵLoRA . Hence, the gradients of the VSD loss are defined as
                                                                                 ∂x
                    ∇θ LVSD = w(t) ϵsϕ (zt (x); y, t) − ϵLoRA (zt (x); y, t, c      ,            (10)
                                                                                 ∂θ
where c is another condition that is added to ϵLoRA and represents the camera viewpoint of the
rendered image x. Viewed in terms of our score decomposition, since ϵLoRA is fine-tuned on x, both
δC and δD are approximately 0, thus it simply predicts δN . Therefore, ∇θ LVSD can be written as
                                                        ∂x                       ∂x
                 ∇θ LVSD = w(t)(δD + δN + sδC − δN )          = w(t)(δD + sδC ) ,                 (11)
                                                        ∂θ                       ∂θ
i.e., it approximates exactly the same terms as our NFSD. It should be noted that unlike our approach,
VSD has a considerable computational overhead of fine-tuning the additional diffusion model during
the optimization process.

6   E XPERIMENTS
We implement NFSD using the threestudio (Guo et al., 2023) framework for text-based 3D gener-
ation. Unless stated otherwise, all 3D models are optimized for 25, 000 iterations using AdamW
optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with a learning rate of 0.01. The initial rendering resolution
of 64 × 64 is increased to 512 × 512 after 5, 000 iterations; at the same time we anneal the maximum
diffusion time to 500 as proposed by Lin et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2023b). The implicit volume
is initialized according to the object-centric initialization (Lin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b). We
alternate the background between random solid-color and a learned neural environment map. The
pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model for all experiments is Stable Diffusion 2.1-base (Rombach
et al., 2022), a latent diffusion model with ϵ-prediction.
3D generation. Figure 6 showcases several NeRFs optimized using our NFSD. As can be seen the
rendered images are sharp and contain highly intricate details. The prompts used and additional
examples can be found in Appendices A.2 and A.7, respectively.
Comparison with SDS. We compare our NFSD with SDS under different parametric generators and
different configurations. In each comparison, the same seed is used by both methods. Specifically,


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         SDS 7.5
         SDS 100
         NFSD 7.5


                    “A metal lying   “A cake made of ice” “A photo of sunset,   “A white dog   “A fire with smoke”
                      Buddha”                               winter, river”        sleeping”

Figure 7: 2D image generation with SDS and NFSD. We directly optimize the latent space of SD-
2.1-base (Rombach et al., 2022). Top row: SDS with CFG of 7.5 generates overly-smooth images
that severely lack detail. The common solution is to increase the CFG scale to 100 (middle row).
The high CFG enables a reasonable distillation of the score, but some artifacts remain (e.g., the dog’s
purple eyes, the frosting in the cake) and realistic details are still lacking (e.g., the fire). Bottom row:
using the standard CFG of 7.5, our NFSD succeeds in distilling finer details, such as the frosting on
the cake or the fire example.

we set the same seed for the guidance process, i.e., the noise and the diffusion time are the same for
both methods, at every step of the optimization process.
2D image generation: Here, we directly optimize the latent code of Stable Diffusion, a 64 × 64 × 4
tensor. In the notations defined in Section 2, θ ∈ R64×64×4 and g(θ) = θ. To initialize the op-
timization process, θ is sampled from a Gaussian Distribution. We then use either LNFSD or LSDS
as the only loss for 1, 000 iterations. As illustrated in Figure 7, SDS optimization with a nominal
CFG scale (7.5) yields over-smoothed images, while using a high CFG scale (100) generates the
main object but lacks background details and occasionally introduces aritfacts. In contrast, NFSD
optimization is able to produce more pleasing results in which the object is clear, the background
is detailed, and the image looks more realistic, even when using a CFG value of 7.5. For example,
observe the fur of the dog which contains artifacts in the SDS-100 configuration, and looks more re-
alistic with NFSD-7.5. In addition, observe the fire flames which feature fewer details and therefore
look painted with SDS-100, and exhibit more detail and realism when using NFSD-7.5.
Text-to-NeRF synthesis: In Figure 8 we use SDS and NFSD to optimize NeRFs given text prompts.
Here we do not preform time annealing of the diffusion, which hinders a bit the quality of the output
model, but allows better emphasis on the differences between SDS and NFSD. As can be seen,
although SDS succeeds in generating plausible 3D objects, it typically generates fewer fine details.
Note for example the wings of the eagle and the mane of the horse. Note that, unlike images, the
NeRF representation is inherently smooth; furthermore, additional losses, such as shape density, are
applied. These regularizations, combined with a high CFG value, enable SDS to produce plausible
results, despite the unwanted noise distillation. In contrast, NFSD produces more detailed results
with ordinary CFG values by attempting to eliminate the noise and explicitly approximate δD .
Comparison with related methods. In Figure 9 we compare our method with recent approaches
including DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022), Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023), Latent-NeRF (Metzer et al.,
2022), Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023), and ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b). Following previ-
ous works (Metzer et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023), for each of
these methods we compare to results that were reported by the authors. As can be seen, our method
achieves comparable or better results, while being significantly simpler than most of these methods.
For example, observe the roof of the cottage, which is highly detailed in our method and in Pro-
lificDreamer, but exhibits less detail in the other methods. Unlike ProlificDreamer which requires


                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SDS 100
NFSD 7.5


Figure 8: Comparison of NeRFs optimized by SDS (top) and NFSD (bottom). NFSD allows better
distillation: e.g., observe the wings of the eagle (leftmost), the angel’s stomach (second from left),
and the horse’s mane and tail (third from right). Furthermore, NFSD creates fewer sporadic features,
as in the gargoyle (third from left). The prompts are reported in Appendix A.2.


           DreamFusion   Latent-NeRF   Magic3D         Fantasia3D   ProlificDreamer NFSD (ours)
Figure 9: Comparison of NFSD with different methods. Our NFSD is of high resolution and ex-
hibits detailed features. In the top row we used the prompt “A plate piled high with chocolate chip
cookies”, and in the bottom one we used “A 3D model of an adorable cottage with a thatched roof”.
optimizing a diffusion model in parallel to the NeRF optimization, our method is simpler to imple-
ment and the optimization process is much faster. Please note that the original methods differ in
their implementation details, including the diffusion model that guides the optimization. Therefore,
in Appendix A.8, we provide comparison using threestudio (Guo et al., 2023) for all method results.

7          C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we have revisited the SDS process and introduced a novel interpretation, dissecting
the score into three distinct components: the condition, the domain, and the denoising components.
Through this novel perspective, we proposed a simple distillation process, which we refer to as
Noise-Free Score Distillation (NFSD). NFSD was developed with the explicit goal of preventing
noise distillation during the optimization process. Notably, NFSD requires only minimal adjust-
ments to the SDS framework, all while operating with a nominal Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG)
scale. Despite its simplicity, NFSD has shown promising potential in advancing the generation of 3D
objects, demonstrating notable improvements when compared to both SDS and existing approaches.
While NFSD enables better score distillation compared with SDS, two main drawbacks of the SDS
process still exist, namely the well known Janus problem (multi-face) and low diversity. We be-
lieve that the latter is a direct result of the distillation process mechanism: the diffusion scores that
guide the optimization are uncorrelated across successive iterations, even if noise is successfully
eliminated. While annealing the diffusion time as the optimization progresses is helpful, designing
a more principled noise scheduling might prove more effective, and lead to improved diversity.
Additionally, we recognize the challenging nature of evaluating NeRFs generated from text, with a
current absence of suitable metrics and benchmarks to assess NeRF quality and enable comprehen-
sive comparisons across various methodologies. We believe that the development of such metrics is
essential for advancing research in this domain and and would like to investigate this in the future.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Rinon Gal and Yuval Alaluf for their feedback and helpful suggestions. This work was
supported in part by the Israel Science Foundation (grants no. 2492/20, 3611/21 and 3441/21), Len
Blavatnik and the Blavatnik family foundation.

R EFERENCES
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika
  Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, Tero Karras, and Ming-Yu Liu. ediff-i: Text-
  to-image diffusion models with ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324,
  2022.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T. Freeman. Maskgit: Masked generative
  image transformer. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 11305–11315, 2022.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, AJ Maschinot, Jose Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan
  Yang, Kevin Murphy, William T. Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, Yuanzhen Li, and Dilip Krishnan.
  Muse: Text-to-image generation via masked generative transformers, 2023.
Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fantasia3d: Disentangling geometry and
  appearance for high-quality text-to-3d content creation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
  national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), October 2023.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. ArXiv,
  abs/2105.05233, 2021.
Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, and Jie Tang. Cogview: Mastering text-to-image generation via
 transformers. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-
  a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. ArXiv, abs/2203.13131, 2022.
Yuan-Chen Guo, Ying-Tian Liu, Ruizhi Shao, Christian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Guan Luo, Chia-
  Hao Chen, Zi-Xin Zou, Chen Wang, Yan-Pei Cao, and Song-Hai Zhang. threestudio: A unified
  framework for 3d content generation. https://github.com/threestudio-project/
  threestudio, 2023.
Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, and Daniel Cohen-Or.          Delta denoising score.    arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.07090, 2023.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.            Classifier-free diffusion guidance.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Yukun Huang, Jianan Wang, Yukai Shi, Xianbiao Qi, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Lei Zhang. Dream-
  time: An improved optimization strategy for text-to-3d content creation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.12422, 2023.
Aapo Hyvärinen and Peter Dayan. Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score match-
  ing. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6(4), 2005.
Shir Iluz, Yael Vinker, Amir Hertz, Daniel Berio, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Ariel Shamir. Word-as-
  image for semantic typography. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01818, 2023.
Ajay Jain, Amber Xie, and Pieter Abbeel. Vectorfusion: Text-to-svg by abstracting pixel-based
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 1911–1920, 2023.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Minguk Kang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Richard Zhang, Jaesik Park, Eli Shechtman, Sylvain Paris, and Taesung
 Park. Scaling up gans for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d con-
  tent creation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 300–309, 2023.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  423–439. Springer, 2022.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.       Decoupled weight decay regularization.       arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Gal Metzer, Elad Richardson, Or Patashnik, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Latent-nerf for
  shape-guided generation of 3d shapes and textures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07600, 2022.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using 2D
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. ArXiv, abs/2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L. Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Seyedeh Sara Mahdavi, Raphael Gontijo
  Lopes, Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. ArXiv, abs/2205.11487, 2022.
Jascha Narain Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep
  unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. ArXiv, abs/1503.03585, 2015.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Maham Tanveer, Yizhi Wang, Ali Mahdavi-Amiri, and Hao Zhang. Ds-fusion: Artistic typography
 via discriminated and stylized diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09604, 2023.
Christina Tsalicoglou, Fabian Manhardt, Alessio Tonioni, Michael Niemeyer, and Federico Tombari.
  Textmesh: Generation of realistic 3d meshes from text prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12439,
  2023.
Kevin Turner. Decoding latents to rgb without upscaling. https://discuss.huggingface.co/t/decoding-
  latents-to-rgb-without-upscaling/23204, 2022.
Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jaco-
  bian chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12619–12629, 2023a.
Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Prolific-
  Dreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3D generation with variational score distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16213, 2023b.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasude-
   van, Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Benton C. Hutchinson, Wei Han, Zarana
   Parekh, Xin Li, Han Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Scaling autoregressive models
   for content-rich text-to-image generation. ArXiv, abs/2206.10789, 2022.
Joseph Zhu and Peiye Zhuang. Hifa: High-fidelity text-to-3d with advanced diffusion guidance.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18766, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    V ISUALIZATION OF SCORE COMPONENTS
In Figures 2, 3 and 4 we visualize the score components, or manipulation of them.
Stable Diffusion operates in the latent space of a pretrained autoencoder, and there-
fore we use the decoder to obtain these images. At a first glance it may be surpris-
ing that the decoder can decode such latents, as they are out of the distribution that
it was trained on. However, as shown in (Turner, 2022) and discussed by (Metzer
et al., 2022), the RGB value at a certain pixel, can be approximated by applying a
fixed linear transformation on the corresponding pixel of the latent code. Hence,
we conclude that the latent space of Stable Diffusion behaves similarly to the RGB
space, and decoding to RGB latent codes that are out of distribution is still mean-
ingful. We also note that when decoding the zero latent code, we get the brown RGB image shown
on the right. Therefore, this color in our visualizations indicates a value of 0 in the latent code.
Additionally, in Figure 3 we visualize δD and δN by generating pairs of xID (in-domain) and xOOD
(out-of-domain) images. Additional components are visualized in Figure 10. The two ID images
were generated using DDIM sampling with the prompts “a pretty cat on a sand” and “a cow in a
field”. Subsequently, generate the corresponding OOD images by applying a Gaussian filter to the
cat image and a bilateral filter to the cow image.


       xID              xOOD              zID
                                           t                 zOOD
                                                              t             ϵID
                                                                             ϕ = δN      ϵOOD
                                                                                          ϕ   = δN + δD


                                                                              neg                 neg
  δD = ϵID   OOD
        ϕ − ϵϕ        xOOD + δD      xOOD + δN + δD    xOOD + δN + δD − ϵ    δD           xOOD + δD


Figure 10: Extension of Figure 3 in the main paper. Top row: we generate a pair of in-domain (xID )
and out-of-domain (xOOD ) images, both depicting the same underlying content. The same noise ϵ is
added to both images yielding zID t = zt (xID ) and zt
                                                       OOD
                                                             = zt (xOOD ), for ID and OOD respectively.
We then calculate the predicted score of the pre-trained diffusion model, ϵID     ϕ = ϵϕ (zt (xID ); ∅, t)
      OOD
and ϵϕ = ϵϕ (zt (xOOD ); ∅, t). Bottom row: we first calculate δD by subtracting the OOD score
prediction from the ID score prediction, and then show that by adding this component to the OOD
image, the quality of the resulting image, xOOD + δD , is significantly improved. Conversely, when
adding both δD and δN to xOOD (resulting in xOOD + δN + δD ), the noise is clearly apparent. When
subtracting ϵ from xOOD + δN + δD , in a manner similar to the procedure in SDS, the resulting image
                                                         neg
(xOOD + δN + δD − ϵ) looks blurry. We also show δD           as defined in Equation 6, and demonstrate
that its addition to xOOD is similar to the result of adding the δD defined in the leftmost column.


A.2    P ROMPTS USED IN THE PAPER
Here we report the prompts used in several of the figures, in a left-to-right, top-to-bottom fashion.
In Figure 6: “A huge Hedgehog”, “a soldier iron decor pen holder”, “a trunk up statue of an Elephant
with Thailand Decoration, side view”, “a photo of a vase with sunflowers”, “a brass statue of a
dragonfly” and “a rainbow colored wings spread parrot”.
In Figure 8: “a eagle catching a snake”, “a golden statue of a fairy angel with white wings”, “a metal
gargoyle statue with white wings, “a silver metal running horse on a table glass”, “a huge Hystrix”
and “a phoenix in golden cage”.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3          D IVERSITY OF R ESULTS

We explore the diversity of generated results achieved by our method compared to SDS-100. We
follow a procedure similar to the one outlined in Sec. 6 by training a 2D-latent image, albeit without
implementing any annealing of the diffusion time. As illustrated in Figure 11, both methods exhibit
limited variation, portraying similar objects of comparable sizes positioned centrally within the im-
age. Therefore, we infer that the limited diversity observed in SDS cannot be attributed solely to the
use of a high CFG scale.
  SDS 100
  NFSD 7.5


Figure 11: Diversity in NFSD and SDS Results. We optimize 2D-latent images using the prompt
“An astronaut riding a horse” for both SDS (top) and NFSD (bottom) with each column originating
from a different seed.

A.4          N EGATIVE P ROMPTS

Here we show the relation between the term δD presented in the paper to the technique of using
negative prompts. Specifically, the usage of negative prompts, namely replacing the empty un-
conditional prompt (“”) with a selected negative prompt, is well-known to improve the results of
ancestral-sampling (Liu et al., 2022). In the context of SDS, it is also possible to use a negative
prompt instead of the empty prompt, yielding
                                                                                                     ∂x
                ∇θ LSDS-neg = w(t)(ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) + s(ϵϕ (zt ; y, t) − ϵϕ (zt ; pneg , t)) − ϵ) .                  (12)
                                                                                                     ∂θ
Since
  ϵϕ (zt ; y, t) − ϵϕ (zt ; pneg , t) = (ϵϕ (zt ; y, t) − ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t)) − (ϵϕ (zt ; pneg , t) − ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t)), (13)
then, LSDS-neg can also be written as
                                                                                       ∂x
                              ∇θ LSDS-neg = w(t)(δD + δN + s(δC + δD ) − ϵ) ,                                      (14)
                                                                                       ∂θ
since δD is defined as −(ϵϕ (zt ; pneg , t) − ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t)) in Equation 6. Interestingly, using a negative
prompt in SDS, mimics the addition of an amplified δD term to the SDS loss. This further strengthens
the importance of the term δD , and supports its definition with the negative prompt. As can be seen
in Figure 13, the negative prompt (NP) usually adds details to both SDS and NFSD (e.g., the smoke).
However, The results obtained by SDS-100+NP sometimes exhibit some artifacts such as the dark
spots on the cake’s frosting, and above the dog’s eyes. NFSD-7.5+NP obtains highly detailed results
(e.g., the ice on the berries), but sometimes slightly deviates from the prompt (e.g., the cake does
not look made of ice with NP).

A.5          A BLATION S TUDIES

Time Threshold We empirically validate our decision to set ts = 200 as the sufficiently small
time in Equation 6 for estimating ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t) ≈ δD . We follow a similar procedure to the one
outlined in Sec. 6 without time annealing. As depicted in Figure 12, a time interval that is too small
fails to regulate the generated image, resulting in noticeable artifacts, while too large values of ts
lead to an overly smoothed result. Note, that in all the visualized examples we use a CFG scale of
7.5, and therefore the results for ts = 1000 look worse than those of SDS-100.

                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      ts = 0          ts = 100   ts = 200    ts = 300      ts = 400      ts = 500     ts = 1000
Figure 12: Different time thresholds ts . For every t < ts , δD is estimated via ϵϕ (zt ; ∅, t). The
prompts used are: “An astronaut riding a horse” and “Panda snowboarding”.

Ablating δD To better understand the role of δD in NFSD, we remove it from our loss, keeping
only the δC term. In the second row of Figure 13, we show results where we optimize a 2D-latent
image only with δC . As can be seen, optimizing with δC results in an image that follows the prompt,
but has many artifacts.


   “A metal lying
     Buddha”


   “A cake made of
         ice”


     “A photo of
    sunset, winter,
        river”


      “A white dog
        sleeping”


      “A fire with
        smoke”



                       SDS-7.5     7.5δC      SDS-100    SDS-100+NP     NFSD-7.5    NFSD-7.5+NP

Figure 13: Extension of Figure 7. In the second column we present results obtained by using only
the δC component in NFSD. As shown, this results in many artifacts. Using the negative prompt
adds details to both SDS-100 and NFSD-7.5 as shown in the fourth and rightmost columns for SDS
and NFSD, respectively. However, SDS-100+NP exhibits some artifacts (e.g., the cake frosting,
the dog’s eyes). NFSD-7.5+NP produces sharp and highly detailed results, but sometimes slightly
deviates from the prompt (e.g., the cake).

A.6      Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

FID We quantitatively evaluate both our NFSD and SDS for the task of 2D-image generation
using the COCO2014 caption dataset. We have sampled 5K captions and images from the validation
dataset. The FID scores between the generated data of each method and the COCO dataset are shown
in Table 1. As can be seen in the table, NFSD achieves better FID compared to SDS-100, confirming
the better image quality achieved by our method.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       SDS-100           NFSD (ours)
                                                FID     39.04              35.18

   Table 1: FID-5K results on COCO2014. NFSD achieves lower FID score compared to SDS.


User Study Following Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023) and ProlificDreamer (Wang et al., 2023b), we
conducted a user study comparing rendered NeRF images obtained by DreamFusion (Poole et al.,
2022), Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023), Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023), ProlificDreamer (Wang et al.,
2023b), and our NFSD method. Specifically, we used 15 prompts from previous works, and for each
prompt, we displayed images corresponding to this prompt obtained by methods that provide a result
for this prompt. Respondents were asked to choose the image that is most aligned with the given
prompt, and the highest quality image. Deciding between methods may be very difficult in certain
examples, and therefore we allowed to choose results from more than a single method. The final
score of each method is defined as the percentage of times the results of this method were selected.
Note that since we allow respondents to choose more than a single method in each question, the
scores are not summed to 100. The results are summarized in Table 2. As can be seen, all methods
provide results that are aligned with the prompt and our method attains the highest score. In terms
of quality, our method obtains significantly better results compared with the competing methods.

                             DreamFusion              Fantasia3D         Magic3D        ProlificDreamer            NFSD (ours)
 prompt alignment               46.09                   61.74             42.03               41.55                  65.51
   image quality                 3.19                   27.83             17.75               37.68                  70.14

            Table 2: User study results. The highest possible score for each method is 100.


A.7    A DDITIONAL RESULTS

In Figures 14 and 15 we present additional results for text-to-NeRF generation using our NFSD.


   “Michelangelo style statue of dog reading news on a cellphone”                           “pink flamingo in paradise”


                   “Orangutan eating a banana”                                “[*] a baby bunny sitting on top of a stack of pancakes”


                        “A rat driving a car”                                      “A two headed fire dragon with small wings”
Figure 14: NeRFs optimized with NFSD. [*] “A zoomed out DSLR photo of”, [...]-“A wide angle
zoomed out DSLR photo of zoomed out view of”.


                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      “A highly detailed statue of a dinosaur made of leaves”        “Decorative mosaic of the mythological Chinese dragon”


      “[...] Tower Bridge made out of gingerbread and candy”                    “A camel with a colorful saddle”


                         “a ceramic lion”                              “A golden statue of a fairy angel with white wings”


       “A sculpture of cleopatra with ceremonial decoration”                          “A ripe strawberry”


              “A robotic butterfly on a metal flower”                       “A DSLR photo of a classic Packard car”


          “A small saguaro cactus planted in a clay pot”                             “A white cat sleeping”


                     “Railing tangga mewah”                                   “A tumbaga pendant depicting a cat”

Figure 15: NeRFs optimized with NFSD. [*] “A zoomed out DSLR photo of”, [...]-“A wide angle
zoomed out DSLR photo of zoomed out view of”.

                                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.8   M ORE C OMPARISONS WITH R ELATED M ETHODS

As mentioned in the main paper, methods in different papers were implemented differently. For
example, the diffusion model used in each of the methods if different, the NeRF implementation
may be different, etc. Hence, we present results obtained by running the unified threestudio (Guo
et al., 2023) framework implementation for all the methods. For all the methods we use Stable
Diffusion 2.1-base and run them on a single GPU. As can be seen in Figure 16, for some of the
methods the results look better with threestudio (e.g., DreamFusion), but for other methods the
results may seem worse. For Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023) the gap may be caused by the diffusion
model, while for Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023) it may be caused by the amount of resources. The
results reported by the authors of Fantasia3D were obtained by optimizing on 8 GPUs while we
use a single one. Overall, our method is comparable or better than all the methods, exhibiting high
resolution and detailed features.


 DreamFusion     Latent-NeRF        Magic3D          Fantasia3D   ProlificDreamer NFSD (ours)

Figure 16: Comparison of NFSD with other methods using the threestudio (Guo et al., 2023) imple-
mentation.

Additionally, in Figures 17,18,19,20 and 21 we show additional comparisons with results obtained
by other methods, as reported in their respective original papers.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   “A marble bust of a mouse”


    DreamFusion         Magic3D            Fantasia3D         ProlificDreamer    NFSD (ours)
                                      “A car made of sushi”


    DreamFusion         Magic3D            Fantasia3D         ProlificDreamer    NFSD (ours)

Figure 17: Comparison of NFSD with other methods using results obtained from the original papers.

                                       “A ripe strawberry”


      DreamFusion               Magic3D                 Fantasia3D              NFSD (ours)
                          “A small saguaro cactus planted in a clay pot”


      DreamFusion               Magic3D              ProlificDreamer            NFSD (ours)
                    “A rabbit, animated movie character, high detail 3d mode”


      DreamFusion               Magic3D              ProlificDreamer            NFSD (ours)

Figure 18: Comparison of NFSD with other methods using results obtained from the original papers.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          “A stack of pancakes covered in maple syrup”


      DreamFusion               Magic3D               Fantasia3D             NFSD (ours)
                                     “A delicious croissan”


      DreamFusion              Fantasia3D           ProlificDreamer          NFSD (ours)
                                     “An ice cream sundae”


      DreamFusion               Magic3D               Fantasia3D             NFSD (ours)
                      “A baby bunny sitting on top of a stack of pancakes”


      DreamFusion               Magic3D             ProlificDreamer          NFSD (ours)
                                         “A hamburger”


      DreamFusion              LatentNerf                Fantasia            NFSD (ours)

Figure 19: Comparison of NFSD with other methods using results obtained from the original papers.
                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           “Baby dragon hatching out of a stone egg”


         DreamFusion                        Magic3D                       NFSD (ours)
                                 “An iguana holding a balloon”


         DreamFusion                        Magic3D                       NFSD (ours)
                                         “A blue tulip”


         DreamFusion                    ProlificDreamer                   NFSD (ours)
                                 “a cauldron full of gold coins”


         DreamFusion                    ProlificDreamer                   NFSD (ours)
Figure 20: Comparison of NFSD with other methods using results obtained from the original papers.
                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            “Bagel filled with cream cheese and lox”


         DreamFusion                        Magic3D                       NFSD (ours)
                                      “A plush dragon toy”


         DreamFusion                    ProlificDreamer                   NFSD (ours)
                                        “A ceramic lion”


         DreamFusion                        Magic3D                       NFSD (ours)
                       “Tower Bridge made out of gingerbread and candy”


         DreamFusion                        Magic3D                       NFSD (ours)

Figure 21: Comparison of NFSD with other methods using results obtained from the original papers.
                                             22
