Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O BJECT-AWARE I NVERSION AND R EASSEMBLY FOR
I MAGE E DITING
  Zhen Yang1 Ganggui Ding1 Wen Wang1 Hao Chen1† Bohan Zhuang2†† Chunhua Shen1
 1
   Zhejiang University, China
 {zheny.cs,dingangui,wwenxyz,haochen.cad,chunhuashen}@zju.edu.cn
 2
   Monash University, Australia
  bohan.zhuang@monash.edu



                                                 A BSTRACT

              Diffusion-based image editing methods have achieved remarkable advances in
              text-driven image editing. The editing task aims to convert an input image with
              the original text prompt into the desired image that is well-aligned with the tar-
              get text prompt. By comparing the original and target prompts, we can obtain
              numerous editing pairs, each comprising an object and its corresponding editing
              target. To allow editability while maintaining fidelity to the input image, existing
              editing methods typically involve a fixed number of inversion steps that project
              the whole input image to its noisier latent representation, followed by a denoising
              process guided by the target prompt. However, we find that the optimal number of
              inversion steps for achieving ideal editing results varies significantly among dif-
              ferent editing pairs, owing to varying editing difficulties. Therefore, the current
              literature, which relies on a fixed number of inversion steps, produces sub-optimal
              generation quality, especially when handling multiple editing pairs in a natural
              image. To this end, we propose a new image editing paradigm, dubbed Object-
              aware Inversion and Reassembly (OIR), to enable object-level fine-grained edit-
              ing. Specifically, we design a new search metric, which determines the optimal
              inversion steps for each editing pair, by jointly considering the editability of the
              target and the fidelity of the non-editing region. We use our search metric to find
              the optimal inversion step for each editing pair when editing an image. We then
              edit these editing pairs separately to avoid concept mismatch. Subsequently, we
              propose an additional reassembly step to seamlessly integrate the respective edit-
              ing results and the non-editing region to obtain the final edited image. To system-
              atically evaluate the effectiveness of our method, we collect two datasets called
              OIRBench for benchmarking single- and multi-object editing, respectively. Ex-
              periments demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance in editing
              object shapes, colors, materials, categories, etc., especially in multi-object editing
              scenarios. The project page can be found here.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models, such as Latent Diffusion Models (Rombach et al.,
2022), SDXL (Podell et al., 2023), Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022),
have advanced significantly and garnered widespread attention. Recently, many methods have be-
gun using diffusion models for image editing. These methods offer fine-grained control over content,
yielding impressive results that enhance the field of artistic content manipulation. We focus on text-
driven image editing, aiming to align the region of interest (editing region) with user-defined text
prompts while protecting the non-editing region. We define the combination of the editing region
and its corresponding editing target as the “editing pair”. In Fig. 1, (parrot, crochet parrot) emerges
as an editing pair when comparing the original prompt with target prompt 1. To enable editability in
the editing region while maintaining fidelity to the input image, existing text-driven image editing
methods (Tumanyan et al., 2023; Couairon et al., 2022; Hertz et al., 2022; Mokady et al., 2023;
     †
         HC and BZ are corresponding authors.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                             Optimal Result
                                   Target Prompt 1:
                                   a blue and yellow crochet parrot is
                                   sitting on a branch
         Original Image            Editing Pair:
                                   (parrot, crochet parrot)
                                                                            Inversion Step=25
                                                                                                      Optimal Result
                                   Target Prompt 2:
                                   a blue and yellow parrot is sitting on
                                   a gold branch
                                   Editing Pair:
                                   (a branch, a gold branch)
                                                                                                     Inversion Step=35
                                   Target Prompt 3:
                                   a blue and yellow crochet parrot is
                                   sitting on a gold branch
Original Prompt: a blue and yellow
                                   Editing Pairs:
parrot is sitting on a branch
                                   (parrot, crochet parrot)
                                   (a branch, a gold branch)
                                                                                                                         Concept Mismatch   Poor Editing

                                                                                   25           30          35                 40               45    Inversion
                                                                                                                                                        Step


Figure 1: Motivation. In the process of text-driven image editing, we first inverse the original
image to progressively acquire all latents. Then, we denoise each latent to generate images under
the guidance of the target prompt. After obtaining all the images, the most optimally edited results
are selected by human. From the first and second rows, we note that different editing pairs have
unique optimal inversion steps. Moreover, we observe editing different editing pairs with the same
inversion step results in concept mismatch or poor editing, as shown in the third row.



Meng et al., 2021) typically project the original image into its noisier representation, followed by a
denoising process guided by the target prompt.
Our key finding is that different editing pairs require varying inversion steps, depending on the edit-
ing difficulties. As shown in the first and second rows in Fig. 1, if the object and target within an
editing pair are similar, it requires only a few inversion steps, and vice versa. Over-applying inver-
sion steps to easy editing pairs or insufficient steps to challenging pairs can lead to a deterioration in
editing quality. This can be even worse when multiple editing pairs exist in the user prompt, as edit-
ing these objects with the same inversion step at once can lead to concept mismatch or poor editing
in the third row of Fig. 1. However, current methods (Tumanyan et al., 2023; Couairon et al., 2022;
Hertz et al., 2022; Mokady et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023) uniformly apply a fixed inversion step to
different editing pairs, ignoring the editing difficulty, which results in suboptimal editing quality.
To this end, we propose a novel method called Object-aware Inversion and Reassembly (OIR) for
generating high-quality image editing results. Firstly, we design a search metric in Fig. 2. This met-
ric automatically determines the optimal inversion step for each editing pair which jointly considers
the editability of the editing object of interest and the fidelity to the original image of the non-editing
region. Secondly, as shown in Fig. 3, we propose a disassembly then reassembly strategy to enable
generic editing involving multiple editing pairs within an image. Specifically, we first search the
optimal inversion step for each editing pair with our search metric and edit them separately, which
effectively circumvents concept mismatch and poor editing. Afterward, we propose an additional
reassembly step during denoising to seamlessly integrate the respective editing results. In this step, a
simple yet effective re-inversion process is introduced to enhance the global interactions among edit-
ing regions and the non-editing region, which smooths the edges of regions and boosts the realism
of the editing results.
To systematically evaluate the proposed method, we collect two new datasets containing 208 and
100 single- and multi-object text-image pairs, respectively. Both quantitative and qualitative exper-
iments demonstrate that our method achieves competitive performance in single-object editing, and
outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods by a large margin in multi-object editing scenarios.
In summary, our key contributions are as follows.

• We introduce a simple yet effective search metric to automatically determine the optimal inversion
  step for each editing pair, which jointly considers the editability of the editing object of interest
  and the fidelity to the original image of the non-editing region. The process of using a search
  metric to select the optimal result can be considered a new paradigm for image editing.


                                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• We design a novel image editing paradigm, dubbed Object-aware Inversion and Reassembly,
  which separately inverses different editing pairs to avoid concept mismatch or poor editing and
  subsequently reassembles their denoised latent representations with that of the non-editing region
  while taking into account the interactions among them.
• We collect two new image editing datasets called OIRBench, which consist of hundreds of text-
  image pairs. Our method yields remarkable results, outperforming existing methods in multi-
  object image editing and being competitive to single-object image editing, in both quantitative
  and qualitative standings.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Text-driven image generation and editing. Early methods for text-to-image synthesis (Zhang
et al., 2017; 2018b; Xu et al., 2018) are only capable of generating images in low-resolution and
limited domains. Recently, with the scale-up of data volume, model capacity, and computational
resources, significant progress has been made in the field of text-to-image synthesis. Representative
methods like DALLE series (Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), Stable
Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), Parti (Yu et al., 2022), and GigaGAN (Kang et al., 2023) achieve
unprecedented image generation quality and diversity in open-world scenarios. However, these
methods provide limited control over the generated images. Image editing provides finer-grained
control over the content of an image, by modifying the user-specified content in the desired manner
while leaving other content intact. It encompasses many different tasks, including image colorization
(Zhang et al., 2016), style transfer (Jing et al., 2019), image-to-image translation (Zhu et al., 2017),
etc. We focus on text-driven image editing, as it provides a simple and intuitive interface for users.
We refer readers to (Zhan et al., 2023) for a comprehensive survey on multimodal image synthesis.
Text-driven image editing. Text-driven image editing need understand the semantics in texts. The
CLIP models (Radford et al., 2021), contrastively pre-trained with learning on internet-scale image-
text pair data, provide a semantic-rich and aligned representation space for image and text. There-
fore, several works (Abdal et al., 2020; Alaluf et al., 2021; Bau et al., 2020; Patashnik et al., 2021)
attempt to combine Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020) with CLIP
for text-driven image editing. For example, StyleCLIP (Patashnik et al., 2021) develops a text in-
terface for StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2019) based image manipulation. However, GANs are often
limited in their inversion capabilities (Xia et al., 2022), resulting in an undesired change in image.
The recent success of diffusion models in text-to-image generation has sparked a surge of interest
in text-driven image editing using diffusion models (Meng et al., 2021; Hertz et al., 2022; Mokady
et al., 2023; Miyake et al., 2023; Tumanyan et al., 2023; Avrahami et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023;
Brooks et al., 2023; Kawar et al., 2023). These methods typically transform an image into noise
through noise addition (Meng et al., 2021) or inversion (Song et al., 2020), and then performing de-
noising under the guidance of the target prompt to achieve desired image editing. Early works like
SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021) achieve editability by adding moderate noise to trade-off realism and
faithfulness. Different from SDEdit which focuses on global editing, Blended Diffusion (Avrahami
et al., 2022) and Blended Latent Diffusion (Avrahami et al., 2023) necessitates local editing by using
a mask during the editing process and restricting edits solely to the masked area. Similarly, DiffEdit
can automatically produce masks and considers the degree of inversion as a hyperparameter, fo-
cusing solely on the editing region. Prompt2Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) and Plug-and-Play (PNP)
(Tumanyan et al., 2023) explore attention/feature injection for better image editing performance.
Compared to Prompt2Prompt, PNP can directly edit natural images. Another line of work explores
better image reconstruction in inversion for improved image editing. For example, Null-text Inver-
sion (Mokady et al., 2023) trains a null-text embedding that allows a more precise recovery of the
original image from the inverted noise. Negative Prompt Inversion (Miyake et al., 2023) replaces the
negative prompt with the original prompt, thus avoiding the need for training in Null-text Inversion.
While progress has been made, existing methods leverage a fixed number of inversion steps for
image editing, limiting their ability to achieve optimal results. Orthogonal to existing methods, we
find that superior image editing can be achieved by simply searching the optimal inversion steps for
editing, without any additional training or attention/feature injection. Our approach is completely
training-free and automatically searches the optimal inversion steps for various editing pairs within
an image, enabling fine-grained object-aware control.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Candidate                                  Inversion Trajectory     Po(original prompt): a cat is sitting on the desk
                                                                                                                                        Editing Pair: (cat, tiger)
            Images                                    Denoise Trajectory       Pt(target prompt): a tiger is sitting on the desk
                                  Optimal Inversion
         Original Image                Step
                       P(image)                                     P(noise)
                                                                                                                     Negative MSE & Min-Max Normalization

    0
                                                                               Candidate                                  Non-Editing
                                                                                                                          Region Mask
                                                                                Images
          Optimal Result
                                                                                            Original Image

                                                                                                                Mask
                                                                                                              Generator
                                                                                                                            Editing
                                                                                                                          Region Mask


    50                                                                                                                CLIP Score & Min-Max Normalization



Inversion
  Step                     (a) Candidate Images Generation                                               (b) Optimal Candidate Selection


Figure 2: Overview of the optimal inversion step search pipeline. (a) For an editing pair, we
obtain the candidate images by denoising each inverted latent. (b) We use a mask generator to
jointly compute the metrics Se and Sne , and finally we obtain S by computing their average.


3         M ETHOD

In general, an image editing task can be expressed as a triplet ⟨Io , Po , Pt ⟩, where Po is the original
prompt describing the original image Io , and Pt is the target prompt reflecting the editing objective.
In image editing, we aim to edit Io to the target image It that aligns with Pt . To achieve this, we
employ Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), a strong text-to-image diffusion model, to enable
text-driven image editing. Specifically, Io is first inverted to Inoise using DDIM Inversion guided by
Po . Following that, Inoise is denoised to generate It guided by Pt to meet the user’s requirement.
We further define an editing pair as (Oo , Ot ), where Oo and Ot denote an object in Po and its
corresponding editing target in Pt , respectively. As shown in Fig. 1, there exist multiple editing
pairs {(Oo , Ot )} given an image editing task ⟨Io , Po , Pt ⟩ that have multiple editing targets.
As shown in Fig. 1, each editing pair can have a distinct optimal inversion step. Hence, using a
single inversion step for an image with multiple editing pairs might lead to poor editing and concept
mismatch. For example, the gold branch is confusingly replaced with a crochet branch at the 40th
step in the third row of Fig. 1. In Sec. 3.1, We propose a optimal inversion step search method to
automatically search for the optimal inversion step for each editing pair, and in Sec. 3.2, we propose
Object-aware Inversion and Reassembly (OIR) to solve the problems of poor editing and concept
mismatch.

3.1         O PTIMAL INVERSION STEP SEARCH

Candidate images generation. DDIM Inversion sequentially transforms an image into its corre-
sponding noisier latent representation. The diffusion model can construct an edited image Iti from
each intermediate result from inversion step i, as shown in Fig. 2 (a). This process produces a set of
images {Iti } called candidate images. Notably, from these candidate images, one can manually se-
                                    ∗
lect a visually appealing result Iti that aligns closely with Pt , with its non-editing region unchanged.
Its associated inversion step i∗ is defined as the optimal inversion step. Surprisingly, comparing to
the commonly used feature-injection-based image editing methods (Tumanyan et al., 2023), sim-
ply choosing a good Iti often produces a better result. A discussion on the difference between our
method and feature-injection-based image editing methods can be found in Appendix A.3.
Optimal candidate selection. Since manually choosing It can be impractical, we further devise a
searching algorithm as shown in Fig. 2 (b). To automate the selection process, we first apply mask
generator to extract the editing region mask Me and the non-editing region mask Mne from Io . By
default, we employ Grounded-SAM (Liu et al., 2023; Kirillov et al., 2023) for mask generation.
However, other alternatives can be used to obtain the editing mask, for example, we can follow


                                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022) or MasaCtrl (Cao et al., 2023) to generate masks from the attention
maps. For a detailed discussion of the mask generation process, please refer to Appendix A.5.
Subsequently, we propose a quality evaluation metric based on two criteria: Se , the alignment be-
tween the editing region of the target image It and the target prompt Pt ; and Sne , the degree of
preservation of the non-editing region relative to the original image Io .
For the first criterion regarding the editing region, we utilize CLIP score (Hessel et al., 2021) to
assess alignment:
                                                CLIPimage (It , Me ) · CLIPtext (Pt )
            Se (It , Pt , Me ) = normalize(                                               ),          (1)
                                              ∥CLIPimage (It , Me )∥2 · ∥CLIPtext (Pt )∥2
where CLIPimage (It , Me ) and CLIPtext (Pt ) are the extracted editing region image feature and
text feature with CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). normalize(·) is the min-max normalization. The
normalization formula is given by: ({Se }i − min{Se })/(max{Se } − min{Se }), {Se } denotes the
complete set of Se values obtained from all candidate images, i denotes the index of the image in
candidate images. Insufficient inversion can restrict the editing freedom while too much inversion
can lead to corrupted results. Thus, we observe that Se first rises then drops as the inversion step
increases.
To measure the similarity between the non-editing regions of It and Io , we employ the negative
mean squared error:
                     Sne (It , Io , Mne ) = normalize(−∥ (It − Io ) ⊙ Mne ∥22 ),                      (2)
where ⊙ denotes the element-wise product, Mne represents the non-editing region mask. Sne usu-
ally decreases as inversion step grows, since the inversion process increases the reconstruction diffi-
culty of the non-editing region. The search metric is simply an average of Se and Sne :
                                       S = 0.5 · (Se + Sne ),                                         (3)
where S is the search metric. As shown in Fig. 2 (b), we define the inversion step that has the highest
search metric as the optimal inversion step.
Acceleration for generating candidate images. We notice that the sequential steps in generating
multiple candidate images in Fig. 2 (a) are independent, and the varying number of steps make
parallelization challenging. Consequently, we propose a splicing strategy over the denoising process.
Firstly, we pair denoising processes of different steps to achieve equal lengths. In this way, denoising
processes of the same length can proceed simultaneously for parallel acceleration, as there is no
dependency between denoising processes. This strategy is detailed in Appendix A.4.

3.2   O BJECT- AWARE I NVERSION AND R EASSEMBLY

The optimal inversion search can be performed for each editing pair, providing us great flexibility in
multi-object editing tasks. In short, to solve concept mismatch and poor editing, we disassemble the
image to add different inversion noise according to the optimal step for each region and reassemble
the noised regions at the corresponding stage.
Disassembly. From the original and target prompts, we get a sequence of editing pairs {(Oo , Ot )k }.
For preparation, we replace the entity Ook in Po with Otk for each pair in {(Oo , Ot )k }, generating a
sequence of guided prompts {Ptk }, as shown in Fig. 3 (a). Then, we feed the original image and the
guided prompts into the optimal inversion step search pipeline to obtain the optimal inversion step
i∗k for all editing pairs, as illustrated in Fig. 3 (b). Here, each guided prompt is treated as the Pt for
the optimal inversion step search pipeline. Subsequently, we use the guided prompt for denoising of
each editing pair, as depicted in Fig. 3 (c). Moreover, the optimal inversion step searching processes
for distinct editing pairs are independent. In a multi-GPU scenario, we can run the step searching
processes for different editing pairs in parallel on multiple GPUs, achieving further acceleration.
The disassembly process segregates the editing processes of different editing pairs, effectively cir-
cumventing concept mismatch. Simultaneously, this isolated denoising allows each editing pair to
employ the latent from its respective optimal inversion step, thus avoiding poor editing.
Reassembly. In this process, given the inversion step for each editing pair, we edit and integrate
the regions into the final result, as illustrated in Fig. 3 (c). We also assign an inversion step for the


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Original Prompt(Po): a dog sitting next to a gift                                                                               Cat optimal        Cake optimal
                                                                                              Reassembly Step=10
                                                               Original Image                                                     inversion step=24   inversion step=30
    ------------------------------------------------------
     Target Prompt(Pt): ... cat ... cake ...
     Editing Pairs: (dog, cat), (gift, cake)
    ------------------------------------------------------
     Guided Prompt(cat): ... cat ... gift ...
     Editing Pair: (dog, cat)
    ------------------------------------------------------                      Timestep=10
     Guided Prompt(cake): ... dog ... cake ...                     Start
     Editing Pair: (gift, cake)
                                                                                                                       Guided Prompt(cat)
           (a) Guided prompts preparation

                          search
                          pipeline                                                                                                    Guided Prompt(cake)

                       Guided Prompt         Cake optimal
Original Image
                           (cake)          inversion step=30                                                            Timestep=20
                                                                    End
                                                                                                    Re-inversion
                                                               Target Image                                                                              Inverse
                       Guided Prompt          Cat optimal
                           (cat)           inversion step=24                                                                                             Denoise

                          search                                                                                                                         Crop/Splice
                          pipeline                                                      Target Prompt


       (b) Optimal inversion step searching                                                (c) Object-aware Inversion and Reassembly



Figure 3: Overview of object-aware inversion and reassembly. (a) We create guided prompts for
all editing pairs using Po and Pt . (b) For each editing pair, we utilize the optimal inversion step
search pipeline to automatically find the optimal inversion step. (c) From each optimal inversion
step, we guide the denoising individually using its guided prompt. We crop the denoised latent of the
editing regions and splice them with the inverted latent of the non-editing region’s at the reassembly
step. Subsequently, we apply a re-inversion process to the reassembled latent and denoise it guided
by Pt .


non-editing region named reassembly step ir , indicating the editing regions reassemble at this step.
                                                          ik
Specifically, for the k-th editing region, we start from Inoise , the noised image at the optimal inver-
                                              k
sion step ik , and use the guided prompt Pt to denoise for ik − ir steps. This ensures the resulting
image Ikir will be at the same sampling step as the non-editing region Inoise  ir
                                                                                   . To reassemble the
                                           ir
regions, we paste each editing result to Inoise to get the reassembled image Irir at step ir . We found
that for most images, setting the reassembly step to 20% of total inversion steps yields satisfactory
outcomes. To enhance the fidelity of the editing results and smooth the edges of the editing region,
instead of directly denoise from Irir , we introduce another noise adding process called re-inversion.
Inspired by (Xu et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023), this process reapplies several
inversion steps on the reassembled image Ir . In our experiments, the re-inversion step ire is also set
to 20% of the total inversion steps, as we empirically found that it performs well for most situations.
Lastly, we use the target prompt Pt to guide the denoising of the re-inversion image Irir +ire , facil-
itating global information fusion and producing the final editing result. Compared with previous
methods, our reassembled latent merges the latents denoised from the optimal inversion steps of all
editing pairs, along with the inverted latent from the non-edited region. This combination enables us
to produce the best-edited result for each editing pair without compromising the non-editing region.

4          E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate our method both quantitatively and qualitatively on diverse images collected from the
internet and the collection method can be found in Appendix A.1. The implementation details of
our method can be found in Appendix A.2. Since single-object editing is encompassed in multi-
object editing, we mainly present the experimental results on multi-object editing. Detailed results
on single-object editing can be found in Appendix A.11.

4.1          M AIN R ESULTS

Compared methods. We make comparisons with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) image editing meth-
ods, including DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022), Null-text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2023), Plug-and-
Play (PNP) (Tumanyan et al., 2023), and the mask-based stable diffusion inpainting (SDI)1 .
       1
           https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-inpainting


                                                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                     (starfish, stuffed toy
             (wooden framed, self-                     (straw hat, colorful   (book, fried egg and                            (monitor, gift box)   (plant, Lego plant)
                                      (tables, tank)                                                        starfish)                                                    (Wall-E, crochet Wall-E)
             portrait of Van Gogh)                          straw hat)           fork in plate)                                (keyboard, game         (human hand,
                                     (house, church)                                                   (foam, checkered                                                 (water, a pile of confetti)
               (leaves, a balloon)                         (cat, tiger)          (vase, teapot)                                   controller)         wooden table)
                                                                                                            blanket)


 Original
 Image


   Our


   PnP


  Stable
Diffusion
Inpainting


DiffEdit


Null-text
Inversion


                     (a)                  (b)                  (c)                    (d)                     (e)                    (f)                   (g)                     (h)


Figure 4: Qualitative comparisons. From top to bottom: original image, our method (OIR),
PNP (Tumanyan et al., 2023), Stable Diffusion Inpainting, DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022), Null-
text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2023). The texts at the top of the images represent editing pairs.


Evaluation metrics. Following the literatures (Hertz et al., 2022; Mokady et al., 2023), we use
CLIP (Hessel et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021) to calculate the alignment of edited image and target
prompt. Additionally, we use MS-SSIM (Wang et al., 2003) and LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018a) to
evaluate the similarity between the edited image and the original image.
Qualitative comparison. We show some qualitative experimental results in Fig. 4, and additional
results can be found in Appendix A.11. From our experiments, we observe the following: Firstly,
SDI and DiffEdit often produce discontinuous boundaries (e.g., the boundary between the tank and
the grassland in Fig. 4 (b), and the desk in Fig. 4 (g)). Secondly, feature injection methods (PNP
and Null-text Inversion) show better editing results in certain scenarios (e.g., the Lego plant in Fig. 4
(g)). However, they overlook the variations in inversion steps for different editing pairs, leading to
poor editing (e.g., the foam in the Fig. 4 (e) and the monitor in Fig. 4 (f) and the water in Fig. 4
(h) are left unedited). Moreover, they face serious concept mismatch, e.g., the color and texture of
the “colorful strew hat” in Fig. 4 (c) is misled by the tiger’s skin. Thirdly, our approach can avoid
concept mismatch, since we edit each editing pair individually by disassembly (e.g., the tiger and
the colorful hat in Fig. 4 (c)). In addition, reassembly in our method can edit non-editing region,
e.g., the shadow in the background changes when the leaves turn into a balloon.
Quantitative comparison. We conducted quantitative analyses on our multi-object editing dataset.
As illustrated in Tab. 1, we achieve state-of-the-art outcomes on CLIP score, surpassing other meth-
ods. Notably, our results show a significant improvement over the previous SOTA methods, PNP.
Besides, our result on MS-SSIM is highly competitive, though it’s marginally behind DiffEdit and
PNP. It’s worth noting that MS-SSIM primarily measures the structural similarity between the output
and input images and may not always correlate with the quality of the edit. As the qualitative ex-
periments reveal, DiffEdit and PNP occasionally neglects certain objects, leaving them unchanged,
which inadvertently boosts the MS-SSIM score.


                                                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   CLIP score ↑      MS-SSIM ↑       LPIPS ↓
                                                   Ours               30.28            0.653          0.329
                                             Plug-and-Play            28.45            0.658          0.359
                                             SD Inpainting            26.87            0.575          0.398
                                                 DiffEdit             20.98            0.736          0.195
                                            Null-text Inversion       28.02            0.651          0.357

 Figure 5:      User study results.       Table 1: Quantitative evaluation. CLIP score measures the
 Users are asked to select the best       alignment of image and text, while MS-SSIM and LPIPS
 results in terms of the alignment to     evaluate the similarity between the original and the edited
 target prompts and detail preserva-      images.
 tion of the input image.
                                        (lighthouse, rocket taking off), optimal inversion step=25


 original image   target image


                                          (blue sky, sky with sunset), optimal inversion step=41


                                               (sea, grassland), optimal inversion step=48


                                 25            30           35            40           45            50 Inversion
                                                                                                          Step

Figure 6: Visualization of the search metric. The images on the right represent the candidate
images obtained using the search metric for each editing pair. In the bottom-left corner, curves are
plotted with its x-axis representing the inversion step and the y-axis indicating the search metric S.


User study. We selected 15 images from the collected multi-object dataset for user testing, and
we compared our OIR with SDI, DiffEdit, PNP, and Null-text Inversion. The study included 58
participants who were asked to consider the alignment to the target prompt and preservation of
details of the original image, and then select the most suitable image from a set of five randomly
arranged images on each occasion. As can be seen from Fig. 5, the image generated by OIR is the
favorite of 66.7% of the participants, demonstrating the superiority of our method. An example of
the questionnaire can be found in Appendix A.11.

4.2   V ISUALIZATION OF THE SEARCH METRIC

We visualize the candidate images and their search metric in Fig. 6 to gain a clearer understanding of
the trend of the search metric S. It’s evident that each editing pair has its own optimal inversion step,
with significant variations between them. For instance, the (sea, and grassland) perform optimally
between steps 45 and 50. Meanwhile, the (lighthouse, rocket taking off) is most effective around
the 25th step, but experience significant background degradation after the 35th step. As shown in
the curves in Fig. 6, the optimal inversion step selected by our search metric aligns closely with
the optimal editing results, showcasing the efficacy of our approach. In addition, in the curves of
each editing pair, we observe a trend that the search metric first increases and then decreases as
the inversion step increases. The reasons are as follows: When the inversion step is small, the
background changes slightly, making editing region alignment with the target prompt the dominant


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


factor in the search metric. As the inversion step grows, the edited result aligns well with the target
prompt, amplifying the influence of background consistency in the search metric. More visualization
results can be found in Appendix A.11.


     Original Image
     (house, church)                                              w/o re-inversion      premature
                              Ours           w/o re-inversion
(a row of tables, a tank)                                       w/o reassembly step     reassembly


   (leaves, a balloon)
 (wooden framed, self-
 portrait of Van Gogh)


                               (a)                 (b)                  (c)                (d)


Figure 7: Ablations for OIR. The images and texts on the far left are the original images and their
editing pairs. The remaining images represent the results after ablating the OIR. The editing effect
within the red box is poor.


4.3    A BLATION S TUDY

As shown in Fig. 7, we conduct ablation experiments on each module in the OIR. Initially, we
set the reassembly step to a significantly large value, essentially merging editing pairs at an early
stage. As observed in Fig. 7(d), mismatch emerge between different concepts, such as the area
designated for the house being overtaken by the trees in the background. Additionally, as depicted
in Fig. 7(b), the image edges become notably rough, unrealistic, and contain noise, when re-inversion
is omitted. Without re-inversion, different regions are denoised independently, leading to a weaker
representation of the relationships between them. If neither is added, not only the concept mismatch,
but the edges are sharp and noisy, as shown in Fig. 7(c).


5     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

We have proposed a new search metric to seek the optimal inversion step for each editing pair, and
this search method represents a new paradigm in image editing. Using search metric, we present
an innovative paradigm, dubbed Object-aware Inversion and Reassembly (OIR), for mulit-object
image editing. OIR can disentangle the denoising process for each editing pair to prevent concept
mismatch or poor editing and reassemble them with the non-editing region while taking into account
their interactions. Our OIR can not only deliver remarkable editing results within the editing region
but also preserve the non-editing region. It achieves impressive performance in both qualitative
and quantitative experiments. However, our method requires additional inference time for optimal
inversion step search, and the effectiveness of our approach on other generic editing tasks, such
as video editing, remains to be verified. Furthermore, exploring the integration of OIR with other
inversion-based editing methods is also an area worth investigating. We consider addressing these
issues in future work.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2022ZD0118700). The
authors would like to thanks Hangzhou City University for accessing its GPU cluster.

R EFERENCES
Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka. Image2stylegan++: How to edit the embedded
  images? In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn., pp. 8296–8305, 2020.

Yuval Alaluf, Or Patashnik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Restyle: A residual-based stylegan encoder via
  iterative refinement. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comp. Vis., pp. 6711–6720, 2021.

Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn., pp. 18208–18218, 2022.

Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended latent diffusion. ACM Tran. Graphics,
 42(4):1–11, 2023.

David Bau, Hendrik Strobelt, William Peebles, Jonas Wulff, Bolei Zhou, Jun-Yan Zhu, and An-
  tonio Torralba. Semantic photo manipulation with a generative image prior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.07727, 2020.

Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn., pp. 18392–18402, 2023.

Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Mas-
 actrl: Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2304.08465, 2023.

Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-
  based semantic image editing with mask guidance. arXiv: Comp. Res. Repository, 2022.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.

Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv: Comp. Res. Repository,
 2022.

Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. arXiv: Comp. Res. Repository, 2021.

Yongcheng Jing, Yezhou Yang, Zunlei Feng, Jingwen Ye, Yizhou Yu, and Mingli Song. Neural style
  transfer: A review. IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics, 26(11):3365–3385, 2019.

Minguk Kang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Richard Zhang, Jaesik Park, Eli Shechtman, Sylvain Paris, and Taesung
 Park. Scaling up gans for text-to-image synthesis. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn.,
 pp. 10124–10134, 2023.

Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn., pp. 4401–4410, 2019.

Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proc. IEEE Conf.
  Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn., pp. 6007–6017, 2023.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv:
  Comp. Res. Repository, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv: Comp. Res. Repository, 2023.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv: Comp.
  Res. Repository, 2021.
Chenlin Meng, Robin Rombach, Ruiqi Gao, Diederik Kingma, Stefano Ermon, Jonathan Ho, and
  Tim Salimans. On distillation of guided diffusion models. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt.
  Recogn., pp. 14297–14306, 2023.
Daiki Miyake, Akihiro Iohara, Yu Saito, and Toshiyuki Tanaka. Negative-prompt inversion: Fast
  image inversion for editing with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv: Comp. Res. Repository,
  2023.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn.,
  pp. 6038–6047, 2023.
Or Patashnik, Zongze Wu, Eli Shechtman, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski. StyleCLIP: Text-
  driven manipulation of stylegan imagery. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comp. Vis., pp. 2085–2094,
  October 2021.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. SDXL: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv: Comp. Res. Repository, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., pp. 8748–8763.
  PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., pp.
  8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt.
  Recogn., pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Proc. Advances in Neural Inf.
  Process. Syst., 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv:
   Comp. Res. Repository, 2020.
Yang Song, Prafulla Dhariwal, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Consistency models. 2023.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features
  for text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn., pp.
  1921–1930, 2023.
Luozhou Wang, Shuai Yang, Shu Liu, and Ying-cong Chen. Not all steps are created equal: Selective
  diffusion distillation for image manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08448, 2023.
Zhou Wang, Eero P Simoncelli, and Alan C Bovik. Multiscale structural similarity for image quality
  assessment. In The Thrity-Seventh Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems & Computers, 2003,
  volume 2, pp. 1398–1402. Ieee, 2003.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Weihao Xia, Yulun Zhang, Yujiu Yang, Jing-Hao Xue, Bolei Zhou, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Gan
 inversion: A survey. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 45(3):3121–3138, 2022.
Tao Xu, Pengchuan Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Han Zhang, Zhe Gan, Xiaolei Huang, and Xiaodong
  He. Attngan: Fine-grained text to image generation with attentional generative adversarial net-
  works. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn., pp. 1316–1324, 2018.
Yilun Xu, Mingyang Deng, Xiang Cheng, Yonglong Tian, Ziming Liu, and Tommi Jaakkola. Restart
  sampling for improving generative processes. arXiv: Comp. Res. Repository, 2023.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2(3):5, 2022.
Fangneng Zhan, Yingchen Yu, Rongliang Wu, Jiahui Zhang, Shijian Lu, Lingjie Liu, Adam Ko-
  rtylewski, Christian Theobalt, and Eric Xing. Multimodal image synthesis and editing: The
  generative AI era. In IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. IEEE, 2023.
Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dimitris
  Metaxas. StackGAN: Text to photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adversarial
  networks. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comp. Vis., 2017.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Colorful image colorization. In Proc. Eur. Conf.
  Comp. Vis., pp. 649–666. Springer, 2016.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreason-
  able effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt.
  Recogn., pp. 586–595, 2018a.
Zizhao Zhang, Yuanpu Xie, and Lin Yang. Photographic text-to-image synthesis with a
  hierarchically-nested adversarial network. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn., 2018b.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
  using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comp. Vis., pp. 2223–2232,
  2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       A PPENDIX
A.1     DATA C OLLECTION

To assess the effectiveness of real-world image editing, we collect two datasets by carefully select-
ing images from various reputable websites, namely Pexels 2 , Unsplash 3 , and 500px 4 . We use
the first dataset to test the ability for single-object editing of the search metric, including animals,
vehicles, food, and more. The second dataset is created to evaluate the method’s multi-object editing
capabilities. Each photo in this dataset contains two editable objects. We also designed one or more
prompts for each image to test the editing effectiveness. The images resize to 512x512 pixels.

A.2     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We use Diffusers5 implementation of Stable Diffusion v1.4 6 in our experiments. For DDIM Inver-
sion, we used a uniform setting of 50 steps. Our method employs the simplest editing paradigm,
consisting of first applying DDIM Inversion to transform the original image into a noisy latent, and
then conducting denoising guided by the target prompt to achieve the desired editing effect. We
employ the CLIP base model to compute the CLIP score as outlined by (Hessel et al., 2021) for
our search metric, and utilize the CLIP large model for quantitative evaluation. Following (Miyake
et al., 2023), we set the negative prompt as the original prompt for the denoising process throughout
our experiments. We use Grounded-SAM7 to generate masks. We use our search metric to perform
single-object editing and compare with Plug-and-Play (PNP) (Tumanyan et al., 2023), Stable Diffu-
sion Inpainting (SDI)8 , and DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022). For multi-object editing, we compare
our method to PNP, SDI, DiffEdit, and Null-text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2023), which can directly
support multi-object editing.
In the single-object editing experiments, the parameters of PNP9 were kept consistent with the de-
fault values specified in the code. DiffEdit10 utilized the default parameters from the diffusers library.
SDI utilized the code from the Diffusers. The random seed is set to 1 for all experiments.
In the multi-object editing experiments, PNP can easily be extended to generalized multi-object
editing scenarios. For SDI, we consider three approaches to extend it to multi-object scenarios.
Method 1 uses a mask to frame out all editing regions and use a target prompt to guide the image
editing. In Method 2, different masks are produced for different editing regions. These regions
then utilize guided prompts for directed generation. Subsequently, after cropping, the results are
seamlessly merged together. In the third approach, we substitute the guided prompt from Method 2
with Ot specific to each editing pair. Method 3 is used in Fig. 4 because it has the best visual effects.
All our experiments are conducted on the GeForce RTX 3090.

A.3     S CHEMATIC C OMPARISON

The automatic image selection through search metric is a new image editing paradigm, which is
theoretically similar to the feature-injected-based image editing method. We use the most repre-
sentative PNP among feature-injected-based image editing methods as an example. In the scenario
of 50 steps of DDIM Inversion, PNP will select the latent after 50 steps of inversion, as shown in
Fig. 8 (a). At this time, latent is the most noisey and has the greatest editability. If we directly
denoise the latent, it will severely destroy the layout of the original image. To solve this problem,
PNP reduces the editing freedom by injecting features. Compared with PNP, our search metric in
Fig. 8 (b) automatically selects the most suitable latent by controlling the number of inversion steps
to achieve editing fidality and editability.
    2
       https://www.pexels.com/zh-cn/
    3
       https://unsplash.com/
     4
       https://500px.com/
     5
       https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers
     6
       https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4
     7
       https://github.com/IDEA-Research/Grounded-Segment-Anything
     8
       https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-inpainting
     9
       https://github.com/MichalGeyer/pnp-diffusers
    10
       https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/api/pipelines/diffedit


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           inverison                                                   inverison


                                   inject feature                                                                alterable


                           denoise                                                        denoise


                           (a) PNP                                             (b) Our Search Metric



Figure 8: Left: the process of the feature injection method. Right: the process of our search metric.


A.4    ACCELERATION FOR G ENERATING C ANDIDATE I MAGES

                  Unet                       Change Latents
                 Denoise                     Change Timestep


  0
                                                                                  (b) Parallel Denoise Methods


                                                                                      1                           50



                                                                                      2                           49


                                                                                      24                          27



  50                                                                                  25                          26


  t
                (a) Serial Denoise Methods                          (c) Parallel Denoise method Extends To 51-Step Denoise



Figure 9: The funnel shape represents the denoising process, while the vertical bold lines represent
the operations of changing the latent and changing the timestep. (a) Schematic for generating all
target images. (b) Our proposed method for implementing parallel generation of all target images.
(c) Extending the methodology to the 50-step DDIM Inversion.

As shown in Fig. 9 (a), generating candidate images is a serial process and there is no interde-
pendence in different denoise processes. We leverage this characteristic to propose an acceleration
method for generating candidate images, illustrated in Fig. 9 (b). This method involves equalizing
the length of denoise operations and introducing “change latent” and “change timestep” operations
at the junctions. By denoising all latents simultaneously, we will change the generation speed of
candidate images to the same speed as generating a picture. An extension of our approach, tailored
to the context where DDIM Inversion spans 50 steps, is shown in Fig. 9 (c).

A.5    G ENERATING MASK AND VISUAL CLIP FEATURE

We utilize the Grounded-SAM (Liu et al., 2023; Kirillov et al., 2023) to generate masks of the editing
regions and we will use these masks to compute the CLIP score (Hessel et al., 2021). The detailed
process is depicted in Fig. 10 (a), and examples of the segmentation result is presented in Fig. 11.
Since only the object features within the mask region are of interest, a self-attention mask is applied
to restrict the feature extraction of CLIP vision model. The mask is resized to match the number of
patches in CLIP and is then transformed into an attention mask as depicted in Fig. 10 (b). Finally, it
is fed into the self-attention of the CLIP vision model for interaction with the original image.


                                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Origin Prompt: a cat wearing a straw hat is lying on the carpet
                                                                                                           resize     generate attention mask
 Origin Object: cat, straw hat


                                                                                                                                                    (197x197)

                                                                                                                (14x14)
              cat

      straw hat


                                                                                                                    CLIP Vision Model              vision feature


                              (a) Generate mask                                                       (b) Generate attention mask


Figure 10: Left: the process of generating editing region mask. Right: the process of generating
CLIP’s self-attention mask through object mask.
 (wooden framed, self-                                                       (straw hat, colorful                           (book, fried egg and
 portrait of Van Gogh)                                                            straw hat)                                   fork in plate)
                                          (tables, tank)
    (leaves, ballon)                                                             (cat, tiger)                                  (vase, teapot)
                                         (house, church)


 (starfish, stuffed toy                                                                                                      (Wall-E, crochet
        starfish)                      (monitor, gift box)                   (plant, Lego plant)
                                                                                                                                 Wall-E)
   (foam, checkered                     (keyboard, game                         (human hand,
                                                                                                                             (water, a pile of
        blanket)                           controller)                         wooden table)
                                                                                                                                confetti)


                                  Figure 11: Segmentation masks for images in Fig. 4.


A.6        C OMPARISON OF EDITING SPEED

                                  Ours OIR              Ours OIR        Null-text                                     Stable Diffusion
               Method                                                                      Plug-and-Play                                           DiffEdit
                                 (Multi-GPU)          (Single-GPU)      Inversion                                        Inpainting
      Average time cost             155s                  298s            173s                      224s                     6s                      15s
       Maximum GPU
                                  19.75 GB                   19.75 GB   22.06 GB                7.31 GB                   10.76 GB                 13.51 GB
           usage

Table 2:             Editing speed and maximum GPU usage of different editing methods in multi-object
editing.

We evaluate the speed of diverse editing techniques applied to a multi-object dataset using the
GeForce RTX 3090, with the results detailed in Table 2. We ignore the time overhead for pre- and
post-processing, such as model loading and file reading, concentrating primarily on computational
costs. “Time cost” denotes the expended time on editing an image, and “Maximum GPU usage”
represents the peak GPU utilization by a single GPU during the editing process. Our OIR implemen-
tation uses the acceleration scheme in Appendix A.4. In Tab. 2, OIR (Multi-GPU) indicates running
OIR on two GPUs, while OIR (Single-GPU) runs the same process on a single GPU, searching the
optimal inversion step for different editing pairs sequentially. We use the default hyperparameters
for Null-text Inversion (NTI), Plug-and-Play (PNP), and DiffEdit, using their open-source codes.
We can observe that, although OIR is slower than NTI and PNP on a single GPU, our method ex-
cels in editing capability compared to these methods. Additionally, the additional time overhead is


                                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Mask From Attention Map                     Mask From Grounded-SAM Mask
rabbit -> origami rabbit
  book -> newspaper         rabbit          book      Editing Result       rabbit         book       Editing Result


 dumplings -> fry rice
  chopsticks -> knife      dumplings     chopsticks   Editing Result     dumplings     chopsticks    Editing Result


Figure 12: Compare the impact of different mask generators in the search metric on editing results.


within an acceptable range. Moreover, our method can be accelerated significantly when running on
multi-GPUs, outperforming NTI and PNP in speed, where NTI and PNP do not have clear solutions
that can be accelerated on multi-GPU due to the temporal dependency between the denoise steps.

A.7     C OMPARISON OF DIFFERENT MASK GENERATORS

We compare the influence of different mask generators on OIR, as shown in Fig. 12. During our
testing, we employ two types of mask generators. The first approach is the Grounded-SAM method
within the segment model. The second approach involves extracting masks using the attention map
from Stable Diffusion, following methods like DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022) and MasaCtrl (Cao
et al., 2023). Specifically, We employ the mask extraction method from DiffEdit, which eliminates
the need for introducing an additional model. The first line in Fig. 12 reveals a notable accuracy loss
in the mask extracted from the attention map compared to the one extracted by Grounded-SAM.
Nevertheless, OIR consistently produces excellent editing results with these sub-optimal masks,
indicating the robustness of our method across various mask generators. Moreover, as seen from the
second line in Fig. 12, our method performs well when using the mask extracted from the attention
map. Thus, our approach is not reliant on the segment model, highlighting its robustness in handling
different masks and producing plausible editing results.

A.8     T HE COMBINATION OF S EARCH M ETRIC AND OTHER INVERSION - BASED IMAGE
        EDITING METHODS

Our search metric can be used in conjunction with other inversion-based image editing methods.
Here we use the fusion of Null-text Inversion (NTI) Mokady et al. (2023) and the search metric as an
example. In NTI, the “cross replace step” is a crucial hyperparameter that determines the proportion
of feature injection. A higher value for the “cross replace step” retains more of the original image
information, while a lower value allows for more freedom in editing. In the NTI’s open-source
code, the “cross replace step” is set to 0.8. There are multiple ways to combine the search metric
and NTI. The first approach is to fix the inversion step and use the search metric to find the optimal
“cross replace step”. The second approach is to fix the “cross replace step” and use the search
metric to find the optimal inversion step. The third approach involves simultaneously searching for
both the “cross replace step” and inversion steps. Fig. 13 shows the experimental results for the first
alternative. From the results in the first row, it is clear that the “cross replace step” in the official code
fails to transform the wooden house into a glass house. By contrast, by exploring the parameters
of the search metric, we can achieve improved editing results. As can be seen from the second
row in Fig. 13, it is evident that the “cross replace step” varies significantly for different editing
tasks, making manual adjustment impractical. Therefore, the search metric is highly valuable in this
context. Additionally, the search metric can be used as an ensemble learning approach. For example,
if three editing methods are applied simultaneously, each producing different editing results, the
search metric can be used to select the optimal result as the final editing outcome.


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Cross replace step searched by search metric

                 Cross replace step in official code
                                                                  Cross replace step
                                      0.4                   0.5                        0.8    0.9
wooden house -> glass house


   dumplings -> fry rice


                Figure 13: The combination of Search Metric and Null-text Inverison.


           Figure 14: The distribution of optimal inversion steps in multi-object dataset.



A.9    T HE DISTRIBUTION OF OPTIMAL INVERSION STEPS IN MULTI - OBJECT DATASET

To determine the distribution of optimal inversion steps in images, we use the search metric to find
the optimal inversion steps for 200 editing pairs in 100 images. The results of these editing pairs
are shown in Fig. 14. This figure illustrates the number of optimal inversion steps on the horizontal
axis for multi-object images, while the vertical axis represents the number of images corresponding
to each optimal inversion step. From Fig. 14, it is clear that different editing targets require different
optimal inversion steps. We notice that larger optimal inversion steps are necessary when altering
backgrounds or objects with significant shape changes, such as the sky or the ground. Conversely,
scenarios with smaller inversion steps typically involve objects and targets with similar shapes.


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                 (two astronauts, two                                                        (lone tree, full moon)   (monitor, gift box)     (TV, TV playing a
                                         (cat, crochet cat) (green house, green castle)
                      soldiers)                                                              (sun flower, crescent     (keyboard, game         cartoon picture)
                                         (glass, golden cup)   (grassy field, snowy field)
                (spacecraft, monument)                                                              moon)                 controller)       (bench, crochet bench)


   Original
   Image


    Ours


   NTI + P2P
(Grounded-SAM)


  NTI + P2P


                         (a)                     (b)                       (c)                        (d)                     (e)                    (f)


                         Figure 15: Our OIR vs. Null-text Inversion with Grounded-SAM.


A.10          OIR VS . N ULL - TEXT I NVERSION WITH G ROUNDED -SAM

Null-text Inversion (NTI) (Mokady et al., 2023) is combined with Prompt-to-Prompt (P2P) (Hertz
et al., 2022) by default, which utilizes the attention map to extract masks and improve background
preservation, allowing for local edits. We replace the mask generation method with Grounded-SAM
to examine whether a precise mask extractor would enhance the editing effectiveness of NTI. In
Fig. 15, columns a, b, and c use the word swap with local edit approach from P2P. Due to the
different lengths of the original prompt and target prompt, columns d, e, and f in Fig. 15 utilize the
prompt refinement with local edit method from P2P. From columns a and d in Fig. 15, we notice
that NTI with Grounded-SAM fails to preserve the layout information of the original image. From
column b, it is evident that NTI cannot effectively address the concept mismatch. From columns c,
e, and f in Fig. 15, it can be seen that NTI fails to overcome the issue of poor editing. The main
reason for the poor performance is that NTI does not take into account that different editing pairs
for the same image should have distinct optimal inversion steps. What’s more, OIR is training-free,
while NTI requires additional training.

A.11          A DDITIONAL RESULTS

                                                                                  CLIP score ↑                  MS-SSIM ↑               LPIPS ↓
                          Search Metric                                              27.49                        0.719                  0.215
              Plug-and-Play (Tumanyan et al., 2023)                                  27.39                        0.680                  0.293
                   Stable Diffusion Inpainting                                       27.36                        0.706                  0.180
                 DiffEdit (Couairon et al., 2022)                                    21.23                        0.726                  0.200

Table 3: Quantitative evaluation for search metric on single-object editing. We use CLIP (Hessel
et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021) to calculate the alignment of image and text, and use MS-SSIM
(Wang et al., 2003) and LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018a) to evaluate the similarity between the target
image and the original image.

We compared the single-object editing capabilities of our search metric with the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) method, as shown in Fig. 16. We have provided quantitative metrics for our single-object


                                                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



             (Banana leaf,                                                                           (horse, wooden   (Rubik's cube,   (cone, birthday
                             (bird, flamingo)   (buggy, jeep)    (Cat, panda)   (Fried rice, cake)
               broccoli)                                                                                 horse)         pine cone)          cake)



 Origin
 image


  Ours


   PNP


DiffEdit


  Stable
Diffusion
Inpainting



                               Figure 16: Qualitative comparison on the search metric.


dataset in Tab. 3, and it’s evident that our method is comparable to the current SOTA approach.
Simultaneously, we display numerous OIR results on the multi-object dataset, as depicted in Fig. 17
and Fig. 18. The comparison between OIR and SDI’s three methods is shown in Tab. 4. Addition-
ally, we have included some search metric visualization experiments, as presented in Fig. 19. The
visualization of the optimal results for different editing pairs in Fig. 4 can be seen in Fig. 20. Fig. 21
displays our user study questionnaire form.

                                                                CLIP score ↑           MS-SSIM ↑               LPIPS ↓
                                  OIR                              34.98                 0.653                  0.329
                           Stable Diffusion
                                                                    32.97                   0.516                0.420
                         Inpainting (Method1)
                           Stable Diffusion
                                                                    32.02                   0.581                0.386
                         Inpainting (Method2)
                           Stable Diffusion
                                                                    32.16                   0.575                0.398
                         Inpainting (Method3)

Table 4: Quantitative evaluation for OIR with Stable Diffusion Inpainting on multi-object
editing. We use CLIP (Hessel et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021) to calculate the alignment of image
and text, and use MS-SSIM (Wang et al., 2003) and LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018a) to evaluate the
similarity between the target image and the original image.


                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 (Cat, owl)                           (bee, butterfly)                          (Dog, penguin)                        (book, towel)
          (dog, golden retriever)          (a green and red leafy basket, parrot)(Christmas cart, cardboard box of presents)     (Wooden table, gold table)


(a)


            (dumplings, fry rice)                      (bird, parrot)                         (car, cabriolet)                 (lighthouse, rocket taking off)
             (chopsticks, knife)                      (tree, bamboo)                     (Wooden house, glass house)              (blue sky, sky with sunset)


(b)


                (fork, scoop)                      (pickup, rusty pickup)                         (van, Lego van)                   (book, newspaper)
           (steak, cup of coffee)               (green trees, yellow trees)          (building, ancient roman architecture)     (Wooden floor, marble floor)


(c)


              (pancake, cake)                         (shoes, boots)                          (cigarettes, noodles)                   (tulips, balloons)
               (milk, coffee)                     (wooden floor, carpet)                     (spoon, makeup brush)                (stormy sky, starry sky)


(d)



                                                 (leaves, clipart lollipop)
            (lighthouse, rocket)                                                        (Cylindrical hay bale, Swiss roll)           (tall grass, lavender)
                                           (Wooden framed decorations, portrait
                (rocks, ship)                                                                  (ground, lavender)                (flowers, a bunch of roses)
                                                of the Statue of Liberty)



(e)



        (asphalt road, railway track)
                                                  (astronaut, Iron Man)                    (full moon, bloody eyeball)                  (shack, castle)
      (white sky, a sky like The Starry
                                        (glass sphere surrounded by rings, UFO)               (water, blazing fire)               (blue sky, Milky Way sky)
         Night of Vincent van Gogh)



(f)


        (wooden chair, golden chair)             (astronaut, mecha robot)                    (lone tree, full moon)           (TV, TV playing a cartoon picture)
        (green grass, wooden floor)                (pink cloud, spaceship)                (sun flower, crescent moon)              (bench, crochet bench)


(g)


       (rocks, cakes on a picnic mat)                  (rabbit, fox)                              (cat, empty)                       (cat, crochet cat)
      (grass of hilltop, lavender field)              (daisies, roses)                       (carpet, wooden floor)                  (glass, golden cup)



(h)


                 (cat, duck)                  (skull, Captain America’s head)                     (cat, bird)                      (rabbit, origami rabbit)
             (piano, brick wall)                     (book, wooden box)                    (bean bag chair, pumpkin)                  (book, newspaper)


(i)


                     (j)                                     (k)                                       (l)                                    (m)


Figure 17: Additional qualitative results for OIR. It’s evident that our method can edit not only
objects but also backgrounds, including the sky and ground, and facilitate style transfer. Examples
like (b, k), (b, m), (c, l), (c, m), (d, m) involve background editing, (c, k) encompasses seasonal
editing, and (f, j) achieves style transfer.


                                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              (monkey, tiger)                   (wooden boat, Lego boat)              (wooden boat, white spacecraft)       (metal toy car, wooden toy car)
        (stone pillar, wooden stake)        (green lake, green furry blanket)          (blue sea, sky with a few stars)    (gray ground, gray furry carpet)


(a)


  (man in black clothes and a helmet, motorcycle)
      (man wearing a Spider-Man mask, Lego      (toy truck, Lego truck)               (sports car, crochet sports car)          (filament, white rose)
                    motorcycle)            (gray ground, Lego wooden floor)                 (sand dunes, rocks)                     (book, gift box)


(b)


                                             (grassy field, field full of snow)
            (big tree, broccoli)                                                          (small plant, Lego plant)           (log cabin, crochet house)
                                       (Mountains and trees, mountains and trees in
         (grass, green grass field)                                                       (human hand, flowerpot)         (forest, yellow forest in autumns)
                                                          winter)



(c)


            (big tree, broccoli)              (two astronauts, two soldiers)               (airplane, Lego airplane)             (bird, crochet bird)
         (grass, green grass field)              (spacecraft, monument)         (the sky, through the close shot of the moon)   (branch, gold branch)


(d)


         (parrot, crochet parrot)                  (wall-e, Lego wall-e)                   (wall-e, wooden wall-e)               (wall-e, Lego wall-e)
           (branch, gold branch)                   (water, grass field)                 (water, a cluster of flowers)               (water, table)


(e)



                    (f)                                      (g)                                    (h)                                    (i)


Figure 18: Additional qualitative results for OIR. It’s evident that our method can edit not only
objects but also backgrounds, including the sky and ground, and facilitate style transfer. Examples
like (a, h), (c, f), (d, f), (d, h), (e, g), (e, h), (e, i) involve background editing. (c, g), (c, i) encompasses
seasonal editing.


                                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   (cat, tiger), optimal inversion step=17
 Original Image    Target Image


                                          (straw hat, colorful straw hat), optimal inversion step=26


                                    10            15           20           25               30         35 Inversion
                                                                                                             Step
                                          (lighthouse, rocket taking off), optimal inversion step=39
 Original Image    Target Image


                                          (starfish, stuffed toy starfish), optimal inversion step=34


                                    25            30           35            40              45         50 Inversion
                                                                                                             Step
                                                   (dog, penguin), optimal inversion step=19
  Original Image   Target Image


                                   (Christmas cart, cardboard box of presents), optimal inversion step=35


                                     15            20           25           30              35         40 Inversion
                                                                                                             Step
                                                 (straws, lavenders), optimal inversion step=31



Original Image     Target Image


                                                    (book, towel), optimal inversion step=33


                                             (wooden table, gold table), optimal inversion step=35


                                     15            20           25           30              35         40 Inversion
                                                                                                             Step

                    Figure 19: Additional visualization results of our search metric.



                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                optimal inversion step=25        optimal inversion step=33         optimal inversion step=17               optimal inversion step=31

     self-portrait                                                            colorful                         plate with fried
                                              tank
     of Van Gogh                                                             straw hat                           egg and fork


                                            church                             tiger                                  teapot
           ballon


                optimal inversion step=36        optimal inversion step=29        optimal inversion step=26                optimal inversion step=30

                optimal inversion step=34        optimal inversion step=39        optimal inversion step=34                optimal inversion step=25

       stuffed toy                                                           wooden                            crochet wall-e
         starfish                           gift box                          table                                robot


                                             game                             small
       chequered                                                                                                   on a pile of
                                            controll                          Lego
        blanket                                                                                                     confetti
                                              er                              plant


               optimal inversion step=39         optimal inversion step=31        optimal inversion step=29                optimal inversion step=46


                     Figure 20: The optimal editing results for each editing pair in Fig. 4.


                                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Figure 21: User study print screen.


                                               24
