Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G ROUP P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION : F EW-S HOT
A LIGNMENT OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Siyan Zhao, John Dang, Aditya Grover
 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
 {siyanz,john.dang,adityag}@cs.ucla.edu



                                                     A BSTRACT

              Many applications of large language models (LLMs), ranging from chatbots to
              creative writing, require nuanced subjective judgments that can differ significantly
              across different groups. Existing alignment algorithms can be expensive to align
              for each group, requiring prohibitive amounts of group-specific preference data
              and computation for real-world use cases. We introduce Group Preference Opti-
              mization (GPO), an alignment framework that steers language models to prefer-
              ences of individual groups in a few-shot manner. In GPO, we augment the base
              LLM with an independent transformer module trained to predict the preferences
              of a group for the LLM generations. For few-shot learning, we parameterize this
              module as an in-context autoregressive transformer and train it via meta-learning
              on several groups. We empirically validate the efficacy of GPO through rigor-
              ous evaluations using LLMs with varied sizes on three human opinion adapta-
              tion tasks. These tasks involve adapting to the preferences of US demographic
              groups, global countries, and individual users. Our results demonstrate that GPO
              not only aligns models more accurately but also requires fewer group-specific
              preferences, and less training and inference computing resources, outperforming
              existing strategies such as in-context steering and fine-tuning methods. 1
              Warning: This paper contains qualitative examples that may be viewed as offen-
              sive or harmful.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly being employed for a wide variety of domains,
with use-cases including creative writing, chatbots, and semantic search among others (Touvron
et al., 2023b; Taori et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a;b; Brown et al., 2020). Many
of these applications are inherently subjective and require generations that cater to different de-
mographics, cultural and societal norms, or simply individual preferences (Hartvigsen et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2023; Solaiman & Dennison, 2021; Blodgett et al., 2020; Dunbar et al., 1997). By
virtue of their large-scale training, current language models are exposed to diverse data that allows
them to represent a multitude of such opinions (Glaese et al., 2022; Durmus et al., 2023; Santurkar
et al., 2023). However, expressing these diverse opinions requires steering the LLM generations to
user requirements. This brings forth the key question studied in this work:

    How do we efficiently adapt LLMs to align closely with the opinions of specific interest groups?

Broadly, prior work has explored two modes of steering language models, which trade-off training
complexity with test-time engineering. On one end, prompt engineering approaches avoid explicit
modifications to the parameters of the language model and elicit desired behavior by crafting a
suitable prompt. Often, the prompt is augmented with a few in-context examples (Brown et al.,
2020; Taori et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022). While prompting approaches are attractive as they
have no additional training complexity over the base model, prompt engineering can be quite tedious
and empirically poor when the desired behaviors are more complex (Zhou et al., 2022; Reynolds &
McDonell, 2021; Qin & Eisner, 2021; Lester et al., 2021). For example, Santurkar et al. (2023) show
     1
         Our code is available at the project website: https://siyan-zhao.github.io/llm-gpo/


                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Prompt
 How satisfied are you with the way democracy is working in           Group   Context Examples
 your country?

 A. Satisfied
 B. Somewhat Satisfied                                                                            Query Prompt
 C. Not Satisfied                                                                                 and Response

                                                                                    ...

                                         Response
    Base LLM
                                          B. Somewhat Satisfied
                    A    B C
                                                                                    ...
                   Group Preference Datasets
Group                            Group



               A B C                                A   B C
                                                                                          GPO
Group                            Group



               A   B C                              A B C


                               (a)                                                          (b)

Figure 1: Overview of GPO. Left: Group alignment aims to steer pretrained LLMs to preferences
catering to a wide range of groups. For each group g, we represent its preference dataset as Dg =
{(xg1 , y1g ), . . . , (xgn , yng )}. Here, yig signifies the preference of group g for a pair of given prompt
qig and response rig , while xgi is its LLM representation obtained with πemb (qig , rig ). Right: Once
trained, GPO provides a few-shot framework for aligning any base LLM to a test group given a
small amount of in-context preference data.


that LLMs over-emphasize opinions from privileged demographics and are challenging to rectify via
in-context prompting approaches.
On the other end, various kinds of alignment approaches have been proposed that seek to augment
or finetune the language model with an additional reward or scoring model. These approaches
can steer the model to achieve complex behaviors such as honesty, helpfulness, and harmlessness
(Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a; Glaese et al., 2022; Bansal et al., 2023; Askell et al., 2021;
Song et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022b; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022), but come at the cost
of additional complexity in gathering sufficient supervision to train reward models and subsequent
finetuning. As a result, existing alignment approaches, such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), DPO
(Rafailov et al., 2023), and Best-Of-N, are not designed to efficiently align LLMs when the number
of target groups is large and supervision for each group is limited.
We introduce Group Preference Optimization (GPO), a few-shot framework for aligning Large Lan-
guage Models to opinions and preferences of desired interest group(s). The key idea in GPO is
to view the alignment of an LLM policy as a few-shot adaptation problem within the embedded
space of an LLM. Specifically, GPO augments an arbitrary base LLM with an independent few-shot
preference module. This module is parameterized via an independent transformer and trained to
explicitly perform in-context supervised learning to predict preferences (targets) given joint embed-
dings (inputs) of prompts and corresponding LLM responses. The use of embeddings guarantees
that the preference module can effectively process in-context examples where each example is itself
a potentially long sequence of prompt and generated response. In-context learning further provides
the ability to efficiently adapt to new, unseen groups at test-time with only a handful of exam-
ples. See Figure 1 for an illustration. Finally, we incorporate various architectural design choices
to guarantee permutation-specific inductive biases, building on recent work in in-context learning
over datasets (Nguyen & Grover, 2022). Once learned, the learned module can serve as a drop-in
replacement for a reward or preference function for policy optimization and re-ranking algorithms.
In our experiments, we validate the effectiveness of GPO for aligning language models to the opin-
ions of 22 diverse US demographic groups in the OpinionQA dataset (Santurkar et al., 2023) and

                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


14 global countries in the GlobalOpinionQA dataset (Durmus et al., 2023). We consider 2 base
language models of different sizes: Alpaca 7B (Taori et al., 2023), an instruction-tuned version of
the LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a) 7B model, and the recent Llama2 13B chat (Touvron et al.,
2023b), which has been fine-tuned on a large dataset of human preferences for helpfulness and
safety. Empirically, we test GPO against a variety of prompting and finetuning baselines. On av-
erage, GPO surpasses the top-performing baselines by 7.1% when adapting to 22 US demographic
groups in OpinionQA, and by 8.4% when aligning with 14 global countries in GlobalOpinionQA.
Furthermore, GPO performs most effectively in adapting to individual preferences compared to other
baselines.


2     G ROUP P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION

2.1   P ROBLEM S ETUP

A large language model (LLM) expresses a probability distribution over natural language, denoted
as π. To accomplish any task, such as question answering or summarization, a user crafts a suitable
query q and prompts the LLM to generate a response r obtained via sampling from the conditional
distribution π(· | q). Rather than decoding responses from a single distribution π(· | q), our goal in
this work is to align the language model to the preferences of a desired target group g ∗ ∈ G. Here,
we adopt a fairly general definition of a group to refer to any collection of agents (e.g., demographic
groups, individual personas), and we use G to denote the space of all possible groups. For training,
we assume that we are given access to preference datasets for a finite set of training groups Gtrain . In
practical applications, the number of groups can be large (e.g., different demographics and cultures)
while the amount of preference data for each group is generally small.

2.2   R ELATED W ORK

Existing approaches for steering LLMs are challenging to apply for group alignment, especially
when the underlying groups are complex and per-group supervision is scarce. Below, we summarize
key approaches and their trade-offs, which will also serve as baselines in our experiments. We
provide additional discussion of related work in Appendix I.
Prompt Engineering: These approaches modify the input prompt q → q ′ to guide the LLM to-
wards a group-aligned distribution (Jiang et al., 2023; Hwang et al., 2023; Deshpande et al., 2023).
Techniques include meta-data utilization, where group-specific meta-data, are appended to the input
prompt. Further, the engineered prompts can be improved via in-context few-shot prompting, in
which the prompt is concatenated with examples of desired behavior. Given the flexibility of lan-
guage, even a preference dataset Dg could be converted into in-context examples for improving the
prompt. Prompt engineering approaches are computationally efficient as they involve no training,
but designing the prompt itself can be a tedious task that relies on heuristics (Zhou et al., 2022;
Lester et al., 2021; Qin & Eisner, 2021), which are not guaranteed to transfer well across differ-
ent LLMs. Finally, it has been shown prompt engineering has limited gains in aligning LLMs to
complex groups on challenging survey datasets (Santurkar et al., 2023; Durmus et al., 2023).
Gradient-based Alignment: Algorithms that fine-tune the base Large Language Model (LLM)
or augment it with additional models have successfully aligned LLMs to complex behaviors like
honesty, harmfulness, and helpfulness. Broadly, there are two main classes of methods. The first
involves supervised learning, using a dataset of responses from a target group for fine-tuning, as
demonstrated in (Ouyang et al., 2022; Ziegler et al., 2019). This method is straightforward but
often suffers from limited generalization and requires extensive group-specific data. The second
class uses explicit human-derived preference data to train reward models for response filtering, re-
ranking (e.g., Best-of-N, importance weighting (Grover et al., 2019)), or reinforcement learning
optimization (e.g., PPO (Ouyang et al., 2022; Schulman et al., 2017)), which may pose challenges
in hyperparameter tuning and stability (Sun et al., 2023; Santacroce et al., 2023). Newer methods
focus on direct optimization of preferences to enhance stability in RL techniques (Rafailov et al.,
2023; Song et al., 2023). These approaches typically require access to large preference datasets. Our
method, GPO, is designed to explicitly align with various interest groups under limited supervision
constraints, positioning it within the explicit alignment framework.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                     Predicted preferences


                                                                                         ŷm+1                                    ŷn



                                                Group Preference Optimization (GPO)


      x1    y1            x2         y2                       xm        ym            xm+1       0                           xn         0

                               Context points                                                        Padded target inputs


Figure 2: Illustration of the GPO architecture for a sequence of n points, with m context points
and n − m target points. The context (x1:m , y1:m ) serves as few-shot conditioning for GPO. GPO
processes the full sequence using a transformer and predicts the preference scores ŷm+1:n .

2.3    P ROPOSED M ETHOD

We desire an alignment approach that generalizes to a wide variety of groups, even when constrained
by the amount of per-group supervision. Accordingly, we view group alignment as a few-shot
learning problem and cast it in the framework of in-context meta-learning. For each training group
g ∈ Gtrain , we represent its preference dataset as Dg = {(xg1 , y1g ), . . . , (xgn , yng )} where yig denotes
the preference of group g to a pair of input prompt query qig and LLM response rig , and xgi denotes the
LLM representation of the concatenation of the prompt query and LLM response xgi = πemb (qig , rig ).
Here, πemb can be the language model embedding function or an identity function that maintains the
input’s raw textual format. Note that while the inputs xg can be shared across different groups (e.g.,
universal surveys), the preferences are different for each group. At test-time, our goal will be to
steer the default LLM distribution to a new distribution, say πg∗ , given a preference dataset Dg∗ for
the target query group g ∗ . For brevity of presentation, we consider the preference to be a real-valued
scalars. Our framework extends to other kinds of responses and preferences, such as short-answer
questions (e.g., MCQs) and relative pairwise responses, as discussed in Appendix H.
Given the above setup, we design GPO to perform group alignment by learning a few-shot preference
model that augments the base LLM, as shown in Algorithm 1. Once learned, we can use it to update
the LLM via any standard preference optimization or reweighting algorithm (e.g., PPO, Best-of-N).
Specifically, we parameterize GPO via a transformer and train it to perform in-context learning on
the training preference datasets. Given a training group g ∈ Gtrain , we randomly split its preference
dataset Dg into a set of m context points and n − m target points, where n = |Dg | is the size of the
                                                                                                g
preference dataset for group g. Thereafter, GPO is trained to predict the target preferences ym+1:n
                           g      g                        g
given the context points (x1:m , y1:m ) and target inputs xm+1:n . Mathematically, we can express the
objective as:
                                                      g
                                                             | xg1:n , y1:m
                                                                        g

                             L(θ) = Eg,m log pθ (ym+1:n                     )                      (1)
where the training group g ∼ Gtrain and context size m are sampled uniformly. θ represents the
parameters of our model. Figure 2 shows an illustration. For decoding, we make the conditional
independence assumption, where we assume that the target preferences are independent of each
other given the context samples and the target inputs:
                                        " n                                 #
                                           X              g    g      g
                          L(θ) = Eg,m            log pθ (yi | x1:n , y1:m )                (2)
                                                     i=m+1

In our preliminary experiments, we also investigated alternatives which model the dependencies.
We did not find any noticeable improvements and hence use Eq. 2 for the rest of the paper.
Following Nguyen & Grover (2022), we can modify the transformer architecture in GPO to explic-
itly account for permutation invariance conditioning over in-context examples. In particular, we
discard the positional encodings commonly found in standard transformer architectures. However,
this loses the pairwise relations between (xi , yi ). To solve this, we concatenate each pair (xi , yi )
into a single token to inform the transformer of their pairwise relation. For the target inputs, we pad
the xi ’s with a dummy token (e.g., 0). Finally, we employ a masking strategy where the context pairs
can self-attend to each other, whereas the padded targets can only attend to the context points and


                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


not to other target points to follow the conditional independence assumption in Eq. 2. GPO satisfies
the properties of context invariance (Property 1.) and target equivalence (Property 2.).
Note that even though GPO uses in-context learning, it is distinct from in-context prompting a base
LLM. The latter does not update the parameters of the base LLM and requires examples of desired
text generations. On the other hand, GPO learns a few-shot model which augments the base LLM
and only requires preferences of users for the LLM generations. That said, both these schemes are
complementary to each other as we can use any engineered prompt (e.g., with in-context examples)
as a drop-in replacement for the default prompt used in the inputs x.

Scaling to long dataset contexts. One challenge with GPO is that the effective sequence length
for the transformer can grow significantly if we use raw representations of prompts and responses
within each input x. This can degrade performance and efficiency significantly. To overcome this
challenge, we propose to use embedded representations of text within x, as LLM representations
can contain sufficient information for solving tasks (Bhatia et al., 2023). In particular, we first
concatenate the prompt and response and compute their joint embedding πemb (qig , rig ) using the base
LLM. We explored different techniques for extracting the joint embeddings from the base LLM, as
detailed in the ablation study in Appendix D, and found it best to use the average embedding of all
the tokens in the input.

Algorithm 1 Group Preference Optimization (GPO)
 1: Input: LLM embeddding function πemb ; Preference datasets Dg ∀g ∈ Gtrain .
 2: Initialize GPO transformer with parameters θ.
                                                g g                      g          g g
 3: For all g ∈ Gtrain , cache embedded pairs (xi , yi ) in Dgemb where xi = πemb (qi , ri ).
 4: repeat
 5:     Sample training group g ∈ Gtrain .
 6:     Sample context size m ∼ Uniform[1, n − 1] where n = |Dg |.
 7:     Split Dgemb randomly into m context (xg1:m , y1:m g
                                                             ) and (n − m) target (xgm+1:n , ym+1:n
                                                                                              g
                                                                                                    )
    pairs.
                                      g
 8:     Predict target preferences ym+1:n      using context (xg1:m , y1:m
                                                                       g
                                                                           ) and padded targets
      g
    (xm+1:n , 0).
 9:     Update θ to minimize in-context loss function L(θ) in Eq. 2.
10: until convergence
11: Output: GPO transformer with learned parameters θ



3     E XPERIMENTS
Datasets. While GPO is general-purpose and can be applied broadly to many language model use
cases, our work is focused on benchmarks which reflect a diverse landscape of human preferences.
Quantitatively evaluating the diverse opinions through open-ended questions (e.g., creative writing)
is inherently complex, and often demands expensive human labels. In contrast, closed-ended re-
sponses (e.g., multiple-choice questions) offer a standardized means of capturing diverse opinions,
thus reducing ambiguity and noise in evaluation. Survey datasets have been used in prior work (San-
turkar et al., 2023; Durmus et al., 2023) to demonstrate the weaknesses of current LLMs in catering
to diverse populations, and hence can be effectively used to benchmark progress in group alignment.
We benchmark group alignment on 2 recent survey datasets: (1) OpinionQA (Santurkar et al., 2023),
which spans 22 US demographic groups (e.g. income, political ideology, race, and sex) across 500
multiple-choice questions and (2) GlobalOpinionQA (Durmus et al., 2023), which contains multiple-
choice questions answered by participants from 14 countries, amounting to 2,554 questions which
cover various topics including politics, media, technology, religion, race, and ethnicity. Survey
questions are shared across different groups, so we use xi (and not xgi ) for brevity henceforth.
Detailed dataset descriptions can be found in Appendix B.
Next, we construct group g preference dataset Dg from the survey data. Let Q be the set of all
survey questions and G be the groups participating in the survey. Consider a survey question q ∈ Q,
with T unique answer options. Each option can be interpreted as a response r, yielding a set of T
viewpoints {xi }Ti=1 = {πemb (q, ri )}Ti=1 . The preference score yig for the viewpoint xi is obtained by


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


aggregating the survey responses given to (q, ri ) from group g. These scores are normalized within
each question to form the group preference distribution vector Pg (q) = [y1g , ..., yTg ] for question q,
          PT
such that i=1 yig = 1. Repeating this process for all n questions in Q yields Dg . During training
and testing, all viewpoints from the same question belong to either the context or target set. Finally,
we apply a softmax layer to predictions for each question, yielding normalized preference scores for
each survey question in the target set.

Evaluation Metric. To rigorously assess the degree of alignment between two opinion distribu-
tions, P1 and P2 , we calculate the Alignment Score, denoted as A(P1 , P2 ; Q) over a set of questions
Q. This metric employs a similarity function Sim:
                                               1 X
                             A(P1 , P2 ; Q) =         Sim(P1 (q), P2 (q))                          (3)
                                              |Q|
                                                   q∈Q

For the OpinionQA dataset (Santurkar et al., 2023) with its ordinal answers, we employ the one-
dimensional Wasserstein Distance as our similarity metric. Conversely, for the GlobalOpinionQA
dataset, which often presents non-ordinal answer structures, we use the Jensen-Shannon Distance as
suggested by the original paper. Further details are available in Appendix B.

Base Large Language Models. We use two different-sized LMs as our base models for baselines
and GPO. The first, Alpaca-7B Taori et al. (2023), is an instruction-tuned variant of the Llama-7B
(Touvron et al., 2023a), crafted using 52K instruction-response pairs. The second, Llama2-13B chat
version, is finetuned over 1M human preferences for helpfulness and safety. For baseline methods
requiring updates of model weights, we use low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021).

Baselines. We compare our method against extensive baseline approaches as introduced below.
For a detailed description of the baselines, refer to the Appendix F. (1) Uniform Distribution as-
sumes equal preference scores for all options; (2) LM Base following Santurkar et al. (2023); Dur-
mus et al. (2023), gets the LM’s default opinion distribution Pπ (q) by extracting and normalizing
prediction scores for answer choices; (3) LM Steered uses prompting strategies to convey group
information to the LM (examples in Appendix K); (4) Few-shot Prompt appends a few examples
showing a group’s preferences for m context questions to the prompt, where m is constrained by
the LM’s context window size and cg includes the context samples {xi , yi }m     i=1 (see Figure 8 in the
Appendix); (5) SFT per group fine-tunes the LM separately for each group g with a maximum
likelihood loss on augmented training examples created by sampling responses r according to the
preference distribution Pg (q); (6) Reward Model trains a per-group reward model by adding a linear
MLP head on a base LLM and training it on m context samples {xi , yig }m    i=1 with MSE loss to predict
preference scores; and (7) In-Context Finetune investigates few-shot in-context alignment ability
by partitioning the group set into meta-train/test sets, splitting training questions into context/query,
supplementing each query q with a context cg of m ground truth preferences, and fine-tuning the
LM with maximum likelihood loss where responses are sampled according to Pg (q).

3.1   R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

Adapting to US demographics in OpinionQA. We conducted experiments with three distinct
meta-train and meta-test splits, allocating 40%, 60%, and 80% of the 22 US demographics groups
respectively as the meta-train groups Gtrain . This group split was consistent with the In-context
Finetune baseline and GPO. For other baselines that operate on a per-group basis, we calculated the
alignment score for the meta-test groups and present results averaged over three random seeds.
Our results are presented in Figure 3. Alpaca-7b base model exhibit alignment scores that are
similar to the alignment score of a uniform distribution. This does not necessarily imply an absence
of biases, as averaging across groups could obscure biases towards certain demographics. Prior
work has found LMs may disproportionately over-represent some groups and under-represent others
(Santurkar et al., 2023). However, Llama2-13b-chat base model exhibits a lower alignment score as
compared to the uniform distribution. This might be attributed to its fine-tuning for safety, causing
the model to lean towards the least harmful option, which can be seen from the qualitative examples
in Appendix J. When we incorporate group information into the LMs, we deploy various prompting
strategies—QA, BIO, and PORTRAY—to convey this information (see Appendix K for examples).


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  1.00                       Alpaca-7b - OpinionQA Dataset                     1.00                       Llama2-13b - OpinionQA Dataset
                                  Meta-train on 40% groups                                                      Meta-train on 40% groups
                                  Meta-train on 60% groups                                                      Meta-train on 60% groups
                  0.95            Meta-train on 80% groups                                     0.95             Meta-train on 80% groups
                  0.90                                                                         0.90


    Alignment Score


                                                                                 Alignment Score
                  0.85                                                                         0.85

                  0.80                                                                         0.80

                  0.75                                                                         0.75

                  0.70                                                                         0.70

                  0.65                                                                         0.65

                  0.60                                                                         0.60
                                         e      t       d  el              t O                                           e      t       d  el              t O
                               form M-bas w-shopt teere mod SFT oup ontexne GP                                 form M-bas w-shopt teere mod SFT oup ontexne GP
                            Uni    L     Fe prom LM-s ward er gr In-cinetu                               Uni       L     Fe prom LM-s ward er gr In-cinetu
                                                      Re   p        f                                                                 Re   p        f
                      0.9               Alpaca-7b - GlobalOpinionQA Dataset                        0.9               Llama2-13b - GlobalOpinionQA Dataset
                                  Meta-train on 40% groups                                                      Meta-train on 40% groups
                                  Meta-train on 60% groups                                                      Meta-train on 60% groups
                                  Meta-train on 80% groups                                                      Meta-train on 80% groups
                      0.8                                                                          0.8
       Alignment Score


                                                                                    Alignment Score
                      0.7                                                                          0.7


                      0.6                                                                          0.6


                      0.5                                                                          0.5


                      0.4                                                                          0.4
                                         e      t       d  el              t O                                           e      t       d  el              t O
                               form M-bas w-shopt teere mod SFT oup ontexne GP                                 form M-bas w-shopt teere mod SFT oup ontexne GP
                            Uni    L     Fe prom LM-s ward er gr In-cinetu                               Uni       L     Fe prom LM-s ward er gr In-cinetu
                                                      Re   p        f                                                                 Re   p        f

Figure 3: Alignment score comparisons on the OpinionQA dataset and GlobalOpinionQA dataset
with Alpaca-7b and Llama2-13b-chat as base models. Results have been averaged across three
group split setups and three random seeds, with standard deviations provided.



We report results for the strategy that yields the best alignment as LM-steered. Given explicit group
information, Alpaca-7b-steered displays slightly lower relative gains as compared to Llama2-13b-
steered. Next, when provided with few-shot group preference context samples, which serve as
an implicit method of conveying group information, the LM’s alignment performance significantly
declines compared to the base language model’s performance. We hypothesize this decline might be
due to the prompting format being outside the distribution of the language model’s training corpus.
For methods involving gradient updates, we maintain a consistent number of context samples across
all baselines, which is also the same number of context examples used in Few-shot prompt. Specifi-
cally, we use 15 samples for Alpaca-7b and 20 for Llama2-13b experiments. With gradient updates,
SFT per-group brings improvement as compared to other gradient-free steering methods. However,
training a Reward Model to predict alignment scores from context samples, and subsequently use
it to predict preference scores for query examples underperforms SFT methods. This outcome may
suggest a risk of overfitting when working with a limited sample size.
GPO achieves notably higher alignment scores on this dataset compared to the baselines for both
the Alpaca and Llama2 base models. GPO uses the same number of context samples for adaptation
and the test groups are unseen during training. We observed performance increases when a larger
number of meta-training groups were used. GPO’s closest baseline, the In-context Finetune method
ranks second, where the LMs are trained to infer from few-shot context samples. On average over
the two base models and the three group split settings, GPO achieves a 7.1% increase over the
In-context Finetune.
Figure 4 qualitatively illustrates the predicted alignment scores from different methods in response
to an OpinionQA example concerning climate change concerns across six demographic groups.
The first row depicts the ground truth group opinion distribution. Given just 15 context samples,
GPO successfully adapts to match the opinion distributions of different groups. For instance, it
increases preference for option A when adapted to the group Hindus, while the steered LMs do
not exhibit correct distribution changes. For example, Llama2-13b-steered appears to be biased
towards a specific option, overrepresenting it rather than accurately reflecting the distribution of the


                                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


targeted group. On the contrary, in demographics with a more balanced distribution like College
graduate/some postgrad, GPO maintains this balance more consistently. This demonstrates that
GPO does not merely adapt to the overall dataset group preferences, but can align to specific groups
using limited context.

                 Q: Thinking about the future of our country, how worried are you, if at all, about climate change?
College graduate/some postgrad Less than high school             Hindu                     Jewish               Liberal                   Asian                 Options
                 a                          a                  a                              a                                            a
              45.4%                     39.9%                  65.5%                       48.0%
                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                              68.6%                       55.4%            A. Very worried
           24.9% 9.4% d                      5.2% d                   5.1% d                                         1.8% d
                                                                                                                     5.7%                      7.7% d      B. Fairly worried
       b        20.2%             b 32.0% 23.0%                       3.6%
                                                                  25.8% c
                                                                                            13.1% d
                                                                                     25.7%13.2%                   23.9%
                                                                                                                          c
                                                                                                                                         28.0%8.8% c       C. Not too worried
                                                                                    b
                    c                          c                      b                       c                       b                  b                 D. Not at all worried
             GPO-                      GPO-
College graduate/some postgrad Less than high school           GPO-Hindu                GPO-Jewish            GPO-Liberal               GPO-Asian
                  a                             a                                                                  a                       a
                                                           a                                       a             50.3%                    52.3%
              44.7%                         37.8%                                   b
                                                            77.1%                       31.0% 26.2%
                   6.0% d                                             4.1% d                                         6.2% d                    5.2% d
            36.7% 12.6%           b 33.7% 9.1% d                     7.6%                     16.1%           25.4%18.2%                24.2%18.3%
                                         19.4%                     11.2% c                26.7%     d
           b           c                                                b                                    b          c               b         c
                                             c                                             c
        Alpaca-steered-           Alpaca-steered-
College graduate/some postgrad Less than high school    Alpaca-steered-Hindu     Alpaca-steered-Jewish   Alpaca-steered-Liberal   Alpaca-steered-Asian
                  a                           a                        a                 b        a                  a                             a
              41.0%                                        b                                                                        b
                                  b 11.3%
                                          39.2%                8.9%35.2%                 8.6%28.5%         b 6.8%40.9%                  9.0%
                                                                                                                                               36.2%
      b 14.3%
                 10.5% d                     8.8% d                    12.1% d       46.0% 16.8% d                  12.4% d                     12.0% d
            34.2%                      40.7%                   43.8%                c                          39.9%                    42.8%
             c                          c                      c                                               c                        c
        Llama2-steered-          Llama2-steered-
College graduate/some postgrad Less than high school    Llama2-steered-Hindu     Llama2-steered-Jewish   Llama2-steered-Liberal   Llama2-steered-Asian
                  a                                                 a                        a                          a
       b 9.6% 39.4%                                             42.5%                    38.6%                     31.7%
                                                          b 4.6%                                           b 30.4%
                 0.2% d           c 92.3%     3.0% ba
                                              0.1%
                                              4.5%                  0.9% d                  0.6% d                   0.3% d        a 94.8%       0.8% cd
                                                                                                                                                 3.2%
                                                    d                                43.5% 17.3%                                                 1.3% b
            50.8%                                              52.1%                b            c                37.6%
              c                                                 c                                                     c


Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of GPO alignment with steered LMs, where each pie chart denotes
the preference distribution of the group. Here, GPO uses Alpaca-7b’s embedding.


Adapting to cross-nation groups in GlobalOpinionQA. The diverse and highly contrasting
opinions across nations in GlobalOpinionQA presents a more complex landscape than the Opin-
ionQA dataset. Upon analyzing performance, trends in the GlobalOpinionQA dataset closely fol-
lowed those observed in the OpinionQA, as depicted in Figure 3. Notably, the alignment score of
the Alpaca-7b base model surpasses that of the uniform distribution while Llama2-13b base model
shows lower alignment. For Alpaca-7b LM-base, this could suggest that the base models might
exhibit stronger alignment to certain specific countries and this hypothesis is supported by the in-
creased standard deviation of the Alpaca-7b LM-base alignment scores, hinting at varied alignment
across different countries, a phenomenon also reported in the dataset (Durmus et al., 2023). Al-
ternatively, this could imply that the base models tend to align more with the dataset’s general
respondents, which naturally would exceed a uniform distribution. With gradient updates, the SFT
per-group method here surpasses the alignment performance of steering methods, while the Reward
Model underperforms SFT methods. The In-context Finetune method emerges as the third-best
and second-best in terms of alignment for Alpaca-7b and Llama-13b respectively, which showcases
enhanced in-context few-shot adaptation post meta-training. However, its training demands are sub-
stantially higher; it requires approximately 4.7 times more training time as compared with GPO on
an NVIDIA RTX A6000 to achieve the depicted performance. Averaged across both base models
and the three group split scenarios, GPO posts a 8.4% improvement over the second-best baseline.

Scalability with Increasing Context Samples. We evaluate the scalability of different methods
with respect to the size of the in-context examples. Figure 5 demonstrates that for Nigeria in the
GlobalOpinionQA dataset, GPO enhances alignment scores with fewer than 10 preference con-
text samples. The performance of Few-shot Prompt improves with more examples but plateaus
with greater variance. In comparison, In-context Finetune exhibits superior adaptability post meta-
training than Few-shot Prompt, yet its alignment is still suboptimal and the number of group context
samples is limited by the context window size of the LM. Both SFT per-group and Reward Model
show incremental improvements with added context samples; however, their sample efficiency is
modest. In contrast, GPO adeptly adapts to groups in a sample-efficient manner.

Adapting to Individual Preferences. Variations in individual opinions can manifest even within
the same demographic groups (Hwang et al., 2023). We align GPO with individual-level preferences.


                                                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alignment Methods on Llama2-13B with Varying Group Context Samples
                    (GlobalOpinionQA - Nigeria)
                  0.85
                  0.80                                                                                                                                       Figure 5: Alignment score of various meth-
                  0.75                                                                                                                                       ods based on Llama2-13B with varying group
                  0.70                                                                                                                                       context sample size. Evaluation conducted on
Alignment Score


                  0.65                                                                                                                                       survey questions for Nigeria from the Glob-
                  0.60                                                                                                                                       alOpinionQA dataset. The shaded region rep-
                  0.55                                                                                                                                       resents the standard deviation across three dif-
                                                                                                     GPO
                  0.50                                                                               In-context Finetune
                                                                                                     Reward Model                                            ferent seed results.
                  0.45                                                                               SFT
                                                                                                     Few-shot Prompt
                  0.40
                          0                     25    50    75 100 125 150                                     175      200
                                                     Number of Group Context Samples


                                                                 Individual Alignment Accuracy Comparison                                                                                           Individual Alignment Accuracy Comparison
                                                                             on the topic of guns                                                                                                                 across 15 topics
                                               0.6                                                                                                                                0.6



                                               0.5                                                                                                                                0.5
                          Alignment Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                             Alignment Accuracy
                                               0.4                                                                                                                                0.4



                                               0.3                                                                                                                                0.3



                                               0.2                                                                                                                                0.2



                                               0.1                                                                                                                                0.1



                                               0.0                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                             e                d                   pt                         l                   ne PO                                          e                         d                pt                         e
                                                          Bas             ere                    m                al     ode                  etu G                                          Bas                    ere                 rom                        tun    GPO
                                                     LM               Ste                    Pro         SFTdividu ard m                t fin                                           LM                    Ste                   ot P                       fine
                                                                 LM                    hot                           ew             tex                                                                  LM                      -sh                       ext
                                                                                  Few-s                er in       R            o n                                                                                           Few                    -co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nt
                                                                                                     p                     In-c                                                                                                                 In


Figure 6: Individual alignment accuracy comparisons from the OpinionQA dataset. Left: Individual
alignment on the gun topic survey. Right: Comprehensive comparison across all 15 topics, show-
casing the performance of various methods on diverse subjects. Experiments use Alpaca-7b as the
base LM. Both GPO and In-context finetune are meta-trained on 40% of individuals and evaluated
on the remaining 60%. The horizontal red line represents the average accuracy of a random model.


From the OpinionQA dataset, encompassing 15 surveys across 15 unique topics, we randomly select
100 participants from each survey, along with their responses to 30 topic-related questions. For each
individual, 40% questions serve as context samples and 60% for queries. We use Alpaca-7b here
as the base model. To steer the LM with individual information, we create individual context from
combined demographic variables, such as income, religion, and age, as demonstrated in Appendix
Figure 9. Since each individual only selects one option, we calculate alignment accuracy instead
by treating the option with the highest predicted preference score as the predicted option. Due to
computational constraints, we confined our evaluations of the SFT per-individual and reward model
methods to one survey. Since both of them operate on a per-individual basis, the training needed
for about a thousand individuals made broader comparisons of the two baselines impractical. In
contrast, other baselines, including in-context finetune and GPO, were assessed across all 15 survey
topics. Across the full breadth of the 15 topics, GPO consistently exhibited superior performance in
adapting to individual preferences relative to other baselines, as depicted in Figure 6.

4                        C ONCLUSION
We introduced, GPO, a novel method for few-shot aligning LLM outputs to both individual and
group preferences given little preference data. GPO is trained on a meta-train dataset containing
group-wise preference data. During inference, GPO adapts to a new test group, predicting aligned
preferences given a few context examples from that group. GPO significantly outperforms prior
methods as measured by alignment score for group preference alignment while requiring no gradient
updates to the base LLM. We find that GPO is also more sample efficient, improving alignment score
significantly more than baseline methods while using fewer samples, and is effective across multiple
popular open-source LLMs of various parameter and pre-training dataset scales.


                                                                                                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
GPO can be used to align models to preferences of diverse interest groups which can provide a
more positive, useful, and inclusive experience for end users of LLM applications. We acknowledge
that aligning LLMs to the preferences of demographic groups can have malicious applications. For
example, making LLMs more capable of producing responses that are more tailored to specific
users may be misused to convince or show members of a group how to perform unethical actions.
Additionally, GPO’s methodology can be used to align a model to a group’s preferences even if
those preferences are harmful. Biased, offensive, and harmful preferences present in the meta-train
or meta-test datasets may be reflected in the outputs of GPO. Future work should investigate methods
for aligning LLM outputs to group preferences without amplifying harmful outputs.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by a Google Award for Inclusion Research and an Adobe Data Science
Award. We want to thank Hritik Bansal for insightful discussions.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as a laboratory
 for alignment. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2112, 2021.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022a.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.
Hritik Bansal, John Dang, and Aditya Grover. Peering through preferences: Unraveling feedback
  acquisition for aligning large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15812, 2023.
Kush Bhatia, Avanika Narayan, Christopher De Sa, and Christopher Ré. Tart: A plug-and-play
  transformer module for task-agnostic reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07536, 2023.
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and Hanna Wallach. Language (technology) is
  power: A critical survey of “bias” in nlp. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5454–5476, 2020.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Ameet Deshpande, Vishvak Murahari, Tanmay Rajpurohit, Ashwin Kalyan, and Karthik
 Narasimhan. Toxicity in chatgpt: Analyzing persona-assigned language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.05335, 2023.
RIM Dunbar, Anna Marriott, and NDC Duncan. Human conversational behavior. Human Nature, 8
  (3):231–246, 1997.
Esin Durmus, Karina Nyugen, Thomas I Liao, Nicholas Schiefer, Amanda Askell, Anton Bakhtin,
  Carol Chen, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Nicholas Joseph, et al. Towards measuring
  the representation of subjective global opinions in language models. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–
  2306, 2023.
Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, Maja Trkebacz, John Aslanides, Vlad Firoiu, Timo Ewalds, Mari-
 beth Rauh, Laura Weidinger, Martin Chadwick, Phoebe Thacker, et al. Improving alignment of
 dialogue agents via targeted human judgements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14375, 2022.
Aditya Grover, Jiaming Song, Ashish Kapoor, Kenneth Tran, Alekh Agarwal, Eric J Horvitz, and
  Stefano Ermon. Bias correction of learned generative models using likelihood-free importance
  weighting. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Christian Haerpfer, Ronald Inglehart, Alejandro Moreno, Christian Welzel, Kseniya Kizilova, Jaime
  Diez-Medrano, Milena Lagos, Pippa Norris, Eduard Ponarin, and Bianca Puranen. World values
  survey: Round seven – country-pooled datafile version 5.0.0. 2022.
Thomas Hartvigsen, Saadia Gabriel, Hamid Palangi, Maarten Sap, Dipankar Ray, and Ece Kamar.
  Toxigen: A large-scale machine-generated dataset for adversarial and implicit hate speech detec-
  tion. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3309–3326, 2022.
Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


EunJeong Hwang, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, and Niket Tandon. Aligning language models to
  user opinions. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2305, 2023.
Hang Jiang, Xiajie Zhang, Xubo Cao, Jad Kabbara, and Deb Roy. Personallm: Investigat-
  ing the ability of gpt-3.5 to express personality traits and gender differences. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.02547, 2023.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), San Diega, CA, USA, 2015.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
  cessing, pp. 3045–3059, 2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2018.
Tung Nguyen and Aditya Grover. Transformer neural processes: Uncertainty-aware meta learning
  via sequence modeling. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 16569–16594.
  PMLR, 2022.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
PewResearch. Writing survey questions. URL https://www.pewresearch.org/
  our-methods/u-s-surveys/writing-survey-questions/.
Guanghui Qin and Jason Eisner. Learning how to ask: Querying lms with mixtures of soft prompts.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 5203–5212, 2021.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
  standing with unsupervised learning. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond the
  few-shot paradigm. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
  Computing Systems, pp. 1–7, 2021.
Michael Santacroce, Yadong Lu, Han Yu, Yuanzhi Li, and Yelong Shen. Efficient rlhf: Reducing
 the memory usage of ppo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00754, 2023.
Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto.
  Whose opinions do language models reflect? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17548, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Irene Solaiman and Christy Dennison. Process for adapting language models to society (palms)
   with values-targeted datasets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:5861–
   5873, 2021.
Feifan Song, Bowen Yu, Minghao Li, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, Yongbin Li, and Houfeng Wang.
  Preference ranking optimization for human alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17492, 2023.
Simeng Sun, Dhawal Gupta, and Mohit Iyyer. Exploring the impact of low-rank adaptation on the
  performance, efficiency, and regularization of rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.09055, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560, 2022.
Tianyi Zhang, Faisal Ladhak, Esin Durmus, Percy Liang, Kathleen McKeown, and Tatsunori B
  Hashimoto. Benchmarking large language models for news summarization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.13848, 2023.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and
  Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     L IMITATIONS

We highlight a few limitations and directions for future work below:
Opinion Datasets: We use datasets containing opinions of various demographic groups to validate
GPO. Survey data is imperfect and may not be fully representative of an entire group’s population.
Additionally, all the datasets that we use in this work are in English. When aligning to groups, the
language that is used to collect preference data and during alignment may have a significant effect
on alignment metrics, especially if the inputs and outputs are in a different language than the native
language of members of a group. Future work should also investigate more challenging few-shot
alignment settings, such as adapting to individual creative preferences where there may be much
higher variance between group preferences.
Multiple-choice Format: Like many previous works, we focus on a multiple-choice format due
to the availability of existing datasets and ease of quantitative evaluations. LLMs are capable of
producing much more complicated long-form responses, and it is important that alignment methods
can be extended to the general long-form response setting. While the GPO framework extends more
broadly to different formats of LLM generations, future work should validate the effectiveness of
GPO for longer form responses and additional considerations such as group preference feedback
representation and evaluation metrics needed to extend to the long-form setting.
Alignment Objectives: When aligning LLMs, multiple factors beyond group preference alignment
are also very important. Aligning to group preferences may result in worse alignment for other
factors including as harmlessness and helpfulness especially if the group preference data includes
examples that contradicts these values. Moreover, aligning to group preferences may amplify un-
desirable behaviors from LLMs including biased or harmful outputs. Future work should study the
impact of group alignment on other important alignment factors and methods to reduce regressions
for these factors when aligning to group preferences.
Model Initialization: Initializing GPO with a pretrained LM transformer backbone might offer
advantages in performance. Specifically, leveraging a pretrained backbone could potentially enhance
GPO’s capacity to encode world knowledge, thereby improving its ability to generalize to OOD
examples. Investigating the performance and generalization benefits of this initialization approach
could be a promising direction for future work.


B     DATASET D ETAILS

B.1   O PINION QA DATASET

This dataset is sourced from Pew American Trends Panel (PewResearch). This dataset’s unique
structural characteristics: the answer choices in the survey questions are principally ordinal (San-
turkar et al., 2023). For instance, options often extend across a spectrum, ranging from categories
such as “A great deal,” “Fair amount,” “Not much,” to “Not at all.” Traditional divergence metrics,
such as the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, are ill-suited for this task, as they fail to encapsulate
the ordinal relationships inherent in the answer choices. In this dataset, the ordinal answer choices
are mapped to a metric space using corresponding positive integers. For example, a typical mapping
in our dataset might look like {A : 1, B : 2, . . . , D : 4}. Therefore, 1-D Wasserstein Distance metric
is used. The alignment score for two opinion distributions P1 and P2 is consequently expressed as:


                                            1 X     WD(P1 (q), P2 (q))
                        A(P1 , P2 ; Q) =         1−                                                 (4)
                                           |Q|          N −1
                                              q∈Q


Here, N denotes the total number of selectable answer options, excluding the option to refuse. The
term N − 1 functions as a normalization factor, representing the maximal possible Wasserstein
distance in the given metric space. The score is bounded within the interval [0, 1], with a score of 1
indicating perfect alignment between the two distributions.
We employ the dataset as encompassing 22 demographic groups within the US, as outlined in Table
1. Our analysis focuses on 500 contentious questions, characterized by frequent disagreements


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


among the considered subgroups. These questions are the same ones used in the steerability analysis
presented in the OpinionQA dataset (Santurkar et al., 2023).

    Attribute          Demographic Group
    CREGION            Northeast, South
  EDUCATION            College graduate/some postgrad, Less than high school
    GENDER             Male, Female
 POLIDEOLOGY           Liberal, Conservative, Moderate
    INCOME             More than $100K+, Less than $30,000
   POLPARTY            Democrat, Republican
     RACE              Black, White, Asian, Hispanic
     RELIG             Protestant, Jewish, Hindu, Atheist, Muslim

      Table 1: Demographic groups considered in our analysis from the OpinionQA dataset.


B.2   G LOBAL O PINION QA DATASET

The survey questions in this dataset is sourced from the Pew Research Center’s Global Attitudes
surveys (PewResearch) and the World Values Survey (Haerpfer et al., 2022). These questions do
not generally contain ordinal structures in the options and the ordinal scores are not presented in the
datasets. Therefore, we choose to use a different metric for evaluating the alignment in this dataset.
                                             1 X
                         A(P1 , P2 ; Q) =           [1 − J D(P1 (q), P2 (q))]                       (5)
                                           |Q|
                                               q∈Q

In this alternate scenario, J D signifies the Jensen-Shannon Distance following the paper’s choice
(Durmus et al., 2023).

                           Country
                           Nigeria
                           Egypt
                           India (Current national sample)
                           China
                           Japan
                           Germany
                           France
                           Spain
                           United States
                           Canada
                           Brazil
                           Argentina
                           Australia
                           New Zealand

        Table 2: List of countries considered in our study, from GlobalOpinionQA dataset.

Out of the 138 countries in the original GlobalOpinionQA dataset, we selected a subsample of 14
countries for our study due to computational constraints. We extract all the survey questions that
have the target countries’ answers. The countries chosen (in Table 2) span several continents to
ensure a broad representation in our evaluation. For instance, Nigeria and Egypt cover Africa, while
India and China represent Asia. European nations are represented by countries such as Germany,
France, and Spain, and the Americas include the United States, Canada, Brazil, and Argentina.
Lastly, the Oceania region is represented by Australia and New Zealand.

C     A BLATION ON THE GPO’ S TRANSFORMER ARCHITECTURE
We design GPO with inductive biases that satisfy two properties that are important for accurate
preference prediction:


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(1) Context Invariance (Property 1.): Unlike traditional transformers that utilize positional en-
codings, GPO omits these encodings to ensure predictions remain unaffected by the sequence or
permutation of context preference pairs. However, this loses the pairwise relations between (xi , yi ).
To solve this, we concatenate each pair (xi , yi ) into a single token to inform the transformer of
their pairwise relation. It adopts an alternative masking strategy that differs from the conventional
causal mask. This approach enables context pairs to exclusively interact with each other, thereby
maintaining focus on relevant information.
(2) Target Equivalence (Property 2.): The masking strategy also makes target points only attend
to the context points, which ensures that the targets are only influenced by the context points, not by
other targets. This aligns with the principle of conditional independence as stated in Equation 2. In
this setup, we don’t require the query preference scores to be generated autoregressively, meaning
the prediction doesn’t depend on previously predicted queries. Therefore, we use a masking strategy
where context samples self-attend, while query pairs attend only to context samples, not to other
query pairs.

Property 1. Context Invariance. A model pθ exhibits context invariance if, given any permutation
         function π and any m ∈ [1, n − 1], it satisfies:
                pθ (ym+1:n |xm+1:n , x1:m , y1:m ) = pθ (ym+1:n |xm+1:n , xπ(1):π(m) , yπ(1):π(m) )
Property 2. Target Equivariance. Model pθ demonstrates target equivariance if, for any permuta-
         tion function π and any m ∈ [1, n − 1], the following is true:
         pθ (yq,m+1:n |xq,m+1:n , xq,1:m , yq,1:m ) = pθ (yq,π(m+1):π(n) |xq,π(m+1):π(n) , xq,1:m , yq,1:m )


To illustrate the effectiveness of these biases, we compare GPO with a standard autoregressive trans-
former that employs a causal mask, akin to the transformers used in GPT-x series (Radford et al.,
2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020). This basic architecture includes autoregressive generation with the
causal mask and uses positional encoding, which we previously omitted to ensure context invari-
ance. Using an autoregressive generation approach violates the target equivalence property since the
prediction of each query point relies on previously generated ones. As depicted in Table 3, GPO’s in-
herent inductive biases yield superior alignment performance compared to a traditional transformer.
It’s noteworthy that in this comparison, we still concatenate the (x, y) pairs into single tokens for
the standard transformer, thus preserving the relationship between the viewpoint x and the group
preference score.

                  Meta train on 40% groups     Meta train on 60% groups      Meta train on 80% groups
       GPO             0.798 ± 0.007                0.820 ± 0.004                 0.799 ± 0.015
    Transformer        0.780 ± 0.009                0.782 ± 0.004                 0.772 ± 0.006

Table 3: Comparison of the alignment scores of GPO and a standard autoregressive transformer on
alignment tasks on GlobalOpinionQA datasets with three group splits and runs are averaged over
three seeds. Experiments are conducted on OpinionQA with Alpaca-7b as the base model.


D     A BLATION ON GETTING EMBEDDINGS FROM THE LLM.
Given that the base LLMs we considered in our experiments were not explicitly trained for text
summarizing, we examined three methods to generate the embedding x of the sentence: 1) Using
the embedding of the last token as the sentence embedding. 2) Averaging over the embeddings of all
tokens in the sentence. 3) Concatenating the embeddings obtained from the previous two methods.
As depicted in the table 4, averaging over the token embeddings of the sentence yielded the most
effective results, whereas relying solely on the last token embedding proved less adept at capturing
sentence-level information.

E     A BLATION ON ADDING GROUP META - CONTEXT FOR GPO
In the primary experiments, viewpoints x are embedded using an LLM. Notably, in our previous
experiments, each xi does not contain group meta-data about the group’s identity or attributes. This


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Embedding Method                      Alignment Score
                       Alpaca-7b last token                   0.903 ± 0.014
                       Alpaca-7b average tokens              0.946 ± 0.007
                       Alpaca-7b last token + average         0.942 ± 0.009
Table 4: Comparison of different embedding methods using Alpaca-7b as the base model on the
OpinionQA dataset, with a meta train split of 80%. Results are averaged across three seeds.


ablation study explores the potential performance enhancement that could be achieved by integrating
                                                                                          g
meta-data into GPO. Specifically, the context information cg is embedded into a vector zctx  , which
is of the same dimension as x as embedded by the same LLM. We examined adding cg from the
three kinds of contextual prompts we study in K. This embedding is then concatenated with each
of the (x, y, zctx ) pairs, serving as the one input token for GPO. As illustrated in Table 5, incor-
porating context embeddings into the structure doesn’t bolster GPO’s performance across the three
group split scenarios, instead it performs worse. We hypothesize this outcome arises because GPO,
unlike LLMs, lacks comprehensive world knowledge of diverse group attributes, making it challeng-
ing to adapt to the meta-data embeddings of unfamiliar groups. Instead, GPO excels in deducing
preference distributions based on the available (x, y) context sample pairs.

                       Meta train on 40% groups   Meta train on 60% groups   Meta train on 80% groups
         GPO                0.920 ± 0.003              0.926 ± 0.013              0.946 ± 0.007
    GPO w/ meta-data        0.900 ± 0.003              0.916 ± 0.017              0.926 ± 0.006

Table 5: Comparison of the alignment scores of GPO with and without meta-data embeddings with
three group splits and runs are averaged over three seeds. Experiments are conducted on OpinionQA
with Alpaca-7b as the base model.


F     BASELINES D ETAILS
We compare our method against extensive baseline approaches for aligning an LLM’s predicted
opinion distributions with human groups:

• Uniform Distribution: This baseline assumes that all answer options are chosen with equal prob-
  ability, indicating no preference or bias towards any specific option. For a  given question q ∈ Q
  with N answer choices, the distribution PU (q) is represented as: PU (q) = N1 , N1 , . . . , N1 .
• LM Base: The opinion distribution, denoted by Pπ , is derived from a pre-trained LM without
  any group-specific steering or fine-tuning. For a given question q ∈ Q, the distribution Pπ (q)
  generated by the model is extracted from the output probability distribution across the N available
  answer choices. We first extract the prediction scores for the next token from the LM, focusing on
  the top-K tokens. We then normalize the values to obtain Pπ (q). For a token that is missing from
  the top-K set, we allocate the smallest prediction score in the top-K set. We use K = 200 in our
  experiments.
• LM Steered: This baseline gauges the model’s adaptability to align with a specific group g ∈ G
  when informed of the group information explicitly through the prompt. We use diverse prompting
  strategies—QA, BIO, and PORTRAY—to convey group information, with examples in Appendix
  K. The opinion distribution obtained for group g under this steering is expressed as Pπ (q; cg ),
  where cg denotes the context for group g.
• Few-shot Prompt: Rather than giving the model explicit group information, we input a few ex-
  amples showing a group’s preferences for m context questions, constrained by the LM’s context
  window size. Here the cg includes the context samples {q, ri , yi }m   i=1 . Using this context, the
  model is prompted to generate a response for a new, unseen question that aligns with the group’s
  opinions. See Figure 8 in the Appendix for examples.
• SFT per group: The LM is fine-tuned separately for each group g using a supervised loss. Let
  Qtrain ⊂ Q denote the subset of m context questions used for training. We create training examples
  (q, r) by sampling q from Qtrain and then sampling responses r with respect to the preference
  distribution Pg (q). The loss is defined as:


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 LSFT = −Eq∼Qtrain ,r∼Pg (q) log pψ (r|q)                            (6)
  where ψ represents the LM parameters and pψ (r|q) denotes the probability of producing the re-
  sponse r given the question q. This procedure fine-tunes the LM to maximize the likelihood of the
  sampled responses that align with the preference distribution of the specific group.
• Reward Model: We start with the architecture of the base LM and add a linear MLP head. The
  augmented model is trained on m context samples to predict the preference scores for the {xi }m i=1
  using a mean squared error loss. Then, the model is employed to predict the preference scores for
                                                             PT
  the query questions and softmax is applied to ensure that i=1 ŷg,q,i = 1 for each query q.
• In-Context Finetune: We investigate whether the LM can be fine-tuned, akin to GPO, to adapt
  to a distribution of groups using few-shot learning. This would ideally enable improved few-
  shot in-context adaptation for unseen groups. To this end, we partition the group set G into a
  meta-train set Gtrain and a meta-test set Gtest . During training, each group in Gtrain serves as a
  training instance. The training questions for each group are split into context samples and query
  questions. For a given query question q, we supplement it with a few-shot context cg , consisting
  of m questions paired with the respective ground truth preference scores. This context mirrors the
  Few-shot Prompt strategy with example shown in Appendix 8. For supervision, for each query,
  we sample responses r, aligned with the human preference distribution Pg (q). The LM undergoes
  fine-tuning using a dataset formed from these context-enhanced samples. The associated loss
  function is:

                           LICT = −Eg∼Gtrain ,q∼Q,r∼Pg (q) log pψ (r|q, cg )                         (7)

G    T RAINING S ETTINGS
For all baseline fine-tuning methods, including SFT per group, reward modeling, and in-context
fine-tuning that necessitate training the base LM, we employ 8-bit integer quantization and utilize
a single Nvidia RTX A6000 GPU with 48GB VRAM. Our parameter search for the learning rate
encompassed values {3e-4, 2e-5, 1e-4}. We settled on 1e-4 for the Alpaca baselines and 2e-5 for the
Llama2-13B-chat baselines. For both SFT and in-context fine-tuning tasks, our effective batch size
was 8, comprised of a batch size of 1 and 8 gradient accumulation steps. In contrast, reward model
training had a batch size of 4 with the same gradient accumulation steps. All baseline methodologies
were trained with LoRA (with r=12, alpha=32, and a dropout rate of 0.05) with a weight decay
of 0.01, utilizing bf16 precision and the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018). For all
methods, We use the validation alignment score for early stopping.
For GPO, the transformer’s feedforward dimension was set to 128, with an embedding depth of 4, 4
heads, and 6 layers. We sampled m uniformly from the range [10, 100] as context samples for every
training task. We also used a learning rate of 3e-4, coupled with the Adam Optimizer (Kingma &
Ba, 2015). More training details can be found in our codebase.

H    E XTENDING GPO B EYOND M ULTIPLE -C HOICE Q UESTIONS
The GPO framework presented in the main paper experiments can be extended beyond the multiple
choice setting. GPO works for any LLM generation setting where there is some scalar which repre-
sents feedback over an LLM response. We present GPO formulations for producing group aligned
LLM responses in the long-form generation setting with two common forms of sparse feedback: (1)
relative (e.g. is response 1 or response 2 better) and (2) absolute (e.g. rate the response on a scale of
1-7).
Relative feedback: each context example includes 2 responses and GPO is trained with a binary
classification objective for each example. During inference, the GPO module can be used to perform
inference through a modified version of best-of-n sampling where n sample responses are sampled
from the base LLM and each of the n2 pairs of responses is inputted to GPO as queries. GPO’s
output can used to calculate a win rate for each of the n responses and the response with the highest
win-rate is chosen as the aligned output response.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Absolute feedback: each context example includes 1 prompt and GPO is trained to regress the
absolute feedback score. During inference, the GPO module can be used as a reward model in
best-of-n sampling to produce a group aligned response.
Since GPO predicts group preference scalars, GPO can be used as a reward model to fine-tune
the base LLM with PPO in settings where performing inference with an additional model is not
desirable.


I   A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK


Alignment via Prompting. The conditional nature of LLMs enables them to be conditioned on
specific task information or context data and alter their output distribution to respect the conditional
information. Various studies have investigated this capability in adapting to groups and personas.
Deshpande et al. (2023) observed that prompts like “Speak like xxx” could elevate LLM’s toxicity
levels contingent upon the persona’s characteristics. Jiang et al. (2023) used prompts to guide GPT-
3.5 to adopt certain personality traits. Beyond explicit persona or group traits, an LLM’s behavior
can also be influenced by presenting it with few-shot examples from its in-context learning ability
(Brown et al., 2020). For example, Hwang et al. (2023) uses the previous opinions of an individual
to adapt the LLM to align with the user. The advantages of this strategy include its computational
efficiency, eliminating the necessity for gradient updates. However, the few-shot examples are re-
stricted by the model’s context size, and designing prompts for effective completion of tasks often
requires careful prompt engineering (Lester et al., 2021; Qin & Eisner, 2021; Zhou et al., 2022;
Reynolds & McDonell, 2021). Additionally, when steering the LLM to be more representative of
a demographics group on nuanced societal questions from survey datasets, especially on nuanced
societal matters, research by Santurkar et al. (2023); Durmus et al. (2023) shows that this steerability
can be constrained, resulting in limited or no enhancements in model alignment.



Gradient-based Alignment. Another line of alignment work involves adjusting the LM’s parame-
ters using a preference dataset through fine-tuning. Methods have been proposed to align LLMs with
specific human values, such as helpfulness, harmlessness, and non-toxicity, using RLHF (Glaese
et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022a). This necessitates the mod-
eling of a reward model from human-labeled preference datasets and the use of RL policies, such as
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), to maximize accumulated rewards. This PPO phase poses challenges
in terms of computational and memory demands, necessitating the training and storing of large-
scale policy, value, reward, and reference models, as well as optimizer states and gradients in GPU
memory. Moreover, this process could require complex hyperparameter tuning (Sun et al., 2023;
Santacroce et al., 2023). To address this, methods such as Direct Preference Optimization (Rafailov
et al., 2023) and Preference Ranking Optimization (Song et al., 2023) have been proposed to directly
learn from pairwise or ranking-based preference datasets without reward modeling. However, these
methods typically result in specialized models for every alignment task. Adapting to multifaceted,
sometimes conflicting group preferences requires fine-tuning distinct models for each subgroup.


J   Q UALITATIVE EXAMPLES OF GPO.


Warning: This section contains qualitative examples that may be viewed as offensive or harmful.
Here we demonstrate multiple qualitative examples of GPO’s predicted group preference versus the
language model’s steered performance. Here we used only 15 context examples for GPO and the
steered LM uses group’s meta-data as context.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K    C ONTEXTUAL PROMPT EXAMPLES
In this paper, we examine three types of contextual prompts, as delineated in Santurkar et al. (2023).
Below, we present examples of the question-answer, biographical, and portrait-based contextual
prompts designed for individuals residing in the Northeastern United States.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Question-Answer Prompt:
  Which part of the United States do you currently live in?
  Response: Northeast

  Biographical Prompt:
  Below, please provide a brief description of the region in
  which you currently reside within the United States, followed
  by answers to several questions.
  Description: I currently reside in the Northeast.

  Portrait-Based Prompt:
  Answer the following question as if you currently reside in the
  Northeast.


           Figure 7: Three types of contextual prompts to provide group information.

  Below is an instruction that describes a task, paired with an
  input that provides further context. Write a response that
  appropriately completes the request.

  ### Instruction:
  Given the answer distributions from a specific demographic
  group for certain questions in a public opinion survey, answer
  the subsequent new question by selecting ONE of the options, as
  if you are a member of this identified demographic group:

  ### Input:

  Question: Question 1
  A. Option 1
  B. Option 2
  C. Option 3
  Answer Distribution:
  A: 25%, B: 35%, C: 40%

  ...

  Question: Question m
  A. Option 1
  B. Option 2
  C. Option 3
  Answer Distribution:
  A: 35%, B: 25%, C: 40%

  Based on the above list of answered questions from a
  demographic group, answer the new question by selecting ONE of
  the options, as if you are a member of this demographic group:

  Question: Question m+1
  A. Option 1
  B. Option 2
  C. Option 3

  ### Response:


    Figure 8: Few-shot in-context prompt with n context questions in Alpaca prompt format.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Below is an instruction that describes a task, paired with an
  input that provides further context. Write a response that
  appropriately completes the request.

  ### Instruction:

  Given that you have the following demographics context:
  Marital Status: Married,
  Religious attendance: Roman Catholic,
  Region: Northeast,
  Age: 65+,
  Sex: Male,
  Education: Some college or no degree,
  Income: $30,000-$50,000,
  Political ideology: Conservative,
  Race: White,
  Answer the following question by picking ONE of the given
  options

  ### Input:

  Would you say Germany has done a good or bad job dealing with
  the coronavirus outbreak?

  Options:
  A. Very good
  B. Somewhat good
  C. Somewhat bad
  D. Very bad

  ### Response:


 Figure 9: A randomly selected individual contextual prompt examples in Alpaca prompt format.


                                               23
