Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V ISION -L ANGUAGE M ODELS P ROVIDE P ROMPTABLE
R EPRESENTATIONS FOR R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Intelligent beings have the ability to quickly learn new behaviors and tasks by
         leveraging background world knowledge. This stands in contrast to most agents
         trained with reinforcement learning (RL), which typically learn behaviors from
         scratch. Therefore, we would like to endow RL agents with a similar ability
         to leverage contextual prior information. To this end, we propose a novel ap-
         proach that uses the vast amounts of general-purpose, diverse, and indexable world
         knowledge encoded in vision-language models (VLMs) pre-trained on Internet-
         scale data to generate text in response to images and prompts. We initialize RL
         policies with VLMs by using such models as sources of promptable representa-
         tions: embeddings that are grounded in visual observations and encode seman-
         tic features based on the VLM’s internal knowledge, as elicited through prompts
         that provide task context and auxiliary information. We evaluate our approach on
         visually-complex RL tasks in Minecraft. We find that policies trained on prompt-
         able embeddings extracted from general-purpose VLMs significantly outperform
         equivalent policies trained on generic, non-promptable image encoder features.
         Moreover, we show that these representations outperform instruction-following
         methods and are competitive with domain-specific representations. In ablations,
         we find that VLM promptability and text generation both are important in yield-
         ing good representations for RL. Finally, we give a simple method for evaluating
         and optimizing prompts used by our approach for a given task without running
         expensive RL trials, ensuring that it extracts task-relevant semantic features from
         the VLM.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Embodied decision-making often requires representations informed by extensive world knowledge
for perceptual grounding, planning, and control. Humans can rapidly learn to perform sensorimotor
tasks by drawing on prior knowledge, which might be high-level and abstract (“If I’m cooking
something that needs milk, the milk is probably in the refrigerator”) or grounded and low-level
(e.g., what refrigerators and milk look like). These capabilities would prove highly beneficial for
reinforcement learning (RL) too: we aim for our agents to interpret tasks in terms of concepts
that can be reasoned about with relevant prior knowledge and grounded with previously-learned
representations, thus enabling more efficient learning. However, doing so requires a condensed
source of vast amounts of general-purpose world knowledge, captured in a form that allows us to
specifically index into and access task-relevant information. Therefore, we need representations
that are contextual, such that agents can use a concise task context to draw out relevant background
knowledge, abstractions, and grounded features that aid it in acquiring a new behavior.
An approach to facilitate this involves integrating RL agents with the prior knowledge and reasoning
abilities of pre-trained foundation models. Transformer-based language models (LMs) and vision-
language models (VLMs) are trained on Internet-scale data to enable generalization in downstream
tasks requiring facts or common sense. Moreover, in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020) and in-
struction fine-tuning (Ouyang et al., 2022) have provided better ways to index into (V)LMs’ knowl-
edge and guide their capabilities based on user needs. These successes have seen some transfer to
embodied control, with (V)LMs being used to reason about goals to produce executable plans (Ahn
et al., 2022) or as pre-trained encoders of useful information (like instructions (Liu et al., 2023) or
feedback (Sharma et al., 2023)) that the control policy utilizes. Both of these paradigms have major


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                 Actions
                                          Promptable Representations
                                                                                                    Learned                   Task
                                                                                                     Policy                   Env
                                                                                                              Reinforcement
                                                                                                              Learning Loop
                                         Frozen Vision-language Model


                                                                                                                Rewards
            Task-relevant Prompt                  Observation               Decoded Text


                                                                        "Yes, there is a spider."
           "Spiders in Minecraft are
           black. Is there a spider in
                  this image?"


Figure 1: An example instantiation of PR2L. We query a VLM with a task-relevant prompt about observa-
tions to produce promptable representations, which we train a policy on via RL. Rather than directly asking
for actions or specifying the task, the prompt enables indexing into the VLM’s prior world knowledge to access
task-relevant information. They also allow us to inject auxiliary information (e.g., about visual features).

limitations: actions generated by LMs are often not appropriately grounded, unless the tasks and
scenes are amenable to being expressed or captioned in language. Even then, (V)LMs are often only
suited to producing subtask plans, not low-level control signals. On the other hand, using (V)LMs
to simply encode inputs under-utilizes their knowledge and reasoning abilities, instead focusing on
producing embeddings which reflect language’s compositionality (e.g., so an instruction-following
policy may generalize). This motivates the development of an algorithm for learning to produce
low-level actions that are both grounded and that leverage (V)LMs’ knowledge and reasoning.
To this end, we introduce Promptable Representations for Reinforcement Learning (PR2L): a flexi-
ble framework for guiding vision-language models to produce semantic features, which (i) integrate
observations with prior task knowledge, and (ii) are grounded into actions via RL (see Figure 1).
Specifically, we ask a VLM questions about observations that are related to the given control task,
encouraging it to attend to task-relevant information in the image based on both its internal world
knowledge and any supplemental information injected via prompting. The VLM then encodes this
information in decoded tokens, which are discarded, and associated representations, which serve
as input to a learnable policy. In contrast to the standard approach of using pre-trained image en-
coders to convert visual inputs into generic features for downstream learning, our method yields
task-specific features that capture information particularly conducive to learning a considered task.
In this way, the VLM does not just produce an ungrounded encoding of instructions or task spec-
ifications, but embeddings containing semantic information relevant to the given task that is both
grounded and informed by the VLM’s prior knowledge through prompting.
To the best our knowledge, we introduce the first approach for initializing RL policies with gener-
ative VLM representations. We demonstrate our approach on tasks in Minecraft (Fan et al., 2022),
as it has semantically-rich and visually-complex tasks found in many practical, realistic, and chal-
lenging applications of RL. We find that, by using our approach, we outperform equivalent policies
trained on unpromptable visual embeddings or with instruction-conditioning– both popular ways
of using pre-trained image models and VLMs respectively for control. Furthermore, we show that
promptable representations extracted from general-purpose VLMs outperform domain-specific rep-
resentations. Our results and ablations highlight how visually-complex control tasks can benefit
from accessing the knowledge captured within VLMs via prompting.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
Embodied (V)LM reasoning. Many recent works have leveraged (V)LMs as embodied reasoners
by treating them as priors over effective plans for a given goal. These works use the model’s lan-
guage modeling and auto-regressive generation capabilities to extract such priors as textual subtask
sequences (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022b; Sharma et al., 2022) or code (Liang et al., 2023;
Singh et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2022; Vemprala et al., 2023), by effectively using the LM to decom-
pose long-horizon tasks into executable parts or instructions. These systems often need grounding
mechanisms to ensure feasibility of their plans (e.g., affordance estimators (Ahn et al., 2022), scene
captioners (Zeng et al., 2022), or trajectory labelers (Palo et al., 2023)). Furthermore, these works
often assume access to low-level policies that can execute these subtasks, such as skills to allow a
robot to pick up objects (Ahn et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2023), which is often a strong assumption.
These methods generally do not address how such policies can be acquired, nor how these low-level


                                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


skills can themselves benefit from the prior knowledge in (V)LMs. Even works in this area that use
RL still use (V)LMs as state-dependent priors over reasonable high-level goals to learn (Du et al.,
2023). This is a key difference from our work: instead of considering priors on plans or goals,
we rely on VLM’s implicit knowledge of the world to extract representations which encode task-
relevant information. We train a policy to solve the task by converting these features into low-level
actions via standard RL, meaning the VLM does not need to know how to take actions for a task.
Embodied (V)LM pre-training. Other works use (V)LMs to embed useful information like instruc-
tions (Liu et al., 2023; Myers et al., 2023; Lynch & Sermanet, 2021; Mees et al., 2023), feedback
(Sharma et al., 2023; Bucker et al., 2022), reward specifications (Fan et al., 2022), and data for world
modeling (Lin et al., 2023b; Narasimhan et al., 2018). These works use (V)LMs as encoders that
capture the compositional semantic structure of input text and images, which often aids in general-
ization: a instruction-conditioned model may never have learned to grasp apples (but was trained to
grasp other objects), but by interacting with them in other ways and receiving associated language
descriptions, the model might learn what an apple is and its physical properties, thus potentially
being able to grasp it zero-shot. In contrast, our method’s primary advantage is that the resulting
embeddings are informed by world knowledge, both from prompting and pretraining. Rather than
just specifying that the task is to acquire an apple, we ask a VLM to parse observations into directly
relevant features, like whether there is an apple in the image or if the observed location is likely
to contain apples – all information that is useful for RL, even in single-task settings. Thus, we use
VLMs to help RL solve new tasks, rather than just to learn how to perform instruction following.
We note these two categories are not binary. For instance, Brohan et al. (2023) use VLMs to under-
stand instructions, but also reasoning (e.g., figuring out the “correct bowl” for a strawberry is one that
contains fruits); Palo et al. (2023) use a LM to reason about goal subtasks and a VLM to understand
when a trajectory matches a subtask description, automating the demonstration collection/labeling
of Ahn et al. (2022), while Adeniji et al. (2023) use a similar framework to pretrain a language-
conditioned RL policy that can then be transferred to learning other tasks; and Shridhar et al. (2021)
use CLIP to merge vision and text instructions directly into a form that a Transporter (Zeng et al.,
2020) policy can operationalize. Nevertheless, these works primarily focus on instruction following
in robot manipulation domains. In contrast, our approach prompts a VLM to supplement RL with
representations of world knowledge, rather than relying on commands or task specifications. In ad-
dition, except for Adeniji et al. (2023), these works focus on imitation learning, assuming access to
existing demonstrations for policy training and fine-tuning, which we forgo by using online RL.

3    P RELIMINARIES
Reinforcement learning task and objective. We adopt the standard deep RL partially-observed
Markov decision process (POMDP) framework, wherein a given control task is defined by the tuple
(S, A, pT , γ, r, ρ0 , O, pE ), where S is the set of states, A is the set of actions, pT : S × A × S → R
are the state transition probabilities, γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, r : S × A → R is the reward
function, ρ0 : S → R is the distribution over initial states, O is the set of observations (including
the visual observations), and pE : S × O → R are observation emission probabilities. The objective
is to find parameters θ of policy πθ : O × A → R which, together with ρ0 , pE , and pT , defines a
distribution over trajectories pθ with maximum expected returns η(θ):
                                                                        "∞              #
                                                                         X
                                                                            t
                           η(θ) = E((s0 ,o0 ,a0 ),(s1 ,o1 ,a1 ),...)∼pθ    γ r(st , at )               (1)
                                                                t=0

Vision-language models. In this work, we utilize generative VLMs (like Li et al. (2022; 2023a);
Dai et al. (2023)): models that generate language in response to an image and a text prompt passed
as input. This is in contrast to other designs of combining vision and language that either generate
images or segmentation (Rombach et al., 2022; Kirillov et al., 2023) and CLIP (Radford et al., 2021).
Formally, the VLM enables sampling from p(x1:K |I, c), where x1:K represents the K tokens of
the output, I is the input image(s), c is the prompt, and p is the distribution over natural language
responses produced by the VLM on those inputs. Typically, the VLM is pre-trained on tasks that
require building association between vision and language such as image captioning, visual-question
answering, or instruction-following. While these differ from the “pure” language modeling ob-
jective, all these tasks nonetheless require learning to attend to certain semantic features of input


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Vision-language Model                                                                          Policy

                                                                                                                         Action
                           Final Layer Representations


                                                                                                                       Policy MLP

                         Frozen LLM Transformer Layer

                                        ...

                         Frozen LLM Transformer Layer
                                                                                                  Non-visual Observations                   Summary
                                                                                               Yaw, Pitch, Position, Previous Action, ...    Embed
        Image Tokens                 Prompt Tokens                   Decoded Tokens


                                                                                                            Policy Transformer Layer
       Image Encoder                     Tokenizer                        Decoder
                                                                                                            Encoder                         Decoder

       RGB Observation                    Prompt                       Decoded Text


                             "Spiders in Minecraft are black. Is
                                                                   "Yes, there is a spider."                     ...                         CLS
                               there a spider in this image?"


Figure 2: Schematic of how we extract task-relevant features from the VLM and use those representa-
tions in a policy that we train with RL. These representations can incorporate task context from the prompt,
while generic image encoder representations cannot. As the embeddings of generative Transformers can be
variable length, the policy also has a Transformer layer that takes in the VLM representations and a “CLS”
token, thereby condensing all inputs into a single summary embedding.
images depending
               Q on the given prompt. For auto-regressive generative VLMs, this distribution is
factorized as t p(xt |I, c, x1:t−1 ). Typical architectures for generative VLMs parameterize these
distributions using weights that define a representation ϕt (I, c, x1:t−1 ), which depends on the im-
age I, the prompt c, and the previously emitted tokens, and a decoder p(xt |ϕt (I, c, x1:t−1 )), which
defines a distribution over the next token.

4     PR2L: P ROMPTABLE R EPRESENTATIONS FOR RL
Our goal is to supplement RL with task-relevant information extracted from VLMs containing
general-purpose knowledge. One way to index into this information is by prompting the model
to get it to produce semantic information relevant to a given control task. Therefore, our approach,
PR2L, queries a VLM with a task-relevant prompt for each visual observation received by the agent,
and receives both the decoded text and, critically, the intermediate representations, which we refer to
as promptable representations. Even though the decoded text might often not be correct or directly
usable for choosing the action, our key insight is that these VLM embeddings can still provide useful
semantic features for training control policies via RL. This recipe enables us to incorporate seman-
tic information without the need of re-training or fine-tuning a VLM to directly output actions, as
proposed by Brohan et al. (2023). Note that our method is not an instruction-following method, and
it does not require a description of the actual task in natural language. Instead, our approach still
learns control via RL, while benefiting from the incorporation of background context to improve
RL. In this section, we will describe various components of our approach, accompanied by design
choices and other practical considerations.

4.1   P ROMPTABLE R EPRESENTATIONS
Why do we choose to use VLMs in this way, instead of the many other ways of using them for
control? In principle, one can directly query a VLM to produce actions for a task given a visual
observation. While this may work when high-level goals or subtasks are sufficient, VLMs are em-
pirically bad at yielding the kinds of low-level actions used commonly in RL (Huang et al., 2022a).
As VLMs are mainly trained to follow instructions and answer questions about visual aspects of
images, it is more appropriate to use these models to extract semantic features about observations
that are conducive to being linked to actions. Specifically, we elicit features that are useful for
the downstream task by querying these VLMs with task-relevant prompts that provide contextual
task information, thereby causing the VLM to attend to and interpret appropriate parts of observed
images. Extracting these features naı̈vely by only using the VLM’s decoded text has its own chal-
lenges: such models often suffer from both hallucinations (Ji et al., 2023) and an inability to report
what they “know” in language, even when their embeddings contain such information (Kadavath
et al., 2022; Hu & Levy, 2023). However, even when the text is bad, the underlying representations
still contain valuable granular world information that is potentially lost in the projection to language


                                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Li et al., 2021; Wiedemann et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b). Thus, we disregard
the generated text in our approach and instead provide our policy the embeddings produced by the
VLM in response to prompts asking about relevant semantic features in observations instead.
Which parts of the network can be used as promptable representations? The VLMs we consider
are all based on the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), which treats the prompt, input
image(s), and decoded text as token sequences. This architecture provides a source of learned repre-
sentations by computing embeddings for each token at every layer based on the previous layer’s to-
ken embeddings. In terms of the generative VLM formalism introduced prior, a Transformer-based
VLM’s representations ϕt (I, c, x1:t−1 ) consist of N embeddings per token (the outputs of the N
self-attention layers) in the input image I, prompt c, and decoded text x1:t−1 . The decoder p(xt |ϕt )
extracts the final layer’s embedding of the most recent token xt−1 , projecting it to a distribution over
the token vocabulary and allowing for it to be sampled. When given a visual observation and task
prompt, the tokens representing the prompt, image, and answer consequently encode task-relevant
semantic information. Thus, for each observation, we use the VLM to sample a response to the task
prompt x1:K ∼ p(x1:K |I, c). We then use some or all of these token embeddings ϕK (I, c, x1:t−1 ) as
our promptable representations and feed them, along with any non-visual observation information,
as a state representation into our downstream neural-network policy trained with RL.
In summary, our approach involves creating a task-relevant prompt that provides context and auxil-
iary information. This prompt, alongside the current visual observation from the environment, is fed
to into the VLM to generate tokens. While these tokens are used for decoding, they are ultimately
discarded. Instead, we utilize the representations produced by the VLM (associated with the image,
prompt, and decoded text) as input for our policy, which is trained via an off-the-shelf online RL
algorithm to produce appropriate actions. A schematic of our approach is depicted in Figure 2.

4.2   D ESIGN C HOICES FOR I NSTANTIATING PR2L
To instantiate our method, several design choices must be made. First, the representations of the
VLM’s decoded text are dependent on the chosen decoding scheme. E.g., greedy decoding is fast
and deterministic, but may yield low-probability decoded tokens; beam search improves on this by
considering multiple “branches” of decoded text, at the cost of requiring more compute time (for
potentially small improvements); lastly, sampling-based decoding can quickly yield estimates of the
maximum likelihood answer, but at the cost of introducing stochasticity, which may increase vari-
ance. Given the inherent high-variance of our tasks (due to sparse rewards and partial observability)
and the computational expense of VLM decoding, we opt for greedy decoding.
Second, one must choose which VLM layers’ embeddings to utilize in the policy. While theoreti-
cally, all layers of the VLM could be used, pre-trained Transformer models tend to encode valuable
high-level semantic information in their later layers (Tenney et al., 2019; Jawahar et al., 2019). Thus,
we opt to only feed the final two layers’ representations into our policy. It’s worth noting that un-
like conventional fixed-dimensional state representations used in RL, these representation sequences
are of variable length. To accommodate this, we incorporate an encoder-decoder Transformer layer
in the policy. At each time step in a trajectory, this Transformer receives variable-length VLM
representations, which are attended to and converted into a fixed-length summarization by the em-
beddings of a learned “CLS” token (Devlin et al., 2019) in the decoder (green in Figure 2). We
also note that this policy can receive the observed image directly (e.g., after being tokenized and
embedded by the image encoder), so as to not lose any visual information from being processed by
the VLM. However, we choose not to do this in our experiments in order to more clearly isolate and
demonstrate the usefulness of the VLM’s representations in particular.
Finally, while it is possible to fine-tune the VLM for RL end-to-end with the policy, akin to what
was proposed by Brohan et al. (2023), this approach incurs substantial compute, memory, and time
overhead, particularly with larger VLMs. Nonetheless, we find that our approach performs better
than not using the language and prompting components of the VLM. This holds true even when the
VLM is frozen, and only the policy is trained via RL, or when the decoded text occasionally fails to
answer the task-specific prompt correctly.

4.3   TASK -R ELEVANT P ROMPT
How do we design good prompts to elicit useful representations from VLMs? As we aim to extract
good state representations from the VLM for a downstream policy, we do not use instructions or task


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


descriptions, but task-relevant prompts: questions that make the VLM attend to and encode semantic
features in the image that are useful for the RL policy learning to solve the task. For example, if the
task is to find a toilet within a house, appropriate prompts include “Is there a toilet in this image?”
and “Am I likely to find a toilet here?” Intuitively, the answers to these questions help determine
appropriate actions (approach the toilet, look around the room, explore elsewhere, etc.), making the
corresponding representations good for representing the state for a policy. Answering the questions
will require the VLM to attend to task-relevant features in the scene, relying on the model’s internal
conception of what things look like and common-sense semantic relations. Note that prompts based
on instructions or task descriptions do not enjoy the above properties: while the goal of those prior
methods is to be able to directly query the VLM for the optimal action, the goal of task-relevant
prompts is to produce a useful state representation, such that running RL optimization on them
can accelerate learning an optimal policy. While the former is not possible without task-specific
training data for the VLM in the control task, the latter proves beneficial with off-the-shelf VLMs.
Finally, these prompts also provide a place where auxiliary helpful information can be provided: for
example, one can describe what certain entities of interest look like, aiding the VLM in detecting
them even if they were not commonly found in the model’s pre-training data.
Evaluating and optimizing prompts for RL. Since the specific information and representations
elicited from the VLM are determined by the prompt, we want to design prompts that produce
promptable representations that maximize performance on the downstream task. The brute-force
approach would involve running RL with each candidate prompt to measure its efficacy, but this
would be computationally very expensive. In lieu of this, we evaluate candidate prompts on a small
dataset of observations labeled with semantic features of interest for the considered task. Example
features include whether task-relevant entities are in the image, the relative position of said entities,
or even actions (if expert demonstrations are available). We test prompts by querying the VLM and
checking how well the resulting decoded text for each image matches ground truth labels. As this is
only practical for small, discrete label spaces that are easily expressed in words, we also draw from
probing literature (Shi et al., 2016; Belinkov & Glass, 2019) and see how well a small model can
fit the VLM’s embeddings to the labels, thus measuring how extractable said features are from the
promptable representations (without memorization). While this approach does not directly optimize
for task performance, it does act as a proxy that ensures a prompt’s resulting representations encode
certain semantic features which are helpful for the task.

5     E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
We wish to empirically show that one can prompt a VLM to elicit visually-grounded representations
that aid in a downstream control task, thus bringing the benefits of Internet-scale VLM pre-training
to RL. To this end, we design experiments to answer the following questions: (1) Can promptable
representations obtained via task-specific prompts enable more performant and sample-efficient
learning than those of pre-trained image encoders? (2) How does PR2L compare to approaches
that directly “ask” the VLM to generate the best possible actions for a task specified in the prompt?
(3) How well do representations obtained from a general-purpose VLM compare to other domain-
specific representations, that are also trained to associate visual observations with text, measured via
control performance?
Implementation details. For all experiments, we use the InstructBLIP instruction-tuned generative
VLM (Dai et al., 2023). Concretely, we use the Vicuna-7B version (Chiang et al., 2023) at half
precision to produce promptable representations. We present the hyperparameters in Appendix C.

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP AND C OMPARISONS : M INECRAFT
To answer the questions listed above, we conduct experiments on the Minecraft domain, which
provides a number of control tasks that require associating visual observations with rich semantic
information to succeed. Moreover, since these observations are distinct from the images in the the
pre-training dataset of the VLM, succeeding on these tasks relies crucially on the efficacy of the task-
specific prompt in meaningfully affecting the learned representation, enabling us to stress-test our
method. For example, while spiders in Minecraft somewhat resemble real-life spiders, they actually
exhibit stylistic exaggerations, such as bright red eyes and a large black body. If the task-specific
prompt is indeed effective in informing the VLM of these facts, it would produce a representation
that is more conducive to policy learning and this would be reflected in task performance. Finally,
recent works also find pre-trained models to be useful in Minecraft tasks (Baker et al., 2022; Zhu

                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        PR2L Prompt                             RT-2-style Baseline Prompt                   Change Auxiliary Text Ablation Prompt
                “Spiders in Minecraft are black.                    “I want to fight a spider.
Combat Spider                                                                                                    “Is there a spider in this image?”
                Is there a spider in this image?”       I can attack, move, or turn. What should I do?”
                                                                      “I want to milk a cow.                 “Cows in Minecraft are black and white.
  Milk Cow      “Is there a cow in this image?”
                                                    I can use my bucket, move, or turn. What should I do?”        Is there a cow in this image?”
                                                                    “I want to shear a sheep.                 “Sheep in Minecraft are usually white.
 Shear Sheep    “Is there a sheep in this image?”
                                                    I can use my shears, move, or turn. What should I do?”       Is there a sheep in this image?”

Table 1: Prompts used for querying the VLM with PR2L, comparison (b), and the change auxiliary text
ablation. For the last column, we remove the auxiliary text for combat spider, and add it in for the other two.


et al., 2023; Nottingham et al., 2023; Lifshitz et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b), motivating us further
to study this domain.
Minecraft tasks. We consider three Minecraft tasks provided by the MineDojo simulator (Fan et al.,
2022): (i) combat spider, where the agent must find and defeat a nearby spider while equipped with
a shield, diamond sword, and diamond armor; (ii) milk cow, where the agent must milk a nearby cow
by using an equipped bucket; and (iii) shear sheep, where the agent must cut wool from a nearby
sheep by using equipped shears. We follow the prescriptions of Fan et al. (2022) for defining the ob-
servation and action spaces and reward function structures for these tasks. Specifically, at each time
step, the policy observes an egocentric RGB image, its pose (Cartesian coordinates and pitch/yaw
angles in the world frame), and its previously-executed action; the policy can choose a discrete ac-
tion to turn the agent by changing the agent’s pitch and/or yaw in fixed discrete increments, move,
attack, or use a held item. The maximum allowed rollout length for each task is 500, with termina-
tion for early successes. We utilize proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) as
our base RL algorithm for all approaches. Additional details are available in Appendix B.
Comparisons. To answer the research questions posed at the start of this section, we compare our
approach to: (a) methods that do not utilize prompting to obtain representations of the observation,
(b) a method that directly “asks” the VLM to output the action to execute on the agent, inspired by
the approach of Brohan et al. (2023), and (c) running RL on the MineCLIP representation (Fan et al.,
2022), which is obtained by fine-tuning CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) on Minecraft data. Running RL
on MineCLIP serves as an “oracle” comparison since this representation was explicitly fine-tuned
on a large dataset of Minecraft Youtube videos, whereas our pre-trained VLM is frozen, and is not
trained on any Minecraft video data. Comparison (b) attempts to adapt the approach of Brohan et al.
(2023) to our setting and directly outputs the action from the VLM. While Brohan et al. (2023)
also fine-tune the VLM backbone, we are unable to fine-tune this VLM using our computational re-
sources. In order to compensate for this difference, we do not just execute the action from the VLM,
but train an RL policy to map this decoded output action into a better action. Note that, if the VLM
already decodes good action texts for the specified task, then simply copying over this action via RL
should be easy. Finally, comparison (a) does not utilize the task-specific prompt altogether, instead
using embeddings from the VLM’s image encoder (specifically, the ViT-g/14 image encoder from
InstructBLIP (blue in Figure 2)). While this representation of the observation is task-agnostic and
still benefits from pre-training, PR2L utilizes prompting to produce task-specific representations.
For a fair comparison, we utilize the exact same Transformer-layer policy architecture and hyperpa-
rameters for this baseline as in PR2L, ensuring that performance differences come from prompting
for better representations from the VLM. For more details, see Appendix C.

5.2     D ESIGNING TASK -S PECIFIC P ROMPTS FOR PR2L
Next, we discuss how to design the task-specific prompts for PR2L. As noted earlier in Section 4.3,
these are not instructions or task descriptions, but prompts that force the VLM to encode semantic
information about the task in its representation. The simplest relevant semantic feature for our tasks
is the presence of the target entity in a given visual observation. Thus, we choose “Is there a [spi-
der/cow/sheep] in this image?” as the base of our chosen prompt. We also introduce two alternative
prompts per task that prepend different amounts of auxiliary information about the target entity.
For example, for spiders, the two candidate prompts that we consider are “Spiders in Minecraft are
black.” and “Spiders in Minecraft are black and have red eyes and long, thin legs.” To choose be-
tween these prompts, we apply our prompt evaluation and optimization strategy by measuring how
well the VLM is able to decode a correct answer to the question of whether or not the target entity
is present in the image on a small pre-collected dataset of images annotated with the answer to this
question. Full details and results of this evaluation scheme are presented in Appendix A and Table


                                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Combat Spider Results                                            Milk Cow Results                                          Shear Sheep Results
                    12                                                       10
                                                                                                                                              8
                    10                                                           8
                     8                                                                                                                        6
     IQM Returns                                                                 6
                     6
                                                                                 4                                                            4
                     4
                                                                                 2
                     2
                                                                                                                                              2
                     0                                                           0


                                                                            250                                                              40
                    150
                                                                            200
IQM Success Count


                                                                                                                                             30
                    100                                                     150
                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                            100
                    50                                                                                                                       10
                                                                             50
                     0                                                           0                                                             0
                          0   25k    50k 75k 100k 125k 150k                          0         25k          50k         75k       100k             0     25k        50k         75k   100k
                                     Training Time Steps                                            Training Time Steps                                     Training Time Steps
                                                (a) VLM Image Encoder Baseline           (b) RT-2-Style Baseline         (c) MineCLIP Encoder (oracle)    PR2L (ours)


Figure 3: Performance of PR2L vs other comparisons. Plots show IQM returns and success counts over
time for the Minecraft tasks for 16 trials. Shaded regions represent one standard error (though some are
omitted for visual clarity). PR2L outperforms the VLM image encoder and RT-2-style baselines, while being
competitive with the domain-specific representations produced by the MineCLIP encoder oracle.
2. While we observe that auxiliary text only helps with detecting spiders while systematically and
significantly degrading the detection of the other two entities, more importantly, our results (that we
discuss in the next section) show that this detection success rate is correlated with performance of the
RL policy for any prompt. Finally, we note that we also utilize additional prompts for comparison
(b), following the recipe for prompt design prescribed by Brohan et al. (2023), which motivated this
comparison. In these prompts, we also provide a list of allowed actions that the VLM can choose
from to the policy. All chosen prompts are presented in Table 1.
5.3 R ESULTS AND A BLATIONS
For all of our results, we report the interquar-               Probability of Improvement over VLM Image Encoder Baseline Returns
tile mean (IQM) standard error of the returns Combat Spider                                                  0.72
and number of successes over 16 seeds per con-         Milk Cow                                               0.74
dition for all Minecraft tasks in Figure 3 and      Shear Sheep                                     0.56
the probability of improvement of PR2L over                    0.0            0.2        0.4         0.6         0.8          1.0
the VLM image encoder baseline in Figure 4,
following Agarwal et al. (2022). For the re- Figure 4: PR2L yields high probability of improve-
turns, we apply exponential smoothing to the ment over the VLM image encoder comparison (a).
episode’s returns or success indicators with smoothing factor α = 0.05 (so each smoothed datapoint
is determined by an effective window of the 20 most recent unsmoothed ones).
Minecraft results. As shown in Figure 3, on all the three tasks, PR2L significantly outperforms both
using the VLM image encoder (comparison (a)) and the method that directly “asks” the VLM for the
action (comparison (b)) inspired by RT-2. This shows how control tasks can benefit from extracting
prior knowledge encoded in VLMs by prompting them with task context and auxiliary information,
even in single-task situations where the generalization properties of instruction-following methods
do not apply. While PR2L does not outperform the “oracle” MineCLIP policy on combat spider, it
performs competitively or better than MineCLIP on the other two tasks that we study, even though
the latter is fine-tuned on Minecraft-specific data while InstructBLIP is not.
Furthermore, we hypothesize that MineCLIP outperforms PR2L on the spider task because, out
of all the entities that we study, Minecraft spiders are the most different visually from real spiders,
giving rise to comparatively poor representations in the VLM (which is trained exclusively on natural
images). Nevertheless, our results in Figure 3 show that PR2L provides an effective approach to
transform a general-purpose VLM into a strong task-specific control policy (without fine-tuning)
that can often outperform policies trained on domain-specific representations on a given task.
Ablations studies. We run several ablation experiments to isolate and understand the importance of
various components of PR2L towards extracting good promptable representations for RL. First, we
run PR2L with no prompt to see if prompting with task context actually tailors the VLM’s generated
representations favorably towards the target task, improving over an unprompted VLM. Note that


                                                                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Combat Spider Ablation Results                            Milk Cow Ablation Results                           Shear Sheep Ablation Results
                    100
                                                                        200
                    80                                                                                                          30
IQM Success Count                                                       150
                    60
                                                                                                                                20
                    40                                                  100

                                                                        50                                                      10
                    20
                     0                                                   0                                                        0
                          0   25k   50k 75k 100k 125k 150k                    0        25k          50k      75k        100k          0       25k        50k       75k     100k
                                    Training Time Steps                                    Training Time Steps                                   Training Time Steps
                                         No Prompt      No Generation             Change Auxiliary Text        (a) VLM Image Encoder Baseline        PR2L (ours)


Figure 5: Ablation studies on all Minecraft tasks with the VLM image encoder baseline (blue) and our full
approach (red), as shown in Figure 3. All ablations achieve worse performance than PR2L, highlighting the
importance of each ablated component (the prompt, VLM generation, or inclusion of auxiliary text). Curves
are IQM success counts and shaded regions are the standard error. We apply a third-order Savitsky-Golay filter
with window size 10 to improve readability. We present additional metrics in Figure. 7 in the Appendix.

this is not the same as simply utilizing the image encoder (comparison (a)) alone, since this ablation
decodes through the VLM, just with an empty prompt. Second, we run PR2L with our chosen
prompt, but no generation of text – i.e., the policy only receives the embeddings associated with the
image and prompt (the left and middle red groupings of tokens at the top of Figure 2, but not the
right-most group). This tests the hypothesis that representations of generated text might make certain
task-relevant features more salient. For instance, the embeddings for “Spiders in Minecraft are black.
Is there a spider in this image?”, might not encode the presence of a spider as clearly as if the VLM
generates “Yes” in response, impacting downstream performance. Finally, to check if our prompt
evaluation and optimization strategy provides a good proxy for downstream task performance while
tuning prompts for P2RL, we run PR2L with alternative prompts that were not predicted to be the
best, as per our criterion in Appendix A. Concretely, this amounts to removing the auxiliary text
from the prompt for combat spider and including it for milk cow and shear sheep.
Results from these ablation experiments are presented in Figure 5. In general, all of these ablations
perform worse than PR2L. For milk cow, we note the most performant ablation is no generation, per-
haps because the generated text is often wrong – among the chosen prompts, it yields the lowest true
positive and negative rates for classifying the presence of its corresponding target entity (see Table
2 in Appendix A), though adding auxiliary text makes it even worse, perhaps explaining why milk
cow experienced the largest performance decrease from adding it back in. Regardless, based on the
overall trends, we conclude that (i) the promptable and generative aspects of VLM representations
are important for extracting good features for control tasks and (ii) our simple evaluation scheme is
an effective proxy measure of how good a prompt is for PR2L.


6                         D ISCUSSION
In this work, we propose Promptable Representations for Reinforcement Learning (PR2L), a method
for extracting semantic features from images by prompting VLMs with task context, thereby making
use of their extensive general-purpose prior knowledge. We demonstrate this approach in Minecraft,
a domain that benefits from interpreting its visually-complex observations in terms of semantic con-
cepts that can be related to task context. This general framework for using VLMs for control tasks
opens many new paths of research. For example, prompts are currently hand-crafted based on the
user’s conception of useful features for the task. While coming up with effective prompts for our
tasks in particular was not difficult, the process of generating and efficiently evaluating/optimizing
them could be automated, which we leave for future works. Additionally, running PR2L with offline
RL may provide even more in-depth insights into the benefits of this approach, since it removes
the need for exploration (which we do not expect PR2L to help with). Finally, while we consider
VLMs as our source of promptable representations, other types of promptable foundation mod-
els pre-trained with more sophisticated methods could also be used: e.g., ones trained on videos,
domain-specific data, or even physical interactions might yield even better representations, perhaps
which encode physics or action knowledge, rather than just common-sense visual semantics. Devel-
oping and using such models with PR2L offers an exciting way to transfer diverse prior knowledge
to a broad range of control applications.


                                                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ademi Adeniji, Amber Xie, Carmelo Sferrazza, Younggyo Seo, Stephen James, and Pieter Abbeel.
  Language reward modulation for pretraining reinforcement learning, 2023.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G. Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice, 2022.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey,
 Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as i can and not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. 2022.
Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokhov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by watching
  unlabeled online videos, 2022.
Yonatan Belinkov and James Glass. Analysis methods in neural language processing: A survey,
  2019.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choro-
  manski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, Pete Florence, Chuyuan Fu,
  Montse Gonzalez Arenas, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kehang Han, Karol Hausman, Alexander
  Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov,
  Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Lisa Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Hen-
  ryk Michalewski, Igor Mordatch, Karl Pertsch, Kanishka Rao, Krista Reymann, Michael Ryoo,
  Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Pierre Sermanet, Jaspiar Singh, Anikait Singh, Radu Soricut,
  Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Quan Vuong, Ayzaan Wahid, Stefan Welker, Paul Wohlhart,
  Jialin Wu, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-2:
  Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Arthur Bucker, Luis Figueredo, Sami Haddadin, Ashish Kapoor, Shuang Ma, Sai Vemprala, and
  Rogerio Bonatti. Latte: Language trajectory transformer, 2022.
Shaofei Cai, Zihao Wang, Xiaojian Ma, Anji Liu, and Yitao Liang. Open-world multi-task control
  through goal-aware representation learning and adaptive horizon prediction, 2023.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language
 models with instruction tuning, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2019.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ziluo Ding, Hao Luo, Ke Li, Junpeng Yue, Tiejun Huang, and Zongqing Lu. Clip4mc: An rl-friendly
  vision-language model for minecraft, 2023.
Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek
  Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
  models, 2023.
Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang,
  De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied
  agents with internet-scale knowledge. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022, 2022.
Jennifer Hu and Roger Levy. Prompt-based methods may underestimate large language models’
  linguistic generalizations, 2023.
Chenguang Huang, Oier Mees, Andy Zeng, and Wolfram Burgard. Visual language maps for robot
  navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), London, UK, 2023.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents, 2022a.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models, 2022b.
Ganesh Jawahar, Benoı̂t Sagot, and Djamé Seddah. What does BERT learn about the structure of
  language? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, mar 2023.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston, Sheer
  El-Showk, Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam Bow-
  man, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson, Jackson Kernion, Shauna
  Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario Amodei, Tom
  Brown, Jack Clark, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Ka-
  plan. Language models (mostly) know what they know, 2022.
Anssi Kanervisto, Stephanie Milani, Karolis Ramanauskas, Nicholay Topin, Zichuan Lin, Junyou
  Li, Jianing Shi, Deheng Ye, Qiang Fu, Wei Yang, Weijun Hong, Zhongyue Huang, Haicheng
  Chen, Guangjun Zeng, Yue Lin, Vincent Micheli, Eloi Alonso, François Fleuret, Alexander
  Nikulin, Yury Belousov, Oleg Svidchenko, and Aleksei Shpilman. Minerl diamond 2021 compe-
  tition: Overview, results, and lessons learned, 2022.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything, 2023.
Belinda Z. Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Implicit representations of meaning in neural
  language models, 2021.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation, 2022.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models, 2023a.
Kenneth Li, Aspen K. Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Watten-
  berg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task,
  2023b.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control, 2023.
Shalev Lifshitz, Keiran Paster, Harris Chan, Jimmy Ba, and Sheila McIlraith. Steve-1: A generative
  model for text-to-behavior in minecraft, 2023.
Haowei Lin, Zihao Wang, Jianzhu Ma, and Yitao Liang. Mcu: A task-centric framework for open-
  ended agent evaluation in minecraft, 2023a.
Jessy Lin, Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Danijar Hafner, Pieter Abbeel, Dan Klein, and Anca Dragan.
  Learning to model the world with language. 2023b.
Hao Liu, Lisa Lee, Kimin Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Instruction-following agents with multimodal
  transformer, 2023.
Corey Lynch and Pierre Sermanet. Language conditioned imitation learning over unstructured data,
  2021.
Arjun Majumdar, Karmesh Yadav, Sergio Arnaud, Yecheng Jason Ma, Claire Chen, Sneha Silwal,
  Aryan Jain, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, Dhruv Batra, Yixin Lin, Olek-
  sandr Maksymets, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Franziska Meier. Where are we in the search for an
  artificial visual cortex for embodied intelligence?, 2023.
Oier Mees, Jessica Borja-Diaz, and Wolfram Burgard. Grounding language with visual affordances
  over unstructured data. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), London, UK, 2023.
Vivek Myers, Andre He, Kuan Fang, Homer Walke, Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Ching-An Cheng,
  Mihai Jalobeanu, Andrey Kolobov, Anca Dragan, and Sergey Levine. Goal representations for
  instruction following: A semi-supervised language interface to control, 2023.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A univer-
  sal visual representation for robot manipulation, 2022.
Karthik Narasimhan, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Grounding language for transfer in
  deep reinforcement learning, 2018.
Kolby Nottingham, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Alane Suhr, Yejin Choi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Sameer
  Singh, and Roy Fox. Do embodied agents dream of pixelated sheep: Embodied decision making
  using language guided world modelling, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
Norman Di Palo, Arunkumar Byravan, Leonard Hasenclever, Markus Wulfmeier, Nicolas Heess,
  and Martin Riedmiller. Towards a unified agent with foundation models, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  20-1364.html.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2022.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pratyusha Sharma, Antonio Torralba, and Jacob Andreas. Skill induction and planning with latent
  language, 2022.

Pratyusha Sharma, Balakumar Sundaralingam, Valts Blukis, Chris Paxton, Tucker Hermans, An-
  tonio Torralba, Jacob Andreas, and Dieter Fox. Correcting robot plans with natural language
  feedback. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2022, 2023.

Xing Shi, Inkit Padhi, and Kevin Knight. Does string-based neural MT learn source syntax? In
  Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  1526–1534, November 2016.

Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2021.

Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans
   using large language models, 2022.

Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. Bert rediscovers the classical nlp pipeline, 2019.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2017.

Sai Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Arthur Bucker, and Ashish Kapoor. Chatgpt for robotics: Design
  principles and model abilities. Technical report, Microsoft, 2023.

Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models,
  2023a.

Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe,
  explain, plan and select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world
  multi-task agents, 2023b.

Gregor Wiedemann, Steffen Remus, Avi Chawla, and Chris Biemann. Does bert make any sense?
  interpretable word sense disambiguation with contextualized embeddings, 2019.

Haoqi Yuan, Chi Zhang, Hongcheng Wang, Feiyang Xie, Penglin Cai, Hao Dong, and Zongqing Lu.
  Plan4mc: Skill reinforcement learning and planning for open-world minecraft tasks, 2023.

Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian,
  Travis Armstrong, Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, and Johnny Lee. Transporter
  networks: Rearranging the visual world for robotic manipulation. Conference on Robot Learning
  (CoRL), 2020.

Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, Brian Ichter, Krzysztof Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker,
  Federico Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Van-
  houcke, and Pete Florence. Socratic models: Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with
  language, 2022.

Bohan Zhou, Ke Li, Jiechuan Jiang, and Zongqing Lu. Learning from visual observation via offline
  pretrained state-to-go transformer, 2023.

Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, Yu Qiao, Zhaoxiang Zhang, and Jifeng Dai. Ghost in the minecraft:
  Generally capable agents for open-world environments via large language models with text-based
  knowledge and memory, 2023.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Target Entity                     Prompt                     True Positive Rate     True Negative Rate
                     “Is there a spider in this image?”            22.27%                 100.00%
    Spider           “Spiders in Minecraft are black.
                                                                   73.42%                 94.54%
                     Is there a spider in this image?”
                      “Spiders in Minecraft are black
                      and have red eyes and long, thin             50.50%                 99.85%
                   legs. Is there a spider in this image?”
                      “Is there a cow in this image?”              71.00%                 45.41%
    Cow          “Cows in Minecraft are black and white.
                                                                   98.22%                  2.00%
                     Is there a cow in this image?”
                 “Cows in Minecraft are black and white
                           and have four legs.                     96.67%                  7.35%
                     Is there a cow in this image?”
                     “Is there a sheep in this image?”             88.00%                 59.83%
    Sheep             “Sheep in Minecraft are white.
                                                                  100.00%                  0.00%
                      Is there a sheep in this image?”
                    “Sheep in Minecraft are white and
                              have four legs.                     100.00%                  0.00%
                     Is there a sheep in this image?”

Table 2: InstructBLIP’s performance at decoding text indicating that it detected the presence of a
target entity when given different prompts. We use this as a proxy metric for prompt engineering for
RL, allowing us to determine which prompt to use for PR2L.


A    P ROMPT E VALUATION FOR RL IN M INECRAFT

We discuss how to evaluate prompts to use with PR2L, by showcasing an example for a Minecraft
task. We start by noting that the presence and relative location of the entity of interest for each task
(i.e., spiders, sheep, or cows) are good features for the policy to have. To evaluate if a prompt elicits
these features from the VLM, we collect a small dataset of videos in which each Minecraft entity
of interest is on the left, right, middle, or not on screen for the entirety of the clip. Each video is
collected by a human player screen recording visual observations from Minecraft of the entity from
different angles for around 30 seconds at 30 frames per second (with the exception of the video
where the entity is not present, which is a minute long).
We propose prompts that target each of the two features we labeled. First, we evaluate prompts that
ask “Is there a(n) [entity] in this image?” As the answers to these questions are just yes/no, we see
how well the VLM can directly generate the correct answer for each frame in the collected videos.
The VLM should answer “yes” for frames in the three videos where the target entity is on the left,
right, or middle of the screen and “no” for the final video. Second, we evaluate if our prompts can
extract the entity’s relative position (left, right, or middle) in the videos where it is present. We
note that the prompts we tried could not extract this feature in the decoded text (e.g., asking “Is the
[entity] on the left, right, or middle of the screen?” will always cause the VLM to decode the same
text). Thus, we try to see if this feature can be extracted from the decoded texts’ representations.
We measure this by fitting a three-category linear classifier of the entity’s position given the token-
wise mean of the decoded tokens’ final embeddings. This is an unsophisticated and unexpressive
classifier, i.e., we do not have to worry about the model potentially memorizing the data, which
means that good classification performance corresponds to an easy extractability of said feature.
We evaluate three types of prompts per task entity for the first feature: one simply asking if the
entity is present in the image (e.g., “Is there a spider in this image?”) and two others adding vary-
ing amounts of auxiliary information about visual characteristics of the entity (e.g., “Spiders in
Minecraft are black. Is there a spider in this image?” and “Spiders in Minecraft are black and have
red eyes and long, thin legs. Is there a spider in this image?”). We present evaluations of all such
prompts in Table 2. We find that the VLM benefits greatly from auxiliary information for the spider


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


case only, likely because spiders in Minecraft are the most dissimilar to the ones present in natural
images of real spiders, whereas cows and sheep are still comparatively similar, especially in terms
of scale and color. However, adding too much auxiliary information degrades performance, perhaps
because the input prompt becomes too long, and therefore is out-of-distribution for the types of
prompts that the VLM was pre-trained on. This same argument may explain why auxiliary informa-
tion degrades performance for the other two target entities as well, causing them to almost always
answer that said entities are present, even when they are not. Once more, considering that these tar-
gets exhibit a higher degree of visual resemblance to to their real counterparts compared to Minecraft
spiders, it is reasonable to infer that the VLM would not benefit from auxiliary information. Fur-
thermore, taking into account that the auxiliary information we gave is more common-sense than
the information given for the spider, it could imply that the prompts are also more likely to be out-
of-distribution (given that “sheep are white” is so obvious that people would not bother expressing
it in language), causing the systematic performance degradation.
                                                                                                  Linear Classifier Accuracy of Relative Position of Spider
For the probing evaluation, we find that all three                             1.0
prompts reach similar final linear classifiabili-
                                                                               0.8
ties for each of their target entities, as shown



                                                     Classification Accuracy
in Figure 6. While this does not aid in choos-                                 0.6
ing one prompt over another, it does confirm                                   0.4
that the VLM’s decoded embeddings for each                                               Is there a spider in this image?
                                                                               0.2       Spiders in Minecraft are black. Is there a spider in this image?
prompt still contains this valuable and granu-                                           Spiders in Minecraft are black and have red eyes and long, thin legs.
                                                                                         Is there a spider in this image?
lar position information about the target entity,                              0.0
even though the input prompt did not ask for it.                                                   Linear Classifier Accuracy of Relative Position of Cow
                                                                               1.0

                                                                               0.8
B M INE D OJO
                                                     Classification Accuracy


                                                                               0.6
E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS
                                                                               0.4
Spaces.     The observation space for the                                                Is there a cow in this image?
                                                                               0.2       Cows in Minecraft are black and white. Is there a cow in this image?
Minecraft tasks consists of the following:                                               Cows in Minecraft are black and white and have four legs.
                                                                                         Is there a cow in this image?
                                                                               0.0
      1. RGB: Egocentric RGB images from                                       1.0
                                                                                                  Linear Classifier Accuracy of Relative Position of Sheep
         the agent. (160, 256, 3)-size tensor of
         integers ∈ {0, 1, ..., 255}.                                          0.8
                                                     Classification Accuracy


      2. Position: Cartesian coordinates of                                    0.6
         agent in world frame. 3-element vec-                                  0.4
         tor of floats.                                                                                     Is there a sheep in this image?
                                                                               0.2                          Sheep in Minecraft are white. Is there a sheep in this image?
      3. Pitch, Yaw: Orientation of agent in                                                                Sheep in Minecraft are white and have four legs.
                                                                                                            Is there a sheep in this image?
         world frame in degrees. Note that we                                  0.0
                                                                                     0              100             200              300             400             500
         limit the pitch to 15◦ above the hori-                                                                           Epochs

         zon to 75◦ below for combat spider,         Figure 6: We train a linear classifier to predict the
         which makes learning easier (as the         relative position of the target entity (left/right/middle)
         agent otherwise often spends a signif-      based on the average VLM embeddings decoded in re-
         icant amount of time looking straight       sponse to each associated candidate prompt. We find
         up or down). Two 1-element vectors          that all three candidate prompts per task elicit embed-
         of floats.                                  dings that are similarly highly conducive to this classi-
                                                     fication scheme.
      4. Previous Action: The previous action
         taken by the agent. Set to no opera-
         tion at the start of each episode. One-
         hot vector of size |A| = 53 for combat
         spider and 89 otherwise (see below).
This differs from the simplified observation space used in Fan et al. (2022) in that we do not use any
nearby voxel label information and impose pitch limits for combat spider. This observation space is
the same for all Minecraft experiments.
The action space is discrete, consisting of 53 or 89 different actions:
      1. Turn: Change the yaw and pitch of the agent. The yaw and pitch can be changed up
         to ±90◦ in multiples of 15◦ . As they can both be changed at the same time, there are


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         9 × 9 = 81 total different turning actions. The turning action where the yaw and pitch
         changes are both 0◦ is the no operation action. Note that, since we impose pitch limits
         for the spider task, we also limit the change in pitch to ±30◦ , meaning there are only 45
         turning actions in that case.
      2. Move: Move forward, backward, left, right, jump up, or jump forward for 6 actions total.
      3. Attack: Swing the held item at whatever is targeted at the center of the agent’s view.
      4. Use Item: Use the held item on whatever is targeted at the center of the agent’s view.
         This is used to milk cows or shear sheep (with an empty bucket or shears respectively). If
         holding a sword and shield, this action will block attacks with the latter.
This non-combat spider action space is the same as the simplified one in Fan et al. (2022). All
experiments for a given task share the same action space.
World specifications. MineDojo implements a fast reset functionality that we use. Instead of
generating an entirely new world for each episode, fast reset simply respawns the player and all
specified entities in the same world instance, but with fully restored items, health points, and other
relevant task quantities. This lowers the time overhead of resets significantly, but also means that
some changes to the world (like block destruction) are persistent. However, as breaking blocks
generally takes multiple time steps of taking the same action (and does not directly lead to any
reward), the agent empirically does not break many blocks aside from tall grass (which is destroyed
with a single strike from any held item). We keep all reset parameters (like the agent respawn radius,
how far away entities can spawn from the agent, etc) at their default values provided by MineDojo.
We stage all tasks in the same area of the same programmatically-generated world: namely, a sun-
flower plains biome in the world with seed 123. This is the default location for the implementation
of the spider combat task in MineDojo. We choose this specific world/location as it represents a
prototypical Minecraft scene with relatively easily-traversable terrain (thus making learning faster
and easier).
Additional task details and reward functions. We provide additional notes about our Minecraft
tasks.
Combat spider: Upon detecting the agent, the spider approaches and attacks; if the agent’s health
is depleted, then the episode terminates in failure. The agent receives +1 reward for striking any
entity and +10 for defeating the spider. We also include several distractor animals (a cow, pig,
chicken, and sheep) that passively wander the task space; the agent can reward game by striking
these animals, making credit assignment of success rewards and the overall task harder.
Milk cow: The agent also holds wheat in its off hand, which causes the cow to approach the agent
when detected and sufficiently nearby. For each episode, we track the minimum visually-observed
distance between the agent and the cow at each time step. The agent receives +0.1|∆dmin | reward
for decreasing this minimum distance (where ∆dmin ≤ 0 is the change in this minimum distance at
a given time step) and +10 for successfully milking the cow.
Shear sheep: As with milk cow, the agent holds wheat in its off hand to cause the sheep to approach
it. The reward function also has the same structure as that task, albeit with different coefficients:
+|∆dmin | for decreasing the minimum distance to the sheep and +10 for shearing it.

C    P OLICY AND T RAINING D ETAILS
For our actual RL algorithm, we use the Stable-Baselines3 (version 2.0.0) implementation of
clipping-based PPO (Raffin et al., 2021), with hyperparameters presented in Table 3. Many of these
parameters are the same as the ones presented by Fan et al. (2022). For the spider trials, we use a
cosine learning rate schedule:
                                                                                               
                                                                1 + cos π current   train step
                                                                            total train steps
    LR(current train step) = Min LR + (Max LR − Min LR)                                         (2)
                                                                            2

We also present the policy and VLM hyperparameters in Table 4. The hyperparameters and ar-
chitecture of the MLP part of the policy are primarily defined by the default values and structure


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 Task
                        Hyperparameter
                                                 Combat Spider   Milk Cow    Shear Sheep
                     Total Train Time Steps         150000        100000       100000
                          Rollout Steps                          2048
                    Action Entropy Coefficient                   5e-3
                    Value Function Coefficient                    0.5
                            Max LR                   5e-5          1e-4         1e-4
                            Min LR                   5e-6          1e-4         1e-4
                           Batch Size                             64
                         Update Epochs                            10
                                γ                                0.99
                             GAE λ                               0.95
                           Clip Range                             0.2
                       Max Gradient Norm                          0.5
                     Normalize Advantages                        True

Table 3: PPO hyperparameters for Minecraft tasks, shared by the baselines, our method, and abla-
tions.


                                    Policy Transformer Hyperparameters

                                      Transformer Token Size         512
                                  Transformer Feedforward Dim        512
                                   Transformer Number Heads           2
                               Transformer Number Decoder Layers      1
                               Transformer Number Encoder Layers      1
                                     Transformer Output Dim          128
                                       Transformer Dropout           0.1
                                     Transformer Nonlinearity       ReLU

                                       Policy MLP Hyperparameters

                                      Number Hidden Layers             1
                                        Hidden Layer Size            128
                                       Activation Function           tanh

                                     VLM Generation Hyperparameters

                                      Max Tokens Generated            6
                                      Min Tokens Generated            6
                                       Decoding Scheme              Greedy

                    Table 4: All policy hyperparameters for all Minecraft tasks.


defined by the Stable-Baselines3 ActorCriticPolicy class. Note that the no generation abla-
tion, VLM image encoder baseline, and MineCLIP trials do not generate text with the VLM, and
so all do not use the associated process’s hyperparameters. The MineCLIP trials also do not use a
Transformer layer in the policy, due to not receiving token sequence embeddings. It instead just uses
a MLP, but with two hidden layers (to supplement the lowered policy expressivity due to the lack of
a Transformer layer).
Additionally, InstructBLIP’s token embeddings are larger than ViT-g/14’s (used in the VLM image
encoder baseline), and so may carry more information. However, the VLM does not receive any
privileged information over the image encoder from the task environment – any additional informa-
tion in the VLM’s representations is therefore purely from the model’s prompted internal knowledge.
Still, to ensure consistent policy expressivity, we include a learned linear layer projecting all repre-
sentations for this baseline and our approach to the same size (512 dimensions) so that the rest of
the policy is the same for both.


D    F ULL A BLATION P LOTS

We extend Figure 5 with additional performance metrics in Figure 7.


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Combat Spider Ablation Results                      Milk Cow Ablation Results                            Shear Sheep Ablation Results
                                                                         10                                                      8
                         8                                                8                                                      7
                         6                                                                                                       6
           IQM Returns                                                    6
                                                                                                                                 5
                         4                                                4
                                                                                                                                 4
                         2                                                2
                                                                                                                                 3
                         0                                                0                                                      2

                    100
                                                                         200
                    80                                                                                                         30
IQM Success Count


                    60                                                   150
                                                                                                                               20
                    40                                                   100
                                                                         50                                                    10
                    20
                         0                                               0                                                       0
                             0   25k    50k 75k 100k 125k 150k             0         25k         50k        75k      100k           0      25k         50k         75k    100k
                                        Training Time Steps                             Training Time Steps                                    Training Time Steps
                                                  No Prompt No Generation        Change Auxiliary Text        VLM Image Encoder Baseline     PR2L (ours)


Figure 7: Extended version of Figure 5 with both the returns and success counts for the ablation
trials. All curves represent IQMs and shaded regions represent the standard error (though some are
omitted for visual clarity).

                                                                               Behavior Cloning Success Rate
                                   Combat
                                    Spider

                                        Milk
                                        Cow

                                       Shear                                                                         PR2L (ours)
                                       Sheep                                                                         VLM Image Encoder Baseline
                                            0.0                    0.2              0.4                      0.6                     0.8                  1.0
                                                                                           Success Rate

Figure 8: Success rates for BC on either PR2L or VLM image encoder baseline representations for
all original tasks. PR2L excels at combat spider, even after the policy is trained for a single epoch.


E                            A DDITIONAL M INECRAFT E XPERIMENTS

E.1                          B EHAVIOR C LONING

We collected expert policy data by training a policy on MineCLIP embeddings to completion on all
of our original tasks and saving all transitions to create an offline dataset. We then embedded all
transitions with either PR2L or the VLM image encoder. Finally, we train policies with behavior
cloning (BC) on successful trajectories under a specified length (300 for combat spider, 250 for milk
cow, and 500 for shear sheep) from either set of embeddings for all three tasks, then evaluate their
task success rates.
Results are presented in Fig. 8. We first note that, since the expert data was collected from a policy
trained on MineCLIP embeddings, the shear sheep policy is not very effective (as we found in Fig.
3). Both resulting shear sheep BC policies are likewise not very performant. We find that combat
spider in particular shows a very large gap in performance: the PR2L agent achieves approximately
twice the success rate of the VLM image encoder agent after training for just a single epoch. The
comparatively small amount of training and data necessary to achieve near-expert performance for
this task supports our hypothesis that promptable representations from general-purpose VLMs do
not help with exploration (they work better in offline cases, where exploration is not a problem), but
instead are particularly conducive to being linked to appropriate actions even though the VLM is not
producing actions itself. Further investigation of this hypothesis is presented in Appendix F.


                                                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Combat Spider Results                                            Milk Cow Results                                  Shear Sheep Results
                                                                             250                                                      40
                   100
                                                                             200                                                      30
IQM Success Rate   80
                   60                                                        150
                                                                                                                                      20
                   40                                                        100
                                                                             50                                                       10
                   20
                    0                                                         0                                                        0
                         0   25k    50k 75k 100k 125k 150k                         0          25k         50k         75k   100k           0    25k         50k        75k   100k
                                    Training Time Steps                                           Training Time Steps                              Training Time Steps
                                                VLM Image Encoder Baseline             VC-1 encoder          R3M encoder      Oracle detector   PR2L (ours)


Figure 9: Success counts for the following additional baseline trials: (1) using VC-1 as an encoder,
(2) using R3M as an encoder, and (3) using VLM image encoder embeddings with privileged oracle
entity detection. All curves represent IQMs and shaded regions represent the standard error (some
are omitted for visual clarity).


E.2                      A DDITIONAL BASELINES

We provide additional baselines in combat spider, milk cow, and shear sheep. Specifically, as
InstructBLIP’s image encoder may not be especially good for control tasks, we train policies on
embeddings from VC-1 and R3M – two image encoders with representations that are specifically
pretrained for embodied control and decision-making (Majumdar et al., 2023; Nair et al., 2022). As
they both yield fix-sized embeddings, we use the same policy architecture and task hyperparameters
as the MineCLIP baseline experiments. Additionally, to disambiguate whether PR2L is simply more
performant due to being able to more reliably detect the task-relevant entity, we train a baseline pol-
icy on top of both the VLM image encoder embeddings and an indicator of whether the entity is
in view based on a privileged oracle semantic LIDAR readings (as provided by MineDojo)1 . This
baseline uses the same hyperparameters as the VLM image encoder baseline. We present all results
in Fig. 9 and find that PR2L beats all three baselines in all cases.


F                        R EPRESENTATION A NALYSIS

Why do our prompts yield higher performance than one asking for actions or instruction-following?
Intuitively, despite appropriate responses to our task-relevant prompts not directly encoding actions,
there should be a strong correlation: e.g., when fighting a spider, if the spider is in view and the
VLM detects this, then a good policy should know to attack to get rewards. We therefore wish to
investigate if our representations are conducive to easily deciding when certain rewarding actions
would be appropriate for a given task – if it is, then such a policy may be more easily learned by RL,
which would explain PR2L’s improved performance over the baselines.
To investigate this, we use the embeddings of our offline data from the BC experiments (collected
by training a MineCLIP encoder policy to high performance on all of our original three tasks, as
discussed in Appendix E.1). We specifically look at the embeddings produced by a VLM when
given our standard task-relevant prompts and when given the instructions used for our RT-2-style
baseline. We then perform principal component analysis (PCA) on the tokenwise average of all
embeddings for each observation, thereby projecting the embeddings to a 2D space with maximum
variance.
We visualize these low-dimensional space in Fig. 10 for the final 20 successful observations from
each task, with the point colors of orange and blue respectively indicating whether the observation
results in a functional action (attack or use item) or movement (translation or rotation) by the expert
policy. Additionally, we enlarge points corresponding to when the agent received rewards in order
to recognize which actions aided in or achieved the task objective.

    1
      We note that, as InstructBLIP uses its image encoder’s representations as its sole source of visual informa-
tion, if InstructBLIP is actually just doing better object detection, then any information about the presence of
the entity must also be available to the VLM image encoder baseline.


                                                                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Combat Spider PR2L Reps PCA                                    Milk Cow PR2L Reps PCA                                         Shear Sheep PR2L Reps PCA
                  15                                                      15                                                                  15
                                                            Movement                                                                                      Movement
                                                            Attack                                                                                        Use
                  10                                                      10                                                                  10

                                                                          5                                                                   5
                  5
                                                                          0                                                                   0
            PC2   0
                                                                           5                                                                   5
                   5                                                      10                                                                  10
                                                                                         Movement
                  10                                                      15             Use                                                  15
                            0        5        10       15       20                  15         10       5     0       5        10        15         20      15       10    5      0        5    10
                        Combat Spider Instruction Reps PCA                               Milk Cow Instruction Reps PCA                                  Shear Sheep Instruction Reps PCA
                  10
                                                            Movement                                                      Movement                                                    Movement
                                                            Attack        15                                              Use                 15                                      Use
                  5
                                                                          10                                                                  10
                  0
                                                                          5                                                                   5
            PC2


                   5                                                      0                                                                   0

                                                                           5                                                                   5
                  10
                                                                          10                                                                  10
                  15
                       15       10       5         0        5        10        15         10        5       0     5       10        15             15     10     5        0   5       10       15
                                             PC1                                                            PC1                                                           PC1


Figure 10: PCA of VLM representations of observations from twenty episode rollouts of expert
policies in all three Minecraft tasks. Larger points correspond to transitions where the expert re-
ceived > 0.1 reward. We vary the prompt to be either our task-relevant prompt or the RT-2-style
baseline instruction prompt. Our prompt’s representations are bi-modal, with the clusters on the left
corresponding to the VLM outputting “yes” (the entity is in view). We find that most functional
actions (orange points) that yielded rewards are located in said clusters. Note that, since these expert
policies are trained on top of MineCLIP embeddings, the shear sheep policy is not very performant,
as seen in Fig. 3.


We find that our considered prompts resulted in a bimodal distribution over representations, wherein
the left-side cluster corresponds to the VLM outputting “yes (the entity is in view)” and the right-
side one corresponds to “no.” Additionally, observations resulting in functional actions that received
rewards (large orange points in Fig. 10) tend to be on the left-side (“yes”) cluster for representations
elicited by our prompt, but are more widely distributed in the instruction prompt case, in agreement
with intuition. This is especially clear in the milk cow plot, wherein nearly all rewarding functional
actions (using the bucket on the cow to successfully collect milk) are in the lower left corner.
This analysis supports that the representations yielded by InstructBLIP in response to our chosen
style of prompts are more structured than representations from instructions. Such structure is useful
in identifying and learning rewarding actions, even when said actions were taken from an expert
policy trained on unrelated embeddings. This suggests that such representations may similarly be
more conducive to being mapped to good actions via RL, which we observe empirically (as our
prompt’s representations yield more performant policies than the instructions for the RT-2-style
baseline).


G    E XTENDED L ITERATURE R EVIEW

Learning in Minecraft. We now consider some current approaches for creating autonomous learn-
ing systems for tasks in Minecraft. Such works highlight some of the difficulties prevalent in tasks in
said environment. For instance, since Minecraft tasks take place in a dynamic open world, it can be
difficult for an agent to determine what goal it is attempting to reach and how close it is to reaching
that goal. Cai et al. (2023) tackles these issues by introducing and integrating a training scheme for
self-supervised goal-conditioned representations and a horizon predictor. Zhou et al. (2023) learns
a model from visual observations to discriminate between expert state sequences and non-expert
ones, which provides a source of intrinsic rewards for downstream RL tasks (as it pushes the policy


                                                                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to learn to match the expert state distribution, which tend to be “good” states for accomplishing tasks
in Minecraft).
Foundation Models and Minecraft. Likewise, there has been much interest in applying foundation
models – especially (V)LMs – to Minecraft tasks. Baker et al. (2022) pretrains on large scale videos,
which enabled the first agent that could learn to acquire diamond tools (thereby completing a long-
standing challenge in the MineRL competition Kanervisto et al. (2022)). LMs have subsequently
also been used to produce graphs of proposed skills to learn or technology tree advancements to
make in the form of structured language (Nottingham et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023b). Other works propose to use the LLM to generate actions or code submodules
given textual descriptions of observations or agent states (Wang et al., 2023a). Finally, VLMs have
been used largely for language-conditioned reward shaping (Fan et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2023).
In contrast, we use VLMs as a source of representations for learning of atomic tasks (as defined
by Lin et al. (2023a)) that have pre-defined reward functions; the latter works can thus be used in
conjunction with our proposed approach for tasks where these vision-language reward functions are
appropriate.


                                                  21
