Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



S INGLE M OTION D IFFUSION
  Sigal Raab∗, Inbal Leibovitch∗, Guy Tevet, Moab Arar,
 Amit H. Bermano and Daniel Cohen-Or
 Tel Aviv University, Israel
 {sigal.raab,inbal.leibovitch}@gmail.com


                                                   A BSTRACT
             Synthesizing realistic animations of humans, animals, and even imaginary creatures,
             has long been a goal for artists and computer graphics professionals. Compared to
             the imaging domain, which is rich with large available datasets, the number of data
             instances for the motion domain is limited, particularly for the animation of animals
             and exotic creatures (e.g., dragons), which have unique skeletons and motion patterns.
             In this work, we introduce SinMDM, a Single Motion Diffusion Model. It is designed
             to learn the internal motifs of a single motion sequence with arbitrary topology and
             synthesize a variety of motions of arbitrary length that remain faithful to the learned
             motifs. We harness the power of diffusion models and present a denoising network
             explicitly designed for the task of learning from a single input motion. SinMDM
             is crafted as a lightweight architecture, which avoids overfitting by using a shallow
             network with local attention layers that narrow the receptive field and encourage mo-
             tion diversity. Our work applies to multiple contexts, including spatial and temporal
             in-betweening, motion expansion, style transfer, and crowd animation. Our results
             show that SinMDM outperforms existing methods both qualitatively and quantita-
             tively. Moreover, while prior network-based approaches require additional training
             for different applications, SinMDM supports these applications during inference. Our
             project page, which includes links to the code and trained models, is accessible at
             https://sinmdm.github.io/SinMDM-page.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Animation of 3D characters is a long pursued task in computer graphics with many applications, from
the big screen to virtual reality headsets. It is notoriously known as a time-consuming task done by
expert artists. In recent years, neural models have offered faster and less expensive tools for modeling
motion (Holden et al., 2016; Petrovich et al., 2022; Raab et al., 2023). In particular, the very recent
adaptation of diffusion models into the motion domain provides unprecedented results in both quality
and diversity (Tevet et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2022).
These data-driven methods typically require large amounts of data for training. However, motion data
is quite scarce. Moreover, for non-human skeletons, it barely exists. The few available datasets contain
humanoids only, with fixed topology and bone ratio. Animators often customize a skeleton per character
(human, animal, or magical creature), for which common data-driven techniques are irrelevant.
In this work, we present a Single Motion Diffusion Model, dubbed SinMDM, that trains on a single
motion input sequence. Our model enables modeling motions of arbitrary skeletal topology, which
often have no more than one animation sequence to learn from. An arbitrary topology refers to the
agnostic nature of the architecture towards skeletal structure. Each motion sequence (of any topology)
requires its own trained model. SinMDM can synthesize a variety of variable-length motion sequences
that retain the core motion elements of the input and can handle complex and non-trivial skeletons. For
example, our model can generate a diverse clan based on one flying dragon or one hopping ostrich.
In the motion domain, learning from a single instance has been explored by Li et al. (2022) using GANs
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) and by Li et al. (2023) using Motion-graphs (Kovar et al., 2002). We advocate
diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) for single input learning, as gradual denoising enhances descriptive
capability and avoids mode-collapse using a rather lightweight scheme that, compared to the prior art,
generates high-quality motions. Furthermore, we demonstrate that diffusion models can be effectively
utilized with limited data, challenging the notion that they solely rely on large datasets.
To learn local motion sequences, the receptive field must be small enough, analogously to the use of
patch-based discriminators (Isola et al., 2017; Li & Wand, 2016) in GAN-based techniques. The use of
a narrow receptive field (Fig. 2) promotes diversity and reduces overfitting. We show the importance of
narrow receptive fields in our ablation studies.
Most motion diffusion models use transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). However, vanilla transformers
are not suitable for learning a single sequence, as their receptive field encompasses the entire motion.
    ∗
        equal contribution.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: SinMDM learns the internal motion motifs from a single motion sequence with arbitrary
topology and synthesizes motions that are faithful to the learned core motifs of the input sequence.
Left: a girl exercising while walking. Right: a breakdancing dragon. Left to right: breakdance uprock,
breakdance freeze, and breakdance flair.
A similar challenge arises with UNets (Ronneberger et al., 2015), commonly used in image diffusion
models. Its depth, along with global attention layers, creates a receptive field covering the whole motion.
SinMDM leverages the concept of narrow receptive fields and introduces a motion architecture specif-
ically designed with this concept. It combines a shallow UNet model adapted for motion with a
QnA (Arar et al., 2022) local attention mechanism, instead of global attention. As a result, SinMDM
outperforms prior art both quantitatively and qualitatively, and demonstrates high efficiency with shorter
training time and less memory consumption. Imputed to its lightweight architecture, SinMDM can be
trained on a single mid-range GPU.
We present many use cases of SinMDM. While neural-network-based prior arts require designated train-
ing per application, ours are applied at inference time, with no need to re-train. Moreover, applications
that require different dedicated algorithms in prior art, are here grouped together as special cases of
the same technique, significantly simplifying their use. One of the applications we present is Motion
Composition, where a given motion sequence is composed jointly with a synthesized one, either tem-
porally or spatially. Its special cases include in-betweening and motion expansion. Another application
that we present is Harmonization, along with its special case, style transfer. Here, a reference motion is
modified to match the learned motion motifs. It should be emphasized that implementing style transfer
using a denoising model is a non-trivial task, and enabling it through motion harmonization is unique.
We further present two more applications: long sequence generation and crowd animation.
In our work, we suggest two comprehensive benchmarks for single-motion evaluation. The first is built
upon the artistically crafted MIXAMO (2021) dataset, utilizing metrics that do not require an additional
feature-extracting model. The second is based on the HumanML3D (2022) dataset and enables metrics
that use latent features, such as SiFID (Shaham et al., 2019). We show that our model outperforms
current works on both benchmarks.
Works with limited fidelity or diversity may excel in one metric, but struggle in others. Thus, rather than
favoring models that shine on a specific criterion, we use the Harmonic Mean metric, which balances
given scores and quantifies their weighted performance.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Single-Instance Learning The goal of single-instance generation is to learn an unconditional gener-
ative model from a single instance, capturing patch-level statistics for generating diverse content. The
instance type varies by input domain, with a majority in imaging. The first works on this topic are
SinGAN (Shaham et al., 2019) and InGAN (Shocher et al., 2019). SinGAN uses a patch-based discrim-
inator (Isola et al., 2017; Li & Wand, 2016) and an image pyramid to hierarchically generate diverse re-
sults. InGAN uses a conditional GAN to solve the same problem using geometry transformation. More
recent approaches include ExSinGAN (Zhang et al., 2021c), which trains multiple modular GANs to
model the distribution of structure, semantics, and texture, and ConSinGAN (Hinz et al., 2021), which
trains several stages sequentially and improves SinGAN. Many works in the imaging domain follow
and improve these works (Asano et al., 2020; Granot et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2020;
Sun & Liu, 2020; Sushko et al., 2021; Yoo & Chen, 2021; Zhang et al., 2022b; Zheng et al., 2021).
Similar to us, Wang et al. (2022) and Nikankin et al. (2023) avoid the pyramid structure and use a
UNet with limited depth. This is not directly applicable to the motion domain. Unlike images with a
regularized 2D spatial structure, motions consist of non-regularized skeletal joints with a temporal axis
and fewer degrees of freedom. Kulikov et al. (2023) construct a multi-scale diffusion process from
down-sampled versions of the training image and their blurry versions.
Several works have been done in other domains, e.g., shapes (Wu & Zheng, 2022) and 3D scenes (Son
et al., 2023). In the motion domain, Ganimator (Li et al., 2022) follows SinGAN and uses a GAN
architecture, with a patch-based discriminator and a temporal pyramid. GenMM (Li et al., 2023) follows


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



GPNN (Granot et al., 2022), and employs non-parametric patch nearest-neighbor methods, implemented
with motion-graphs (Kovar et al., 2002), and yielding higher-quality outputs with a significantly reduced
generation time. Yet, nearest-neighbor methods have limited generalization capabilities, and hence are
mainly suitable for tasks involving “copying” parts of the input. In this respect, learning-based methods,
like Ganimator, offer more applicability as shown in their style-transfer task.
Diffusion Models Diffusion models have been adapted from thermodynamics (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Song & Ermon, 2020) to the imaging domain(Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020a). A generated
image can be further controlled by classifier (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) or classifier-free (Ho & Sali-
mans, 2022) guidance. Local editing of images may be viewed as an inpainting problem, in which a
portion of the image is held constant while the model denoises the remaining part (Song et al., 2020b;
Saharia et al., 2022). In our work, we adapt this technique for spatial and temporal motion composition.
In the motion domain, several works (Zhang et al., 2022a; Kim et al., 2022) introduce diffusion-based
synthesis. The prominent one is MDM (Tevet et al., 2023), which utilizes a lightweight network, uses a
transformer rather than the common UNet and predicts motion rather than noise. Like MDM, SinMDM
presents a lightweight architecture and predicts motion rather than noise. Unlike MDM, our work uses
a QnA-based UNet, as the receptive field of a transformer is the full motion, inducing over-fitting.
Motion Synthesis Models Most of motion synthesis models focus on specific tasks, conditioned on
some limiting factors, which can be high-level guidance such as action (Petrovich et al., 2021; Guo
et al., 2020; Cervantes et al., 2022) or text (Tevet et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021a; Petrovich et al., 2022;
Ahuja & Morency, 2019; Guo et al., 2022; Bhattacharya et al., 2021; Tevet et al., 2023), can be parts of
a motion such as motion prefix (Aksan et al., 2019; Barsoum et al., 2018; Habibie et al., 2017; Yuan &
Kitani, 2020; Zhang et al., 2021b; Hernandez et al., 2019) or in-betweening (Harvey et al., 2020; Duan
et al., 2021; Kaufmann et al., 2020; Harvey & Pal, 2018), motion retargeting or style transfer (Holden
et al., 2017; Villegas et al., 2018; Aberman et al., 2019; 2020a;b), and even music (Aristidou et al.,
2022; Sun et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2018). Fewer models are fully unconditioned (Holden
et al., 2016; Raab et al., 2023; Starke et al., 2022).
The architecture of synthesis models can be roughly divided into recurrent (Habibie et al., 2017; Ghor-
bani et al., 2020), autoencoder based (Maheshwari et al., 2022; Jang & Lee, 2020), GAN based (De-
gardin et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020), normalizing flows based (Henter
et al., 2020), and more recently, neural field based (He et al., 2022) and diffusion based (Tevet et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2022a; Kim et al., 2022; Shafir et al., 2023). Our work belongs to the latter category.

3    P RELIMINARY
In this work, we present SinMDM, a novel framework that learns the internal motion motifs of a single
motion of arbitrary topology and generates a variety of synthesized motions that retain the core motion
elements of the input sequence. At the crux of our approach lays a denoising diffusion probabilistic
model – DDPM (Ho et al., 2020). See Appendix A for a recap of DDPM. Our premise is that diffusion
models offer generalization without being susceptible to mode collapse.
We present a lightweight model, efficient in time and space and simple in architecture. This is achieved
through the gradual denoising process, which enhances the model’s descriptive capability. Our gener-
ative network is a UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) whose global attention layers are replaced by local
QnA layers (Arar et al., 2022).
In the rest of this section we describe our motion representation. Next, we describe our method and de-
sign choices (Sec. 4), explore various applications enabled by SinMDM (Sec. 5), detail the experiments
conducted to validate our approach (Sec. 6), and summarise with conclusions (Sec. 7). The readers are
encouraged to watch the supplementary video to get a full impression of our results.
Motion representation A motion sequence is represented by its dynamic and static features, D and
S, respectively. The former differ at each temporal frame (e.g., joint rotation angles), while the latter is
temporally fixed (e.g., bone lengths). D and S can be combined into global 3D pose sequences using
forward kinematics (FK). In our research, we focus on synthesizing the dynamic features, leaving the
static features intact. That is, we predict dynamics for a fixed skeleton topology with fixed bone lengths.
For simplicity, we use the term motion synthesis for the generation of dynamic features only.
Let N denote the number of frames in a motion sequence, and F denote the length of the features
describing a single frame. In the HumanML3D dataset, a frame is redundantly represented with the
root position and joint positions, angles, velocities, and foot contact (Guo et al., 2022). For the other
datasets used in this work, a frame is represented by joint angles, root positions, and foot contact labels.
We represent the dynamic features of a motion by a tensor D ∈ RN ×F . Naturally, the convolution for
this representation is 1D, convolving on the temporal dimension (of size N ) and holding F features.
More motion representation details can be found in Appendix B.

                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         𝑥#""   𝑥#"#   𝑥#"$   𝑥#"%       𝑥#"&                                           SiLU + Conv + Norm
                                                                                           Shift And Scale
                                                                                        SiLU + Conv + Norm
                Narrow Receptive Field              UNet
                                                                      ResBlock
                       𝒑𝜽 𝑿𝒕 , 𝒕                                        QnA
                                                                                           MHA
                                                                                                    Q
                                                                                          K    V
    𝑡    𝑥!"    𝑥!#    𝑥!$    𝑥!%        𝑥!&    𝑡



Figure 2: Left: To allow training on a single motion, our denoising network is designed such that its
overall receptive field covers only a portion of the input sequence. This effectively allows the network
to simultaneously learn from multiple local temporal motion segments. Our denoiser predicts the input
sequence from a noisy one. x0t . . . xN
                                      t is a motion of N frames at diffusion step t. Right: Our network
is a shallow UNet, enhanced with a QnA local attention layer.
4   G ENERATIVE NETWORK
Our goal is to construct a model that can generate a variety of synthesized motions that retain the
core motion motifs of a single learned input sequence. More formally, we would like to construct the
generative network pθ (Eq. 2, Appendix A) that synthesizes a motion x̂0 from a noised motion xt .
Unlike traditional single-instance methods that utilize down-sampled instance pyramids for coarse-to-
fine learning, our model employs a straightforward architecture without requiring any pyramids.
Our key insight is that internal motifs are learned more effectively with a limited receptive field (Fig. 2
Left). We design SinMDM, a novel generative architecture, accordingly. Our model is a QnA-based
degenerated UNet (Fig. 2 Right). UNets (Ronneberger et al., 2015) are commonly used by imaging
diffusion models (Nichol et al., 2022). However, training a UNet on a single-input leads to overfitting
due to its large receptive field, yielding synthesized sequences that closely resemble the input.
Our first design choice in mitigating this issue is to decrease the depth of the UNet and thereby limit
the receptive field width. However, this step alone is not enough, since standard UNets employ global
attention layers, resulting in a receptive field that encompasses the entire sequence. A possible solution
would be using local attention in non-overlapping windows, like in ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021).
Nonetheless, non-interleaving windows tend to limit the cross-window interaction, compromising the
model’s performance. Our solution is to use QnA (Arar et al., 2022), a state-of-the-art shift-invariant
local attention layer, that aggregates the input locally in an overlapping manner, much like convolutions,
but with the expressive power of attention. The key idea of QnA is to introduce learned queries, shared
by all windows, allowing fast and efficient implementation. Specifically, QnA enables local attention
with a temporally narrow receptive field. Our QnA-based UNet is the first to be used in the motion
domain, where we plug QnA layers instead of the global attention layers of a vanilla UNet. In this
context, a vanilla UNet refers to the UNet utilized in early imaging diffusion works (Ho et al., 2020).
QnA is substantially more efficient than global attention in space and time, and our model benefits from
this advantage as a byproduct. A detailed description of the QnA layers is available in Appendix D.
In Sec. 6, we validate these design choices. We show the effectiveness of a narrow receptive field, and
justify the usage of QnA layers and the choice of a UNet rather than a transformer. In Appendix C, we
provide a comprehensive list of the hyperparameters that can be used to reconstruct our results.

5   A PPLICATIONS
Single-motion learning using diffusion models enables various applications. All our applications are
applied at inference time, with no need to re-train. Unlike SinMDM, Ganimator (2022) requires spe-
cialized training for most of its applications, and GenMM (2023), is limited to replications hence cannot
handle complex applications like harmonization. In the following, we show Motion Composition (Sec.
5.1), where a given motion sequence is composed jointly with a synthesized one, either temporally
or spatially. Its special cases include in-betweening, motion expansion, trajectory control, and joints
control. With our Motion Harmonization (Sec. 5.2), a reference input motion is altered to align with
the learned motion motifs. We illustrate one important special case, style transfer. Lastly, we show
how straightforward use (Sec. 5.3) of SinMDM enables one shot long motion generation and crowd
animation. The applications presented here are also demonstrated in our supplementary video.
5.1 M OTION C OMPOSITION
Given an arbitrary reference motion y unseen by our model, and a region of interest (ROI) mask m
(Avrahami et al., 2022), our goal is to synthesize a new motion x̂0 , such that the regions of interest
x̂0 ⊙ m are synthesized from random noise, while the complementary area remains as close as possible
to the given motion y, i.e., y ⊙ (1 − m) ≈ x̂0 ⊙ (1 − m), where ⊙ is element-wise multiplication. The
model should output a coherent motion sequence, where the transition between given and synthesized


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Temporal composition – motion expansion. Motion pairs show varied synthesis from a
single input. The input, distinguishable by its faded color, is temporally expanded. Note that the parts
given as input are identical in both sequences, while the synthesized parts differ. Left: synthesize a
suffix given a temporal prefix. Right: synthesize a prefix and a suffix, given the middle part.

                                                                                                               𝒑𝜽 𝒙𝒕 , 𝒕
                     "& #' , %
                                           &


                                                                                       𝑥$     𝑥!       𝑥!"#                    𝑥%
           !$   !!   !!"#        !%   Composition

                                                                                                           +
                                                            Temporal
                                                            Composition                             ()          *)
                                                                 1
                                                                                                   𝑥!"#        𝑦!"#
                 Frames                                      0
                                                                                                                 𝑳𝑷
                                          Composition


                                                                                               𝑯𝑷

                                                                                                   𝑥′!"#       𝑦!"#            𝑦%
                                          Spatial
      Joints


                                                        1
                                                        0


                                                                                                                           𝒒
                𝑥!               𝑦                           Composition                                                            𝒒


Figure 4: Motion composition. Parts from a refer-                              Figure 5: Harmonization. During inference,
ence motion y, are composed with the synthesized                               we inject guidance from input y0 by adding its
                                                                                                LP
motion x̂0 , according to a composition map.                                   low frequencies yt−1  in each step t.

parts is seamless. Moreover, the reference motion can be an arbitrary one, on which our model has not
been trained. When the reference motion y is very different from the learned motion, blending between
the two becomes less smooth. To mitigate this issue, we change the ROI mask such that the borders
between the given and the synthesized motion segments are linearly interpolated, as depicted in Fig. 4.
We fix the motion segments that need to remain unchanged and sample the parts that need to be filled
in. Each step of the iterative inference process (described in Appendix A) is slightly changed, such that
parts of y are assigned into x̂0 according to the indices of the mask. That is, x̂0 ⊙(1−m) = y ⊙(1−m).
Temporal composition – use cases: in-betweening, motion expansion Temporal composition is the
action of filling in selected frame sequences. In-betweeining (Harvey et al., 2020), depicted in Fig. 6, is a
special case of temporal composition, where the filled-in part is at the temporal interior of the sequence,
and the reference y is not necessarily from the same distribution as the learned motion. Another special
case of temporal composition is motion expansion, the motion domain’s equivalent of image outpainting
(Yu et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2021; Teterwak et al., 2019), where the model generates content that resides
beyond the edges of a reference motion sequence. In the case of motion expansion, the ROI mask is
zeroed in the center frames, and assigned ones in the outer regions. See Fig. 3.
Spatial composition – use cases: trajectory control, joints control Motion composition can be
applied spatially, by assigning selected joint indices to the ROI mask. In Fig. 7 we illustrate control
over the upper body, where the motion of the upper body is determined by a reference motion and
assigned to the target motion. The model synthesizes the rest of the joints yielding a motion with the
given sequence in the upper body, and with the learned motifs in the lower body. A composition can be
both spatial and temporal, and all it takes is an ROI mask where several frame sequences are zeroed, i.e.,
taken from the reference motion, and in the complementary part, several joints are zeroed (see Fig. 4).
5.2 M OTION H ARMONIZATION
Given a synthesized motion sequence x0 , we would like to integrate a portion of an unseen motion, y,
into it. The portion of y can be either temporal, i.e., several frames, or spatial, i.e., several joints, or
both. As visualized in Fig. 5, SinMDM overrides a window in x0 with the desired portion of y and
denotes the outcome y0 . Next, y0 is harmonized such that it matches the core motion elements learned
by our model, using a linear low-pass filter ϕN as suggested by Choi et al. (2021). Let x′t−1 and yt−1


                                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Temporal composition – In-betweening.             Figure 7: Spatial composition. Top: “warm-
Both rows show results for the same reference input,        up” – an unseen reference motion. Bottom:
introducing diverse outputs. The beginning and the end      composed motion. The learned motion is
(in faded tones) are given, hence identical in both rows.   “walk in circle”. In the composed result, the
The center of each motion is synthesized, hence the dif-    top body part performs a warm-up activity,
ference between rows.                                       and the bottom walks in a curved path.


Figure 9: Style transfer. Top: one unseen content is ap-         Figure 10: Crowd animation. Groups
plied to both styles. Left: a “happy” style learned by           of jaguars, horses, and ostriches. In each
the network, with the harmonized result below. Right: a          group, no motion is like the other, and
“crouched” style. Note the character in both results is us-      yet they are all learned from a single mo-
ing the exact step rhythm and size as in the content motion.     tion sequence.

denote the noised version of motions pθ (xt , t) and y0 , respectively. The high-frequency details of x′t−1
are added to the low-frequency of yt−1 via xt−1 = ϕN (yt−1 ) + x′t−1 − ϕN (x′t−1 ).
Note the difference between harmonization and motion composition: Both assign parts of an unseen
sequence y into a synthesized motion x0 . However, harmonization changes the assigned part such that
it matches the learned distribution, while composition aims to keep it unchanged.
Style transfer We implement style transfer (Fig. 9) as a
special case of harmonization, where we use all of y in-
stead of a portion of it, hence fully overriding x0 . We use
a model-learned style motion x and an unseen content mo-
tion y. After harmonization, the result combines y’s content
with x’s style.
5.3 S TRAIGHT- FORWARD A PPLICATIONS                            Figure 8: Long motion. “a person
In this section, we present applications that may require       walking back, turning, and walking back
unique methods in prior research but pose no such challenge     again”. Learned on a 10-second sequence
when employing our model.                                       and synthesized to 60 seconds.
Long motion sequences Our model can synthesize variable-length motions, even very long ones,
with no additional training. Imputed to its small receptive field, the model can hallucinate a sequence
as long as requested. An example of a one-minute animation is introduced in Fig. 8.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Crowd animation Although trained on a single sequence, during inference SinMDM can generate a
diverse crowd, each sampled from a different Gaussian noise xT ∼ N (0, I), as shown in Fig. 10.

6    E XPERIMENTS
Our experiments are held on data from the HumanML3D (2022), Mixamo (2021), and Truebones
Zoo (2022) datasets, and on an artist-created animation, using an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU.
6.1 B ENCHMARKS
We test our framework on two benchmarks, based on the HumanML3D and the Mixamo datasets.
These two datasets are different in many aspects. The data in HumanML3D fits the SMPL (Loper et al.,
2015) topology, and its users normally use SMPL’s mean body definition. In contrast, Mixamo provides
70 characters, each possessing their unique bone lengths and some possessing unique topologies. In
addition, the motions in the Mixamo dataset are more diverse and more dynamic.
6.2 M ETRICS
For the Mixamo benchmark, we use the metrics introduced in Ganimator (Li et al., 2022). However,
these metrics are based on the values of motion features (e.g., rotation angles) while the usage of deep
features is the current best practice (Zhang et al., 2018). Given HumanML3D’s capability for deep
feature calculation, we utilize it to present our results specifically on these features.
We define a good score as being either high or low depending on the specific metric’s preference for
higher or lower values. Note that a balance of good scores across all metrics is better than excelling
in just a few. In particular, good diversity scores coupled with poor fidelity indicate deviation from the
input, while good fidelity scores paired with bad diversity suggest overfitting.
An ideal outcome is a combination of good values for all metrics. For models with mixed scores, a
better-scoring model is the one whose scores are more balanced. To this end, we follow established
literature (Rijsbergen, 1979; Chinchor, 1992) and suggest the Harmonic Mean metric, which is widely
used in Machine Learning for this purpose (Taha & Hanbury, 2015). We compute it as follows: first, we
normalize the scores for each metric. Normalization is between zero to the metric’s maximum value. If
the maximum is not known, we select the 90% percentile of the computed scores. For metrics where
lower is better, we subtract the score from the maximum  value. Note that a negative value is therefore
valid. We compute the Harmonic Mean via HM = E/ s11 + · · · + s1E , where E is the number of
metrics in a table and si is the normalized score of metric i. Additionally, our radar plots (Fig. 11)
provide a visual representation of SinMDM’s dominance for both benchmarks, considering all metrics.
Metrics on the Mixamo benchmark Our comparison with prior art (Li et al., 2022; 2023) is held on
the Mixamo dataset, which is also used by these works. We use metrics suggested by Li et al. (2022).
This group of metrics is applied to the motion itself, and not to deep features. It consists of (a) coverage,
which is the rate of temporal windows in the input motion x0 that are reproduced by the synthesized one,
(b) global diversity, measuring the distance between tess(x̂0 ) and x0 , where tess(·) is a tessellation that
minimizes the L2 distance to the input sequence, and (c) local diversity, which is the average distance
between windows in the synthesized motion x̂0 and their nearest neighbors in the input one.
However, these metrics lack important qualities which we address here: (d) inter diversity, the diversity
between synthesized motions. We define intra diversity to be the diversity between sub-windows inter-
nal to a motion and define (e) intra diversity diff, which is the difference between the intra diversity of
the synthesized motions and that of the input motion.
Additionally, we measure the following time-space efficiency values: (f) number of network parameters,
(g) number of iterations, (h) iteration time, and (i) total running time (the product of the last two). A
higher score is better for metrics (a)-(d), and a lower one is better for (e)-(i).
Metrics on the HumanML3D benchmark We use this benchmark to measure metrics that are ap-
plied on deep features, obtained with a motion encoder by Guo et al. (2022). The computed metrics are
(a) SiFID (Shaham et al., 2019), which measures the distance between the distribution of sub-windows
in the learned motion and a synthesized one, (b) inter diversity, which is the LPIPS distance (Zhang
et al., 2018) between various motions synthesized out of one input, and (c) intra diversity diff, which is
the difference between the intra diversity of the synthesized motions and that of the input motion, where
intra diversity is the LPIPS distance between sub-windows in one synthesized motion. For metrics (a)
and (c) lower is better, and for metric (b) higher is better.
6.3 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS
We use the following color scheme in our tables: regular metrics are in grey, the Harmonic Mean metric,
which weighs all scores, is in black, and the best scores are in bold.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                (a) Mixamo benchmark.                                          (b) HumanML3D benchmark.
Figure 11: Benchmark results, depicted as radar plots. Our results present a balanced combination of
high scores. The displayed scores were first converted to a ‘higher is better’ and normalized (Sec. 6.2).


In Tab. 1 and Fig. 11a, we compare SinMDM with prior works and show that it outperforms them. All
the metrics are computed separately on each benchmark motion and then averaged. The metrics that
measure time were computed on benchmark motion number 9 only.
To evaluate our performance vs. another motion diffusion model, we compare it with two variations of
the MDM (Tevet et al., 2023) framework. The first is a vanilla MDM, trained on a single-motion. The
second is a variation of MDM in which we extract short crops out of the single-motion sequence and
train an MDM on them. Note that the second variation holds a narrow receptive field.
The comparison is conducted on the HumanML3D dataset with metrics based on deep features. The
results are shown in Tab. 2 and Fig. 11b. MDM yields complete overfit, thus its SiFID and intra-diversity
scores are perfect (indicating similarity to the input motion), but its inter-diversity scores are low. The
overfit of MDM is caused by the global attention it uses. On the other hand, the quantitative results for
the second MDM variation indicate divergence from the input motion motifs. These quantitative results
are supported by the qualitative results in our supplementary video.
Finally, we reinforce our quantitative results in a user study
in which users evaluate model superiority based on diver-
sity, fidelity, and quality. In the study, we compare our
model vs. other works. Each pair of models is com-
pared over 8 different motions, and each such comparison is
judged by 10 distinct users. The results (Fig. 12) show that
our model is significantly preferred by the users. Screen-
shots from our user study are provided in Appendix E.           Figure 12: User study. The dashed line
                                                                marks 50%.
6.4 Q UALITATIVE RESULTS
Our supp video reflects the quality of our results. It presents multiple synthesized motions, as well as
a comparison to other works. Additionally, Fig. 13 depicts SinMDM vs. current work. Other works
exhibit mode collapse, overfitting, or jittery motion, while SinMDM demonstrates a coherent motion.

6.5 A BLATION
We examine architectural variations on the HumanML3D benchmark and present the results in Tab. 3.
First, as many motion diffusion models favor a transformer over a UNet (Tevet et al., 2023; Kim et al.,
2022), we measure the scores for a QnA-based transformer (row 1). To refrain from overfitting, we apply
QnA layers within the transformer as we do with the UNet. In addition, to promote diversity and permit
the rearrangement of motion components, we employ relative temporal positional embeddings (Shaw
et al., 2018; Press et al., 2022; Su et al., 2021) instead of the existing global ones. However, the QnA-
based transformer attains a bad SiFID score, indicating poor fidelity to the input motion.


Table 1: Mixamo benchmark. SinMDM demonstrates a significant advantage in the harmonic mean
metric. Compared to Ganimator, it leads in all metrics but one. Recall that GenMM requires no training
time/space, reflected in zero values at the right-hand side of the table. However, its inability to generalize
results in inferior scores for most diversity metrics, leading to a lower harmonic mean.
                             Global     Local     Inter Intra Div. #Param.       #Iter.       Iter.        Tot.     Harmon.
                Coverage ↑          ↑         ↑        ↑          ↓        ↓            ↓            ↓            ↓         ↑
                              Div.       Div.     Div.    Diff.      (M)          (K)       Time (s)     Time (h)    Mean
Ganimator          94.3       1.24       1.17     0.09     0.13      21.7       60 (15×4)     0.36          6.0       -0.51
GenMM              98.7       0.4        0.35     0.13     0.05       0              0          0            0         0.56
SinMDM (Ours)      94.3       1.42       1.00     0.13     0.03      5.26           60        0.09          1.5        0.84



                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 2: HumanML3D benchmark. Compar-                         Table 3: Ablation on the HumanML3D bench-
ison with two variants of the diffusion model                 marks. Row 1: QnA-based transformer. Rows
MDM. The first exhibits overfitting and the sec-              2,3: comparing receptive field widths. Row 1
ond lacks fidelity to input. Our model attains good           exhibits divergence and Row 2 indicates overfit.
and balanced scores in all metrics.                           Abbr.: r.f. → receptive field, d → depth.
                        Inter       Intra      Harmon.                                               Inter Intra Div. Harmon.
               SiFID↓         ↑              ↓        ↑                                    SiFID ↓        ↑          ↓        ↑
                        Div.      Div. Diff.    Mean                                                 Div.    Diff.     Mean
MDM (2023)     0.01      0.03        0.14       0.05          Transformer w/ QnA            5.99     1.74     0.57      0.47
MDM on crops 13.94       1.64        1.83      -0.46          UNet w/ QnA
Ganimator     11.01      0.87        0.86       0.15            wide r.f. (d=3)             0.69     0.20     0.34      0.28
SinMDM (Ours) 1.87       0.73        0.40       0.60            narrow r.f. (d=1) (Ours)    1.87     0.73     0.40      0.59


(a) Mixamo dataset. Motion punch to elbow. Sin-           (b) HumanML3D dataset. MDM exhibits overfit, and
MDM outperforms Ganimator, which experiences              MDM trained on crops exhibits jittery motion, e.g., when
mode collapse, and is comparable in quality to the        transferring from standing to jumping without bending the
patch nearest-neighbor method GenMM.                      knees before and after.
                                  Figure 13: Qualitative comparison.
We continue by confirming that a narrow receptive field produces good results while a wider one induces
overfit (rows 2,3). In order to do so, we examine a fixed architecture (QnA-based UNet) with two
receptive field widths. We control the width by tweaking the depth of the UNet. Indeed we observe that
the model with the wide receptive field overfits (replicates) the input motion, as its inter-diversity is bad
while its SiFID and intra-diversity are good.
Note that due to the mixed scores (that indicate either overfit or divergence), the usage of the Harmonic
Mean metric is essential as it allows for the assessment of the combined strength of all scores. In
addition, in Appendix F we show an ablation study of the smoothness fidelity score.

7    C ONCLUSIONS
We have explored the use of diffusion models on single motion sequence synthesis and designed a
motion denoising transformer with a narrow receptive field. Training on single motions is particularly
useful in motion domains, where the number of data instances is scarce. Particularly, for animals and
imaginary creatures, which have unique skeletons and distinctive motion motifs. The motion of such
creatures cannot be captured easily nor learned from the human motion data available.
Our experiments across datasets show that our lightweight diffusion-based method significantly outper-
forms current work both quantitatively and qualitatively. Moreover, our approach allows the synthesis
of particularly long motions and enables a variety of motion manipulation tasks, including spatial and
temporal in-betweening, motion expansion, harmonization, style transfer, and crowd animation.
The innate limitation of our method, common to single-instance models in all domains, is the limited
ability to synthesize out-of-distribution. Another limitation, also common to all single-instance models,
is the inability to set generated sub-motions in a specific order, when such order matters (e.g., certain
dance moves). This can be addressed by enlarging the receptive field (at the cost of lower diversity).
The main limitation of our approach, due to the iterative nature of diffusion models, is the relatively
long inference time.
Finally, our work shows that diffusion models can learn from limited data, contrary to their reputation
for requiring large amounts of data. Nevertheless, in the future, we aim to address the single input limi-
tations, by possibly learning from available motion data of creatures with rather compatible skeletons.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



8   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Panayiotis Charalambous, Andreas Aristidou and Brian Gordon for reviewing ear-
lier versions of the manuscript. This research was supported in part by the Israel Science Foundation
(grants no. 2492/20 and 3441/21), Len Blavatnik and the Blavatnik family foundation, and the Tel Aviv
University Innovation Laboratories (TILabs).

R EFERENCES
Kfir Aberman, Rundi Wu, Dani Lischinski, Baoquan Chen, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Learning character-
  agnostic motion for motion retargeting in 2d. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38(4):75, 2019.

Kfir Aberman, Peizhuo Li, Dani Lischinski, Olga Sorkine-Hornung, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Baoquan
  Chen. Skeleton-aware networks for deep motion retargeting. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
  39(4):62–1, 2020a.

Kfir Aberman, Yijia Weng, Dani Lischinski, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Baoquan Chen. Unpaired motion
  style transfer from video to animation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(4):64–1, 2020b.

Adobe Systems Inc. Mixamo, 2021. URL https://www.mixamo.com. Accessed: 2021-12-25.

Chaitanya Ahuja and Louis-Philippe Morency. Language2pose: Natural language grounded pose fore-
  casting. In 2019 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pp. 719–728, Washington, DC, USA,
  2019. IEEE, IEEE Computer Society.

Emre Aksan, Manuel Kaufmann, and Otmar Hilliges. Structured prediction helps 3d human motion
 modelling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7144–
 7153, Washington, DC, USA, 2019. IEEE Computer Society.

Moab Arar, Ariel Shamir, and Amit H Bermano. Learned queries for efficient local attention. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10841–
 10852, Washington, DC, USA, 2022. IEEE Computer Society.

A Aristidou, A Yiannakidis, K Aberman, D Cohen-Or, A Shamir, and Y Chrysanthou. Rhythm is a
  dancer: Music-driven motion synthesis with global structure. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
  and Computer Graphics, 1, 2022.

Yuki Markus Asano, Christian Rupprecht, and Andrea Vedaldi. A critical analysis of self-supervision, or
  what we can learn from a single image. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020, OpenReview.net, 2020. OpenReview.net.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1esx6EYvr.

Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of natural
 images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
 pp. 18208–18218, Washington, DC, USA, 2022. IEEE Computer Society.

Emad Barsoum, John Kender, and Zicheng Liu. Hp-gan: Probabilistic 3d human motion prediction via
 gan. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops,
 pp. 1418–1427, Washington, DC, USA, 2018. IEEE Computer Society.

Uttaran Bhattacharya, Nicholas Rewkowski, Abhishek Banerjee, Pooja Guhan, Aniket Bera, and Dinesh
  Manocha. Text2gestures: A transformer-based network for generating emotive body gestures for
  virtual agents. In 2021 IEEE Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 1–10, Washington,
  DC, USA, 2021. IEEE, IEEE Computer Society.

Pablo Cervantes, Yusuke Sekikawa, Ikuro Sato, and Koichi Shinoda. Implicit neural representations for
  variable length human motion generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 356–372.
  Springer, 2022.

Jinshu Chen, Qihui Xu, Qi Kang, and MengChu Zhou. Mogan: Morphologic-structure-aware generative
   learning from a single image, 2021.

N Chinchor. Muc-4 evaluation metrics in proc. of the fourth message understanding conference 22–29,
  1992.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon. Ilvr: Con-
  ditioning method for denoising diffusion probabilistic models. in 2021 ieee. In CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 14347–14356, Washington, DC, USA, 2021. IEEE Com-
  puter Society.
Bruno Degardin, João Neves, Vasco Lopes, João Brito, Ehsan Yaghoubi, and Hugo Proença. Gener-
  ative adversarial graph convolutional networks for human action synthesis. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 1150–1159, Los Alamitos,
  CA, USA, 2022. IEEE Computer Society.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
  In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria,
  May 3-7, 2021, OpenReview.net, 2021. OpenReview.net. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.
Yinglin Duan, Tianyang Shi, Zhengxia Zou, Yenan Lin, Zhehui Qian, Bohan Zhang, and Yi Yuan.
  Single-shot motion completion with transformer, 2021.
Saeed Ghorbani, Calden Wloka, Ali Etemad, Marcus A. Brubaker, and Nikolaus F. Troje. Probabilis-
  tic character motion synthesis using a hierarchical deep latent variable model. Computer Graphics
  Forum, 1, 2020. ISSN 1467-8659. doi: 10.1111/cgf.14116.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron
  Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information process-
  ing systems, 27, 2014.
Brian Gordon, Sigal Raab, Guy Azov, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Flex: Extrinsic parameters-
  free multi-view 3d human motion reconstruction. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  176–196, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2022. Springer, Springer International Publishing.
Niv Granot, Ben Feinstein, Assaf Shocher, Shai Bagon, and Michal Irani. Drop the gan: In defense
  of patches nearest neighbors as single image generative models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13460–13469, Washington, DC, USA,
  2022. IEEE Computer Society.
Chuan Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Shihao Zou, Qingyao Sun, Annan Deng, Minglun Gong, and
  Li Cheng. Action2motion: Conditioned generation of 3d human motions. In Proceedings of the 28th
  ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 2021–2029, New York, NY, USA, 2020. ACM.
Chuan Guo, Shihao Zou, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Wei Ji, Xingyu Li, and Li Cheng. Generating diverse
  and natural 3d human motions from text. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5152–5161, Washington, DC, USA, 2022. IEEE Computer
  Society.
Ikhsanul Habibie, Daniel Holden, Jonathan Schwarz, Joe Yearsley, and Taku Komura. A recurrent
  variational autoencoder for human motion synthesis. In 28th British Machine Vision Conference,
  UK, 2017. BMVC.
Félix G Harvey and Christopher Pal. Recurrent transition networks for character locomotion. In SIG-
   GRAPH Asia 2018 Technical Briefs, pp. 1–4. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2018.
Félix G Harvey, Mike Yurick, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, and Christopher Pal.         Robust motion in-
   betweening. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(4):60–1, 2020.
Chengan He, Jun Saito, James Zachary, Holly Rushmeier, and Yi Zhou. Nemf: Neural motion fields for
  kinematic animation. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Gustav Eje Henter, Simon Alexanderson, and Jonas Beskow. Moglow: Probabilistic and controllable
  motion synthesis using normalising flows. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(6):1–14, 2020.
Alejandro Hernandez, Jurgen Gall, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. Human motion prediction via spatio-
  temporal inpainting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 7134–7143, Washington, DC, USA, 2019. IEEE Computer Society.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Tobias Hinz, Matthew Fisher, Oliver Wang, and Stefan Wermter. Improved techniques for training
  single-image gans. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
  Vision, pp. 1300–1309, Washington, DC, USA, 2021. IEEE Computer Society.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Daniel Holden, Jun Saito, and Taku Komura. A deep learning framework for character motion synthesis
  and editing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 35(4):1–11, 2016.
Daniel Holden, Ikhsanul Habibie, Ikuo Kusajima, and Taku Komura. Fast neural style transfer for
  motion data. IEEE computer graphics and applications, 37(4):42–49, 2017.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with condi-
  tional adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 1125–1134, Washington, DC, USA, 2017. IEEE Computer Society.
Deok-Kyeong Jang and Sung-Hee Lee. Constructing human motion manifold with sequential networks.
  In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 39, pp. 314–324, Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2020. Wiley Online
  Library, The Eurographics Association and John Wiley and Sons Ltd.
Angjoo Kanazawa, Jason Y. Zhang, Panna Felsen, and Jitendra Malik. Learning 3d human dynamics
  from video. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Manuel Kaufmann, Emre Aksan, Jie Song, Fabrizio Pece, Remo Ziegler, and Otmar Hilliges. Convo-
 lutional autoencoders for human motion infilling. In 2020 International Conference on 3D Vision
 (3DV), pp. 918–927, Washington, DC, USA, 2020. IEEE, IEEE Computer Society.
Jihoon Kim, Jiseob Kim, and Sungjoon Choi. Flame: Free-form language-based motion synthesis &
   editing, 2022.
Muhammed Kocabas, Nikos Athanasiou, and Michael J Black. Vibe: Video inference for human body
 pose and shape estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
 pattern recognition, pp. 5253–5263, Washington, DC, USA, 2020. IEEE Computer Society.
Lucas Kovar, Michael Gleicher, and Frédéric Pighin. Motion graphs. In Proceedings of the 29th annual
  conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (SIGGRAPH 2002)., pp. 473––482.
  ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2002.
Vladimir Kulikov, Shahar Yadin, Matan Kleiner, and Tomer Michaeli. Sinddm: A single image denois-
  ing diffusion model. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 17920–17930, PMLR,
  2023. PMLR, PMLR.
Juheon Lee, Seohyun Kim, and Kyogu Lee. Listen to dance: Music-driven choreography generation
  using autoregressive encoder-decoder network, 2018.
Chuan Li and Michael Wand. Precomputed real-time texture synthesis with markovian generative ad-
  versarial networks. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 702–716, Berlin/Heidelberg,
  Germany, 2016. Springer, Springer International Publishing.
Peizhuo Li, Kfir Aberman, Zihan Zhang, Rana Hanocka, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Ganimator: Neu-
  ral motion synthesis from a single sequence. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):138,
  2022.
Ruilong Li, Shan Yang, David A Ross, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Learn to dance with aist++: Music
  conditioned 3d dance generation, 2021.
Weiyu Li, Xuelin Chen, Peizhuo Li, Olga Sorkine-Hornung, and Baoquan Chen. Example-based motion
 synthesis via generative motion matching. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2023.
Chieh Hubert Lin, Hsin-Ying Lee, Yen-Chi Cheng, Sergey Tulyakov, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Infinity-
  gan: Towards infinite-pixel image synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, OpenReview.net, 2021. OpenReview.net.
Jianxin Lin, Yingxue Pang, Yingce Xia, Zhibo Chen, and Jiebo Luo. TuiGAN: Learning versatile
   image-to-image translation with two unpaired images. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
   pp. 18–35, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020. Springer, Springer International Publishing.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl: A
 skinned multi-person linear model. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG), 34(6):1–16, 2015.
Shubh Maheshwari, Debtanu Gupta, and Ravi Kiran Sarvadevabhatla. Mugl: Large scale multi person
  conditional action generation with locomotion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference
  on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 257–265, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2022. IEEE Computer
  Society.
Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob
  McGrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. GLIDE: towards photorealistic image generation and edit-
  ing with text-guided diffusion models. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba
  Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 16784–16804, PMLR, 2022. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v162/nichol22a.html.
Yaniv Nikankin, Niv Haim, and Michal Irani. Sinfusion: Training diffusion models on a single image or
  video. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 26199–26214, PMLR, 2023. PMLR,
  PMLR.
Niki Parmar, Prajit Ramachandran, Ashish Vaswani, Irwan Bello, Anselm Levskaya, and Jon
  Shlens. Stand-alone self-attention in vision models. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle,
  Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
  pp. 68–80, 2019.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/
  3416a75f4cea9109507cacd8e2f2aefc-Abstract.html.
Mathis Petrovich, Michael J. Black, and Gül Varol. Action-conditioned 3D human motion synthesis
 with transformer VAE. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 10985–10995,
 Washington, DC, USA, October 2021. IEEE Computer Society.
Mathis Petrovich, Michael J. Black, and Gül Varol. TEMOS: Generating diverse human motions from
 textual descriptions. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Berlin/Heidelberg, Ger-
 many, 2022. Springer International Publishing.
Ofir Press, Noah Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases enables in-
  put length extrapolation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, OpenReview.net,
  2022. OpenReview.net. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=R8sQPpGCv0.
Jia Qin, Youyi Zheng, and Kun Zhou. Motion in-betweening via two-stage transformers. ACM Trans-
   actions on Graphics (TOG), 41(6):1–16, 2022.
Sigal Raab, Inbal Leibovitch, Peizhuo Li, Kfir Aberman, Olga Sorkine-Hornung, and Daniel Cohen-
  Or. Modi: Unconditional motion synthesis from diverse data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13873–13883, Washington,
  DC, USA, 2023. IEEE Computer Society.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents, 2022.
CJ Rijsbergen. Information retrieval. online book http://www. dcs. gla. ac. uk/keith. Preface. html,
  1979.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, pp. 234–241, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2015. Springer, Springer Interna-
  tional Publishing.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David Fleet,
  and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022
  Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–10, New York, NY, USA, 2022. ACM.
Yonatan Shafir, Guy Tevet, Roy Kapon, and Amit H Bermano. Human motion diffusion as a generative
  prior, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Tamar Rott Shaham, Tali Dekel, and Tomer Michaeli. Singan: Learning a generative model from a
  single natural image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 4570–4580, Washington, DC, USA, 2019. IEEE Computer Society.
Peter Shaw, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Ashish Vaswani. Self-attention with relative position representations.
  In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pp. 464–468, 2018.
Assaf Shocher, Shai Bagon, Phillip Isola, and Michal Irani. Ingan: Capturing and retargeting the” dna”
  of a natural image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 4492–4501, Washington, DC, USA, 2019. IEEE Computer Society.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 2256–2265, PMLR, 2015. PMLR, PMLR.
Minjung Son, Jeong Joon Park, Leonidas Guibas, and Gordon Wetzstein. Singraf: Learning a 3d gen-
 erative radiance field for a single scene. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8507–8517, Washington, DC, USA, 2023. IEEE Computer Soci-
 ety.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, OpenReview.net, 2020a. OpenReview.net.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Improved techniques for training score-based generative models. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 33:12438–12448, 2020.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, OpenReview.net, 2020b. OpenReview.net.
Sebastian Starke, Ian Mason, and Taku Komura. Deepphase: Periodic autoencoders for learning motion
  phase manifolds. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–13, 2022.
Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Ahmed Murtadha, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced
   transformer with rotary position embedding, 2021.
Guofei Sun, Yongkang Wong, Zhiyong Cheng, Mohan S Kankanhalli, Weidong Geng, and Xiangdong
  Li. Deepdance: music-to-dance motion choreography with adversarial learning. IEEE Transactions
  on Multimedia, 23:497–509, 2020.
Wenyue Sun and Bao-Di Liu. Esingan: Enhanced single-image gan using pixel attention mechanism for
 image super-resolution. In 2020 15th IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing (ICSP),
 volume 1, pp. 181–186, Washington, DC, USA, 2020. IEEE, IEEE Computer Society.
Vadim Sushko, Dan Zhang, Juergen Gall, and Anna Khoreva. Generating novel scene compositions
  from single images and videos, 2021.
Abdel Aziz Taha and Allan Hanbury. Metrics for evaluating 3d medical image segmentation: analysis,
  selection, and tool. BMC medical imaging, 15(1):1–28, 2015.
Piotr Teterwak, Aaron Sarna, Dilip Krishnan, Aaron Maschinot, David Belanger, Ce Liu, and William T
  Freeman. Boundless: Generative adversarial networks for image extension. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10521–10530, Washington, DC, USA,
  2019. IEEE Computer Society.
Guy Tevet, Brian Gordon, Amir Hertz, Amit H Bermano, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Motionclip: Exposing
  human motion generation to clip space. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Confer-
  ence, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXII, pp. 358–374, Berlin/Heidelberg,
  Germany, 2022. Springer, Springer International Publishing.
Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yoni Shafir, Daniel Cohen-or, and Amit Haim Bermano. Hu-
  man motion diffusion model. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, OpenReview.net, 2023. OpenReview.net. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=SJ1kSyO2jwu.
Truebones Motions Animation Studios. Truebones, 2022. URL https://truebones.gumroad.
  com/. Accessed: 2022-1-15.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Ruben Villegas, Jimei Yang, Duygu Ceylan, and Honglak Lee. Neural kinematic networks for unsuper-
  vised motion retargetting. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 8639–8648, Washington, DC, USA, 2018. IEEE Computer Society.
Weilun Wang, Jianmin Bao, Wengang Zhou, Dongdong Chen, Dong Chen, Lu Yuan, and Houqiang Li.
 Sindiffusion: Learning a diffusion model from a single natural image, 2022.
Zhenyi Wang, Ping Yu, Yang Zhao, Ruiyi Zhang, Yufan Zhou, Junsong Yuan, and Changyou Chen.
  Learning diverse stochastic human-action generators by learning smooth latent transitions. In Pro-
  ceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 12281–12288, Washington,
  DC, USA, 2020. AAAI Press.
Rundi Wu and Changxi Zheng. Learning to generate 3d shapes from a single example, 2022.
Sijie Yan, Zhizhong Li, Yuanjun Xiong, Huahan Yan, and Dahua Lin. Convolutional sequence genera-
   tion for skeleton-based action synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
   on Computer Vision, pp. 4394–4402, Washington, DC, USA, 2019. IEEE Computer Society.
Jihyeong Yoo and Qifeng Chen. Sinir: Efficient general image manipulation with single image re-
   construction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12040–12050, PMLR, 2021.
   PMLR, PMLR.
Jiahui Yu, Zhe Lin, Jimei Yang, Xiaohui Shen, Xin Lu, and Thomas S Huang. Free-form image inpaint-
   ing with gated convolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
   vision, pp. 4471–4480, Washington, DC, USA, 2019. IEEE Computer Society.
Ping Yu, Yang Zhao, Chunyuan Li, Junsong Yuan, and Changyou Chen. Structure-aware human-action
  generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 18–34, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
  2020. Springer, Springer International Publishing.
Ye Yuan and Kris Kitani. Dlow: Diversifying latent flows for diverse human motion prediction. In Eu-
  ropean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 346–364, Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020. Springer,
  Springer International Publishing.
Jia-Qi Zhang, Xiang Xu, Zhi-Meng Shen, Ze-Huan Huang, Yang Zhao, Yan-Pei Cao, Pengfei Wan,
   and Miao Wang. Write-an-animation: High-level text-based animation editing with character-scene
   interaction. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 40, pp. 217–228, Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2021a.
   Wiley Online Library, The Eurographics Association and John Wiley and Sons Ltd.
Mingyuan Zhang, Zhongang Cai, Liang Pan, Fangzhou Hong, Xinying Guo, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu.
 Motiondiffuse: Text-driven human motion generation with diffusion model, 2022a.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, Washington, DC, USA, 2018. IEEE Computer
  Society.
Yan Zhang, Michael J Black, and Siyu Tang. We are more than our joints: Predicting how 3d bodies
  move. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 3372–3382, Washington, DC, USA, 2021b. IEEE Computer Society.
ZiCheng Zhang, CongYing Han, and TianDe Guo. Exsingan: Learning an explainable generative model
  from a single image, 2021c.
Zicheng Zhang, Yinglu Liu, Congying Han, Hailin Shi, Tiande Guo, and Bowen Zhou. Petsgan:
  Rethinking priors for single image generation. In Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial In-
  telligence, AAAI, pp. 3408–3416, Washington, DC, USA, 2022b. AAAI Press. URL https:
  //ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/20251.
Zilong Zheng, Jianwen Xie, and Ping Li. Patchwise generative convnet: Training energy-based mod-
  els from a single natural image for internal learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2961–2970, Washington, DC, USA, 2021. IEEE
  Computer Society.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Yi Zhou, Connelly Barnes, Jingwan Lu, Jimei Yang, and Hao Li. On the continuity of rotation repre-
  sentations in neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 5745–5753, Washington, DC, USA, 2019. IEEE Computer Society.


A PPENDIX
This Appendix adds details on top of the ones given in the main paper. While the main paper stands on
its own, the details given here may shed more light.
In Appendix A we provide a concise recap of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM). Ap-
pendix B describes the dynamic features predicted by our network, and C details the hyperparameters
used by it. In Appendix D we describe the QNA framework, and in Appendix E we depict screenshots
from our user study. Lastly, Appendix F presents a study about motion smoothness, its correlation to
receptive field width, a metric to measure it, and ways to ameliorate it.

A    D ENOISING D IFFUSION P ROBABILISTIC M ODELS (DDPM) – R ECAP
DDPMs (Ho et al., 2020) have become the de-facto leading generative networks technique. While they
have primarily dominated the imaging domain (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), recent works have success-
fully applied this approach in the motion domain (Tevet et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022a). Denoising
networks learn to convert unstructured noise to samples from a given distribution, through an iterative
process of progressively removing small amounts of Gaussian noise.
Given an input motion sequence x0 , we apply a Markov noising process of T steps, {xt }Tt=0 , such that
                                                √
                             q(xt |xt−1 ) = N ( αt xt−1 , (1 − αt )I),                              (1)
where αt ∈ (0, 1) are constant hyper-parameters. When αt is small enough, we can approximate
xT ∼ N (0, I).
We apply unconditional motion synthesis that models x0 as the reversed diffusion process of gradually
cleaning xT , using a generative network pθ . Following Tevet et al. (2023) we choose to predict the input
motion, denoted x̂0 (Ramesh et al., 2022) rather than predicting ϵt , hence
                                              x̂0 = pθ (xt , t).                                        (2)

We apply the widespread diffusion loss, via

                                  Lsimple = Et∼[1,T ] ∥x0 − pθ (xt , t)∥22 .                            (3)

Synthesis at inference time is applied through a series of iterations, starting with pure noise xT . In each
iteration, a clean version of the current sample xt is predicted using a generator pθ . This predicted clean
sample x̂0 is then “re-noised” to create the next sample xt−1 , with the process being repeated until t = 0
is reached.

B    M OTION R EPRESENTATION – A DDITIONAL D ETAILS
This section completes the Motion Representation section in the main paper.
In this section, we describe the dynamic features predicted by our network.
Recall that N denotes the number of frames in the sequence, and F denotes the length of the features
of all joints together in a single motion frame.
Let J denote the number of skeletal joints, and let Q denote the number of rotational features, where
rotational features may be Euler angles, quaternions, 6D rotations, etc. Let C denote the number of
joints that are prone to contact the ground. Clearly, a human, a spider, and a snake possess different
values of C.
When using the HumanML3D (Guo et al., 2022) dataset, we adhere to its representation, in which a
single pose is defined by
                                  p = (ṙa , ṙx , ṙz , ry , j p , j v , j r , cf ) ∈ RF ,
where ṙa ∈ R is the root angular velocity along the Y-axis. ṙx , ṙz ∈ R are root linear velocities on
the XZ-plane, and ry ∈ R is the root height. j p ∈ R3J , j v ∈ R3J and j r ∈ R6J are the local joint


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



       Table 4: Our choice of hyperparameters, given with the same names as used in the code.

                               Name                             Value
                               UNet related
                                 num channels                   256
                                 channel mult                    1
                                 num res blocks                  1
                                 kernel size                     3
                                 use scalse shift norm          True
                                 use checkpoint                 True
                                 use attention                  True
                                 use qna                        True
                               QnA related
                                 head dim                         32
                                 num heads                         4
                               Diffusion related
                                 diffusion steps                 1000
                                 noise schedule                 cosine
                               Training related
                                 batch size                      64
                                 dropout                         0.5
                                 lr method                 ExponentialLR
                                 lr gamma                     0.99998
                                 num steps                     60000
                                 padding mode                  zeros
                                 warmup steps                     0
                                 weight decay                     0


positions, velocities, and rotations with respect to the root, and cf ∈ R4 are binary features denoting the
foot contact labels for four foot joints (two for each leg).
When using data from other datasets, we adhere to the representation used by Li et al. (2022), so we
can conduct a fair comparison with their results. Their representation consists of a 3D root location,
a rotation angle for each joint, and foot contact labels. Altogether, for a general representation D ∈
RN ×F , we have got F = 3 + JQ + C.
The rotations in both representations are defined in the coordinate frame of their parent in the kinematic
chain, and are represented by the 6D rotation features (Q = 6) Zhou et al. (2019), which yields the best
result in many works (Qin et al., 2022; Petrovich et al., 2021).
A growing number of works use foot contact labels (Gordon et al., 2022; Raab et al., 2023) to mitigate
common foot sliding artifacts. Let C denote the set of joints that contact the ground in the subject whose
motion is being learned such that C = |C|. The foot contact labels are represented by L ∈ {0, 1}N ×C .
When a dataset provides foot contact label information (Guo et al., 2022), we use it as is. When a
dataset does not provide them, we calculate it as done by Li et al. (2022), via

                     ∀j ∈ C, n ∈ [1, N ] :      Lnj = 1[∥∆n FK([D, S])nj ∥2 < ϵ],                      (4)

where ∆n FK([D, S])nj denotes the velocity of joint j in frame n retrieved by a forward kinematics
operator, and 1[·] is an indicator function.

C    H YPERPARAMETERS AND T RAINING D ETAILS
In Tab. 4 we detail the values of the hyperparameters that have been used to produce the results shown
in this work. Our models have been trained on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU.

D    Q NA R ECAP
QnA layers (Arar et al., 2022) are a fundamental component in our suggested architecture. In this sec-
tion, we provide an overview of its underlying implementation and illustrate it in Fig. 14. In particular,


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                  Multi-Head              Q    Multi-Head          Q
                                                                                                                                   Attention                    Attention
                                                    Local
                                                 Aggregation                                         c                            V          c       K         V             c K
                                                   Module


                                                                                                                                                                                       Learned Queries
                                                                      Output


                    Sliding Window (3x3)
                                                                                      Input Tokens       Learned Kernel               Input Tokens                 Input Tokens



                                                                                      (a) Convolution                                 (b) SASA                         (c) QnA
Figure 14: QnA overview (extracted from the QnA paper). Left: Local layers may utilize various
approaches to overlapping windows. (a) Convolutions apply aggregation by learning shared weighted
filters. (b) SASA (2019) combines window tokens through self-attention. (c) QnA use shared learned
queries across windows, maintaining the expressive power of attention while achieving linear space
complexity.


                                                       QnA (Ours)        Twins-SVT           Focal-ViT                    NestT
                                                       Swin              XCiT                ResNet
                               84.0
                                1.0
                               83.5
                                0.8
                               83.0
                     Top-1 Accuracy


                               82.5
                                0.6
                               82.0
                                0.4
                               81.5
                               81.0
                                0.2
                               80.5
                               80.0
                                0.0
                                      0.0 25     50 0.275       100      0.4
                                                                          5          10        15
                                                                                               0.6                        1000
                                                                                                                            0.8          500             1.0
                                               Params (M)                       GFLOPs                            Throughput (img/sec)
Figure 15: QnA demonstrates better accuracy-efficiency trade-off compared to state-of-the-art baselines
(extracted from the QnA paper).


QnA is an efficient attention-based layer, which operates in a shift-invariant manner. For every k-size
window, the output is calculated using the self-attention mechanism which is commonly used in the
transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). The self-attention is calculated by first projecting the
input features into keys K = XWK , values V = XWV , and queries Q = XWQ via three linear
projection matrices WK , WV , WQ ∈ RD×D . Then, the output of the self-attention operation is defined
by:


                                                SA(X) = Attention (Q, K) · V
                                                                        √                                                                                                                          (5)
                                                      = Softmax QK T / D · V.

Instead of performing the pricey query-key operation, QnA detours from extracting the queries from
the window itself and directly learns them for the whole-training data (see Fig. 14c). Learning the
queries preserves the expressive capability of the self-attention mechanism and enables an efficient
implementation that relies on simple and fast operations. In particular, a single query q̃ is learned, and
the attention is applied locally for every k-size window. Therefore, the output at entry zi becomes:

                                                      zi = Attention (q̃, KNi ) · VNi ,                                                                                                            (6)
where Ni is the set k-neighbourhood of frame i.
 QnA exhibits state-of-the-art accuracy-efficiency trade-off, as depicted in Fig. 15.


                                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 5: Smoothness error across varying receptive field widths, on the Mixamo benchmark. Each
row shows an architecture with an increasing receptive field width, with the right column displaying the
smoothness error. The top row refers to our best-performing architecture (same ones as in Tab. 1).

                                         Global      Local         Inter     Intra Div.      Smoothness
                           Coverage ↑           ↑          ↑            ↑               ↓                  ↓
                                          Div.        Div.         Div.        Diff.        Diff. (× 1e-5)
    no. layers=1
    no. res blocks = 1        94.3         1.42          1.00      0.13         0.03              9.8
    (baseline)
    no. layers=1
                              97.9         1.22          0.83      0.13         0.03              2.9
    no. res blocks = 2
    no. layers=2
                              99.4         0.99          0.68      0.12         0.04              1.9
    no. res blocks = 1

Table 6: Smoothness error across varying λsmooth values, on the Mixamo benchmark. The left
column shows increasing values of λsmooth , and the right column displays the smoothness error, which
decreases as λsmooth increases. The top row, where λsmooth = 0, corresponds to our best-performing
architecture to date. Introducing the smoothness loss paves the way for a new best-performing architec-
ture, as using λsmooth = 1 attains better smoothness with no degradation at the other metrics.

                                      Global      Local         Inter     Intra Div.      Smoothness
       λsmooth           Coverage ↑          ↑          ↑            ↑               ↓                  ↓
                                       Div.        Div.         Div.        Diff.        Diff. (× 1e-5)
       0 (baseline)         94.3        1.42        1.00        0.13         0.03              9.8
       0.1                  94.1        1.43        1.02        0.13         0.04              7.7
       1                    94.0        1.43        1.02        0.13         0.05              4.8
       10                   92.8        1.48        1.10        0.13         0.07              2.6
       100                  89.4        1.50        1.17        0.12         0.12              1.5


E     U SER S TUDY – S CREENSHOTS
Our user study displays several video clips on each screen, requesting the user to select the one that is
more suitable to the examined attribute, which is either quality, fidelity, or diversity. Screenshots from
a representative video for each attribute are shown in Fig. 16.

F     S MOOTHNESS S TUDY
We target our generated motions to closely match the input motion’s smoothness. Smoothness varies
from motion to motion, for example, a slow walk is characterized by very smooth and flowing motions,
while a fast dance often exhibits abrupt transitions. Next, we present a metric to measure the smoothness
fidelity. Then, we show that the smoothness error is strongly related to the receptive field width, and
lastly, we present a way to improve the smoothness score while keeping our receptive field narrow.

Metric To assess the fidelity of our generated motions to the smoothness of the input motion, we
introduce a metric that quantifies the difference between the ground truth smoothness and that of the
generated motions. The metric we employ is the acceleration error of each joint, first proposed by
Kanazawa et al. (2019) and subsequently adopted by many others (Kocabas et al., 2020; Gordon et al.,
2022). The acceleration at joint j is measured using

                  Accj = En∈[1...N −1] ∥FK(x)(n−1)nj − 2FK(x)nj + FK(x)(n+1)nj ∥22 ,                           (7)

where FK(·)nj denotes the location of joint j in frame n retrieved using a forward kinematics operator,
and x is a motion (given or synthesized).
The acceleration error is measured using

                         Lsmooth = Ej∈J ∥ExT ∼N (0,I) [Accj (G(xT ))] − Accj (x)∥22 ,                          (8)

where G(·) is the inference process and x is the input motion on which our model has been trained.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Varying receptive field study In Tab. 5 we compare smoothness scores for varying receptive field
widths. Recall, that a UNet layer is composed of a varying number of residual blocks and an attention
layer. First we present our baseline, which is the architecture presented in the main paper. Recall that
our best-performing model uses a UNet of depth 1, with one residual block within it. Adding one more
residual block to a UNet of depth 1 (row #2) widens the receptive field, and results in better smoothness
error. Using a UNet of depth 2 results in an even wider receptive field, and a better smoothness error.
We conclude that widening the receptive field decreases the smoothness error. Regrettably, expanding
the receptive field leads to a significant decline in the quality of the generated motion, as indicated by
the diversity metrics, hence it is not a practical way to get better smoothness fidelity.
Next, we suggest a method to enhance smoothness while maintaining our favorable metric scores.

Loss study To get better smoothness without increasing the receptive field, we have used the smooth-
ness term as a loss, denoted Lsmooth . Accordingly, our loss is changed to
                                   L = Lsimple + λsmooth Lsmooth .                                    (9)

Table 6 displays our metric scores on the Mixamo benchmark, for varying values of λsmooth . The
table shows that increasing λsmooth decreases the smoothness error. Up to a value of λsmooth = 1,
the other metric scores remain comparable to the original ones, and for larger values of λsmooth we
see a degradation in the coverage and the intra diversity diff. We conclude that training with a value of
λsmooth = 1 would provide the best results.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             (a) Quality.


                                             (b) Fidelity.


                                             (c) Diversity.
Figure 16: Screenshots from our user study. Note that each human figure in the screenshot is played as
a video.


                                                21
