Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T EACHING A RITHMETIC TO S MALL T RANSFORMERS
 Nayoung Lee∗                                                        Kartik Sreenivasan∗
 University of Wisconsin-Madison                                     University of Wisconsin-Madison
 nayoung.lee@wisc.edu                                                ksreenivasa2@wisc.edu

 Jason D. Lee                                                        Kangwook Lee
 Princeton University                                                University of Wisconsin-Madison
 jasonlee@princeton.edu                                              kangwook.lee@wisc.edu

 Dimitris Papailiopoulos
 University of Wisconsin-Madison
 dimitris@papail.io



                                               A BSTRACT

            Large language models like GPT-4 exhibit emergent capabilities across general-
            purpose tasks, such as basic arithmetic, when trained on extensive text data, even
            though these tasks are not explicitly encoded by the unsupervised, next-token
            prediction objective. This study investigates how even small transformers, trained
            from random initialization, can efficiently learn arithmetic operations such as addi-
            tion, multiplication, and elementary functions like square root, using the next-token
            prediction objective. We first demonstrate that conventional training data is not the
            most effective for arithmetic learning, and simple formatting changes can signifi-
            cantly improve accuracy. This leads to sharp transitions as a function of training
            data scale, which, in some cases, can be explained through connections to low-rank
            matrix completion. Building on prior work, we then train on chain-of-thought
            style data that includes intermediate step results. Even in the complete absence
            of pretraining, this approach significantly and simultaneously improves accuracy,
            sample complexity, and convergence speed. We also study the interplay between
            arithmetic and text data during training and examine the effects of few-shot prompt-
            ing, pretraining, and parameter scaling. Additionally, we discuss the challenges
            associated with length generalization. Our work highlights the importance of
            high-quality, instructive data that considers the particular characteristics of the
            next-word prediction loss for rapidly eliciting arithmetic capabilities.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Large language models like GPT-3/4, PaLM, LaMDA (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Thoppilan et al., 2022) have demonstrated general-purpose properties, often referred to as emergent
abilities (Wei et al., 2022a), for a wide range of downstream tasks like language and code translation,
compositional reasoning, and basic arithmetic operations (Webb et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2021; Wei
et al., 2022b; Shi et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Srivastava et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023). What is
perhaps surprising, is that these tasks are not explicitly encoded in the model’s training objective,
which typically is an auto-regressive, next-token-prediction loss.
Prior research has delved into exploring these capabilities and how they emerge as the scale and
of training compute, type of data, and model size vary (Wei et al., 2022a; Chung et al., 2022; Tay
et al., 2022). Untangling the factors, however, remains challenging due to the data complexity and
the variety of tasks examined. Driven by the curiosity to understand the factors that elicit these
capabilities in next-token predictors, we set out to pinpoint the key contributors that accelerate the
    ∗
        Authors contributed equally to this paper.
    1
        Our code is available at https://github.com/lee-ny/teaching_arithmetic


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: We investigate four data formatting approaches: (i) Plain: standard addition formatting (Section 4),
(ii) Reverse: reversing the output (Section 4), (iii) Simplified Scratchpad: recording the digit-wise sum and
carry-ons (Section 6), and (iv) Detailed Scratchpad: providing detailed intermediate steps (Section 6). We train
small decoder-only transformers from scratch on addition data in these formats. The results (right) highlight the
crucial role of data formatting in accuracy and sample efficiency. Plain never reaches 100% accuracy and the
sample complexity for the remaining methods steadily improves with the level of details in the data format.

emergence of such abilities. These contributors may include the format and scale of data, model
scale, the presence of pre-training, and the manner of prompting.
To provide a more precise examination of these factors, our study is conducted in a controlled setting:
we first focus on teaching arithmetic to small decoder-only transformer models, such as NanoGPT
and GPT-2, when trained from random initialization. Starting with a model of 10.6M parameters and
scaling up to 124M parameters, we use the standard autoregressive next-token prediction loss. Our
objective is to understand if and to what degree these models can efficiently learn basic arithmetic
operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, square root, and sine, thereby providing a clearer
lens through which to view the elicitation of emergent abilities. Below, we summarize our findings.
Data format and sampling plays a significant role. We first observe that teaching a model addition
(or any other operation) using standard addition samples, i.e., ‘A3 A2 A1 + B3 B2 B1 = C3 C2 C1 ’, is
suboptimal, as it requires the model to evaluate the most significant digit C3 of the result first, which
depends globally on all the digits of the two summands. By training on samples with reversed results,
i.e., ‘A3 A2 A1 + B3 B2 B1 = C1 C2 C3 ’, we enable the model to learn a simpler function, significantly
improving sample complexity. Additionally, balanced sampling of different “variants” of addition,
based on the number of carries and digits involved, further enhances learning. Even in this simple
setting, we observe relatively sharp phase transitions from 0 to 100% accuracy as a function of the
size of the training data. Although this may seem surprising, we observe that learning an addition
map on n digits from random samples is equivalent to completing a low-rank matrix. This connection
allows us to offer a reasonable explanation for such phase transitions.
Chain-of-thought data during training. Building on these findings, we then explore the potential
benefits of chain-of-thought (CoT) data during training. This format includes step-by-step operations
and intermediate results, allowing the model to learn the individual components of compositional
tasks. This format is directly borrowed from related literature, e.g., Ling et al. (2017); Wei et al.
(2022b); Zhou et al. (2022a;b). We find that CoT-type training data significantly improved learning in
terms of both sample complexity and accuracy in agreement with CoT fine-tuning literature (Nye
et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2022), but even in the complete absence of pretraining. We conjecture
that this is because breaking down the required compositional function to be learned into individual
components allows the model to learn a higher-dimensional but easier-to-learn function map, in
agreement with recent theoretical findings (Li et al., 2023; Malach, 2023). In Figure 1, we provide
examples of the data formatting methods explored in our work.
Training on text and arithmetic mixtures and the role of few-shot prompting. We also explore the
interplay between arithmetic and text data during training, as LLMs are trained on massive amounts
of data scraped from the internet (Bubeck et al., 2023; Peterson et al., 2019), where it is impractical to
carefully separate different types of data. We observe how the model’s perplexity and accuracy vary
with the ratio of text to arithmetic data. We find that jointly training on all the arithmetic operations
discussed earlier can improve the individual performance of each task and that going from zero-shot
to 1-shot prompting (showing one arithmetic example) yields a large accuracy improvement, but
there is no significant improvement in accuracy by showing more examples.
The role of pre-training and model scale. We further investigate the role of pretraining by fine-
tuning pretrained models like GPT-2 and GPT-3 (davinci) and observe that while the zero-shot


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


performance on arithmetic operations is poor, prior “skills” acquired during pretraining facilitate
quick learning of some basic arithmetic tasks, even with a small number of finetuning samples.
However, finetuning on non-standard data, such as those that result from reverse formatting, can
interfere with the model’s performance when pretrained, leading to decreased accuracy. We finally
share our observations on how performance in arithmetic changes with scale, and although we find
that scale does aid when finetuning for these tasks, it is not a necessary trait.
Compositional and length generalization. One might question if our trained models truly grasp
arithmetic. Our findings present a nuanced answer. We find that length generalization beyond trained
digit lengths is still challenging. For instance, if a model is trained on all n-digit lengths, excluding a
specific length, it still struggles to accurately calculate this missing digit length. Consequently, the
models achieve high accuracy within trained digit lengths but struggle significantly beyond this range.
This suggests that the models learn arithmetic not as a flexible algorithm, but as a mapping function
constrained to trained digit lengths. While this significantly surpasses memorization, it falls short of
comprehensive arithmetic “understanding”.
Novelty over prior work. Our approach heavily builds upon prior work that uses reasoning-
augmented data to enhance model performance, and we do not purport originality in the types of
training data used, nor in achieving the highest performance with the smallest model parameters
possible. What sets our work apart is the primary focus on meticulously ablating our settings and
extensive studies on various sampling techniques, training data formats, data source mixing ratios,
and model scales. Our goal is to pinpoint the factors that contribute to the fast emergence of arithmetic
capabilities. In the process, we also provide several straightforward yet novel and insightful theoretical
explanations for some of the phase transition phenomena we observe. Our emphasis on arithmetic is
not due to its intrinsic significance — one can easily delegate calculations to external tools (Schick
et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023). Instead, arithmetic serves as an emergent skill, easy to isolate and test,
facilitating a more precise exploration of emergent phenomena.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
Instructional data/chain-of-thought. Detailed reasoning in training data has roots predating
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). Ling et al. (2017); Cobbe et al. (2021) use natural language to
generate reasoning steps while Roy & Roth (2016); Reed & De Freitas (2015); Chen et al. (2017);
Cai et al. (2017); Nye et al. (2021) show that symbolic reasoning may suffice. Nogueira et al. (2021)
stress the importance of large number of small-digit samples (Yuan et al., 2023). Razeghi et al.
(2022) observe a correlation between the frequency of numbers in the dataset and the performance
involving them. In contrast, we find that transformers can learn to add numbers that were not seen
during training. Chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022b) refers to the model’s improved accuracy when
prompted to produce intermediate reasoning steps. Zhou et al. (2022b) show that this can be achieved
by providing sufficiently informative exemplars as a few-shot prompt (Brown et al., 2020). Zhou et al.
(2022a) showed that least-to-most prompting can help GPT-3 solve problems decomposable into
simpler sub-problems, by sequentially solving these subproblems. We extend this notion to simple
addition and show that asking the model to output the least significant bit first has a similar effect.
Arithmetic using Transformer models. Our work focuses on decoder-only models as they are
widely used in LLMs (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; MosaicML, 2023). However,
encoder-decoder models have also been extensively studied in the context of learning arithmetic
operations (Kim et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021). Wallace et al. (2019) on the other hand, focus
on the impact of the learned embeddings. Ontanón et al. (2021) extensively study the problem of
compositional generalization on benchmark datasets, such as SCAN (Lake & Baroni, 2018; Drozdov
et al., 2022), and conclude that design choices, like relative position encoding (Shaw et al., 2018),
can improve performance. Charton (2022; 2021) show that Transformers can learn linear algebra
operations with carefully chosen encodings. Hanna et al. (2023) use mechanistic interpretability
techniques to explain the limited numerical reasoning capabilities of GPT-2. Dziri et al. (2023);
Jelassi et al. (2023); Yang et al. (2023) focus on the challenges of length generalization. A recent line
of work explores finetuning techniques to improve arithmetic capabilities in pretrained models (Qian
et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2023; Uesato et al., 2022).
Beyond Transformers. While we focus our attention on GPT-like models, there is a rich literature
studying other seq-to-seq models such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Bowman, 2013; Bowman
et al., 2014; Zaremba et al., 2014). Zaremba & Sutskever (2014) show that RNNs can learn how to


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


execute simple programs with for-loops provided they are trained with curriculum learning. Sutskever
et al. (2014) show that LSTMs show improved performance on text-based tasks such as translation
when the source sentences are reversed, which is closely related to what we observe in addition.
Kaiser & Sutskever (2015) propose Neural GPUs which outperform prior RNNs on binary arithmetic
tasks and even show length generalization i.e., they can perform arithmetic on inputs of lengths that
were unseen during training. This is yet to be seen even in modern pre-trained models (Bubeck
et al., 2023) and therefore it is interesting to see if we can leverage some of these techniques and
apply them to existing modern architectures. Dehghani et al. (2018) propose Universal Transformers
(UTs) which introduce a recurrent transition function to apply recurrence over revisions of the vector
representation at each position as opposed to the different positions in the input. They show that on
the tasks from Zaremba & Sutskever (2014), UTs outperform traditional Transformers and RNNs.


3    P RELIMINARIES AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

In this section, we provide a detailed description of our experimental setup, including the model
architecture and an overview of the various data formatting and sampling techniques used.

Model and Data. To examine the individual factors at play, we use NanoGPT (Karpathy, 2022), a
lightweight implementation of the GPT family of models. NanoGPT is a decoder-only transformer
with six self-attention layers, six heads, and an embedding dimension of 384, resulting in approxi-
mately 10.6M parameters. Unless stated otherwise, we use character-level tokenization and absolute
position encoding. We train NanoGPT from random initialization, which we refer to as training
from scratch, using the conventional next-token prediction objective. To study the effect of scale, we
extend our experiments to GPT-2 and GPT-3 in Section 8. We investigate both training from scratch
as well as fine-tuning using a pretrained GPT-2, whereas, for GPT-3, we only consider fine-tuning
pretrained models. Refer to Appendix I for more details on the models and data used.
For arithmetic tasks like addition, subtraction, and multiplication, we define the training dataset for
a binary operator f (·) as Dtrain = {(ai , bi ), yi }N
                                                     i=1 where yi = f (ai , bi ). For unary operations like
sine, the training dataset is formulated as Dtrain = {ai , yi }Ni=1 , where yi = f (ai ). The test dataset
Dtest is constructed by randomly sampling pairs of operands not included in Dtrain . We then apply
different data formatting techniques on each data sample from the training dataset, creating the final
sequence that serves as the model’s input. Note that while we view ai as a single integer, the model
will see it as a sequence of digits after character-level tokenization.

Data Formatting. In the following sections, we
will delve into the four data formatting approaches
in our arithmetic experiments. See Figure 1 and Ap-
pendix J for examples. In Section 4, we explore
the limitations of the conventional plain-format data
and demonstrate how a simple reversal of the output
order can lead to substantial performance improve-
ments and enhanced sample efficiency. We introduce
two Lemmas to support and explain these findings.         Figure 2: Performance of 3-digit addition on vari-
Additionally, in Section 6, we present results on the     ous data sampling methods used: (i) Random: uni-
simplified and detailed scratchpad formats, highlight-    form sampling of operands; (ii) Balanced digits:
ing significant enhancements in sample efficiency for     assigning higher sampling weights to operations
learning addition. We also emphasize the importance       involving 1 and 2-digit numbers; (iii) Balanced
of carefully designing the intermediate steps in the      carry: balancing the dataset to contain an equal
detailed scratchpad method. Note that the scratch-        number of carry-on operations; (iv) Balanced
pad formats are largely adopted from the literature       both: balancing digits and carry-ons. We observe
                                                          that balanced data improves accuracy compared to
of chain-of-thought (CoT) training (Nye et al., 2021;     random sampling. Experiments on addition with
Zhou et al., 2022b).                                      the ‘$’ symbol wrapped for each sample.

Structured Data Sampling. While data formatting plays a crucial role, we also discover that
choosing the samples carefully is also essential. When sampling operands for n-digit addition
uniformly at random between 1 to 10n − 1, the dataset inevitably becomes highly skewed in terms
of the number of samples with (i) operands containing a certain number of digits and (ii) operands


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


resulting in a certain number of carry-on2 operations. For instance, in the case of 3-digit addition,
random sampling results in a meager 0.01% probability of selecting a 1-digit number. Additionally, 1
or 2 carry-on operations are more likely to occur than 0 or 3. To address this imbalance, we employ a
structured sampling approach. Specifically, we aim to (i) balance digits by assigning higher weights
to lower-digit numbers during the sampling process and (ii) balance carry-ons by ensuring an equal
distribution of examples with 0, 1, . . . , n carry-on operations. When sampling 10, 000 examples of
3-digit addition, we include all 100 1-digit additions, 900 2-digit samples and 9000 3-digit samples.
Note that while the number of samples increases, the fraction of all possible k−digit additions that
we sample for k = 2, 3 decreases due to the inherent skew. The split was chosen to ensure we saw a
“reasonable” fraction of all possible k−digit samples for all k. Similarly, we ensure that the number
of samples with 0, 1, 2, or 3 carry-ons are all approximately 2500.
Figure 2 reveals the importance of balancing. We observe improvements in accuracy across the board
while using balanced data when compared to random sampling. Further, random sampling performs
relatively poorly even for the simple task of 2−digit addition, possibly due to the fact that the model
has not seen enough of these examples. For the remaining experiments, we set the default dataset for
addition to be one that has both balanced digits and carry-ons.

4       DATA F ORMAT C HALLENGES AND A RITHMETIC E MERGENCE
We start by examining integer addition. We first focus on 3-digit addition, i.e., where the two
summads have at most 3 digits (≤ 999). Later, in Section 7, we extend our findings to numbers with
up to 10 digits. Surprisingly, teaching addition can be more complex than expected.
Training on Conventional Data.            We start by training NanoGPT on standard addition data
represented as ‘A3 A2 A1 + B3 B2 B1 = C3 C2 C1 ’, termed the plain format. However, as shown in
Figure 1, this leads to fairly poor performance. We suspect that this is because the next-token
prediction objective outputs the most significant digit (MSB) first. The following lemma clarifies the
necessity to access all operand digits for outputting the MSB first.
Lemma 1. Let A and B be two n-digit numbers, and let C = A + B. Suppose an algorithm A
outputs the digits of C in decreasing order of significance, then A must have access to all digits of A
and B starting from the first digit that it outputs.

The lemma suggests that to train a model for addition and to output the MSB first, it is necessary to
emulate a “global” algorithm. Unlike the standard “local” algorithm for addition, which consists of
computing digit-wise sums and carry-ons, approximating the global algorithm would require learning
a more complicated function than necessary. The increased complexity results in decreased accuracy,
as observed in our experiments. Liu et al. (2023) refer to this phenomenon as attention glitches.
Reversing the Output. We propose that the reverse format ‘$A3 A2 A1 + B3 B2 B1 = C1 C2 C3 $’3 is
more suitable for next-word prediction models. The rationale behind this is that when generating the
sum by starting with the least significant digit (LSB), the model only needs to learn a local function
of three inputs per digit – the two relevant digits of the operands and the carry-on from the previous
digit. This local operation simplifies the function to be learned. The following lemma formalizes this:
Lemma 2. There exists an algorithm that computes C = A + B for two n-digit numbers A and B
and outputs its digits in increasing order of significance such that, at each position i, the algorithm
only requires access to the ith digits of A and B, as well as the carry-on from the previous position.

Lemma 2 directly follows from the standard algorithm for addition, which performs the sum and
carry-on operations digit by digit. The implications of these lemmata are evident in our experiments
when comparing the accuracy of the plain and reverse formats. As shown in Figure 1, training
on reversed outputs significantly enhances accuracy, with considerably fewer samples. What is
particularly remarkable is the rapid emergence of addition occurring between 1k to 4k samples for
reverse. During that, the model rapidly transitions from being unable to add two numbers to being
capable of perfectly adding. This leads us to ask:
    2
     In this paper, we adopt the definition that a carry-on operation involves transferring information from
one digit position to another position of higher significance. Therefore, we refer to the “borrow” operation in
subtraction as a carry operation.
   3
     We use ‘$’ symbol for data delimiter for the reverse format. Refer to Appendix B.1 for details.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Why does addition rapidly emerge as the number of training examples increases?

5    M ATRIX C OMPLETION : AN I NCOMPLETE TALE OF E MERGENCE
Although the rapid transition observed in the previous section may initially seem surprising, closer
examination reveals a fascinating equivalence – learning an addition map on n digits from random
samples can be considered as completing a rank-2 matrix. Establishing this connection with low-rank
matrix completion (LRMC) provides meaningful insights into the observed phenomenon. However
as we explain in this Section, this connection does not tell the complete story, and Transformers
possess generalization capabilities far beyond what LRMC would predict.

Learning addition tables is Matrix Completion. Learning addition from samples i + j can be
formulated as a rank-2 Matrix Completion (MC) problem, where we partially observe an n × n
matrix M , whose (i, j)-th entry represents i + j. M can be decomposed into the sum of two rank-1
matrices, N 1T + 1N T , where N is a vector with entries {1, . . . n}, and 1 is the vector of ones.
Recovering a rank-2 matrix, in the absence of noise, can be sample-optimally performed by a simple
iterative algorithm from Király et al. (2015) (Algorithm 1 in Appendix B.2). As depicted in Figure 3a,
a rapid transition occurs at O(n), a well-known matrix recovery phenomenon (Recht, 2011).
We notice a similar rapid transition in                                        (a) MC of Addition Matrix                    (b) Comparing LRMC & NanoGPT
NanoGPT. To investigate it, we focus on 2-                                 1.0
                                                         Success Probability                                                          100


                                                                                                                      Test Accuracy (%)
digit addition (i.e., n = 100) and evaluate                                0.8                                                            80
                                                                                           n = 20
the performance of learning addition through                               0.6             n = 50                                         60
                                                                           0.4             n = 100                                        40
NanoGPT and LRMC (Figure 3a) by con-                                                       n = 500                                                         plain
structing train data as the revealed entries                               0.2                                                            20               reverse
                                                                                                                                                           matrix completion
of the M matrix. Note that the dataset                                     0.0                                                             0
                                                                                 101       102        103      104                             0    1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
is no longer balanced, as the revealed en-                                             Number of Revealed Entries                                  Number of train examples
tries are randomly sampled for LRMC exper-     Figure 3: (a) We run Algorithm 1 (Király et al., 2015) on
iments, to match the standard MC probabilis-   the addition matrix for n = 20, 50, 100, 500 and report
tic settings Recht (2011). In Figure 3b, both  the success probability while varying the number of re-
NanoGPT and LRMC exhibit rapid transitions     vealed entries. As expected, a sharp transition occurs when
at approximately 1500 samples.                 approximately O(n) entries are revealed. (b) We compare
                                               the performance of NanoGPT trained on a dataset con-
While the observed rapid transition can be taining n = 100 samples (i.e., 2-digit addition) to that of
attributed to the principles of LRMC, shed- the corresponding LRMC problem using the same sample
ding light on the emergent arithmetic skill in set. Remarkably, at ≈ 1500 samples, both NanoGPT and
NanoGPT, this connection falls short of cap- Algorithm 1 begin learning addition almost flawlessly.
turing the full generalization capabilities displayed by NanoGPT.
NanoGPT generalizes better than Matrix Completion solutions. Upon further investigation,
we find that NanoGPT exhibits capabilities beyond LRMC. Notably, LRMC is constrained by its
inability to generalize in the presence of missing rows or columns. In our context, this equates to
certain numbers being omitted from the training data. To assess NanoGPT’s ability to overcome
this, we deliberately exclude specific numbers or digits from our training data and assess the model’s
ability in learning addition. Can the model still generalize to unseen numbers?
As shown in Table 1, the answer to this question is a resounding Yes! The model achieves almost per-
fect accuracy even when excluding half of all possible 3−digit numbers. NanoGPT can successfully
learn 3-digit addition even when numbers or digits are intentionally excluded from the training data,
thereby exhibiting generalization capabilities that far exceed what standard LRMC would predict.
Table 1: Impact of excluding numbers on addition task: NanoGPT models trained with 100/200/500 excluded
operands show no significant drop in accuracy and in some cases, the performance even improves.
                                                   Excluding                                                 Excluding                                        Excluding
                     No Exclusion                 100 numbers                                               200 numbers                                      500 numbers
                  Plain         Rev           Plain                            Rev                   Plain              Rev                              Plain            Rev
 Overall Acc. 92.65%(±2.53) 99.87%(±0.24) 93.36%(±2.62) 99.82%(±0.29) 93.61%(±2.77) 99.78%(±0.17) 93.47%(±3.22) 100.0%(±0.0)
Exclusion Acc.      -             -       94.43%(±1.70) 99.87%(±0.24) 95.25%(±1.60) 99 88%(±0.08) 94.39%(±2.05) 100.0%(±0.0)

Specifically, we randomly choose 100/200/500 numbers and exclude them from the training data.
We then evaluate the trained models using two metrics: (i) Overall accuracy: which measures the


                                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


accuracy over a random set of 10, 000 examples and (ii) Exclusion accuracy: which measures the
accuracy only over the excluded set (where either of the two operands is one of the excluded numbers).
Remarkably, excluding numbers from the training data sometimes leads to improved performance.
We conjecture that this may be due to a regularization effect, similar to random masking or cropping
images in vision tasks. In Appendix B.2.1, we further find that NanoGPT models can even generalize
to unseen digits, where a digit is absent from a particular ordinal position.


6    T RAINING ON C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT DATA E XPEDITES E MERGENCE

So far, we observed that simply reversing the output can result in remarkable performance, exceeding
that of LRMC in learning addition. Here, we investigate if it is possible to expedite the emergence
of addition by further enhancing the data format. As addition is a multi-step process, we explore
the idea of incorporating additional information about each intermediate step. We adopt a CoT
style approach, where we guide the model to learn addition step-by-step. We explore two levels
of detail in the provided instruction steps, as shown in Figure1: (i) Simplified Scratchpad with
minimal information – the sum and carry information for each digit/step. (ii) Detailed Scratch-
pad with comprehensive information on detailed traces of execution for each intermediate step.

                                                                              (a) Sample Efficiency                                              (b) Token Efficiency
The results in Figure 4a show that the model trained                     100                                                            100
on simplified scratchpad achieves 100% accuracy
                                                         Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                        Test Accuracy (%)
                                                                             80                                                             80
with only 2000 samples, whereas reverse requires                             60                                                             60
more than twice as many. Detailed scratchpad,                                40                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                          addition
                                                                                                                                                          reverse
which provides even more fine grained information,                           20                                                             20            simplified scratchpad
                                                                                                                                                          detailed scratchpad
achieves perfect addition with just 1000 samples.                             0
                                                                               0            1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k 7K
                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                              0        100k      200k     300k
This indicates a clear message: incorporating more in-                                     Number of train examples                               Number of tokens in train data
formation enables the model to learn addition with far
                                                    Figure 4: (a) Comparison of sample efficiency:
fewer examples. We conjecture that this is because  evaluating performance on training dataset with
breaking down the required compositional function   different numbers of addition samples. While all
to be learned into individual, simpler components   variants other than plain achieve 100% accuracy,
allows the model to learn a higher-dimensional but  they differ in terms of sample complexity. (b) Num-
                                                    ber of tokens in train dataset required by NanoGPT
easier-to-learn function map, in agreement with re- to learn addition. Reverse is the most efficient
cent theoretical work (Li et al., 2023; Malach, 2023).
                                                    in terms of token usage for model training, as
We note that while CoT-style training enhances sam- the scratchpad methods, although more sample-
ple efficiency, it may not necessarily be the most efficient, require more tokens per sample.
“token-efficient” approach. To account for the cost associated with training and inference, we conduct
a cost analysis based on the number of tokens (number of training samples × number of tokens per
sample – see Appendix G for details) in the train data. encountered during training. The result in
Figure 4b shows that reverse is the most efficient in terms of token usage for model training. The
scratchpad methods, although more sample-efficient, require more tokens per sample.
In summary, incorporating scratchpad data and decom-                                              100
posing the addition task into steps offer a promising
                                                                                  Test Accuracy (%)


strategy to improve the performance and efficiency of                                                 80
small models in learning addition from scratch. Nev-                                                  60
ertheless, for practical usage, it is crucial to evaluate                                                              plain
both the number of samples for achieving the desired                                                  40               reverse
performance and the actual token requirements during                                                  20               simplified scratchpad
training and inference.                                                                                                detailed scratchpad
                                                                                                       0     5-digit                   7-digit                10-digit
                                                                                                        0      50k             100k                    150k         200k
                                                                                                            Number of train examples
7 L ONGER D IGITS AND B LENDING                       Figure 5: Comparison of sample efficiency for
A RITHMETIC WITH S HAKESPEARE                         5, 7, and 10-digit additions. Training on plain
                                                      requires an increasing number of samples for
In this section, we go beyond 3-digit addition to en- higher digits, while the sample complexity for
compass a wider range of arithmetic tasks and longer other data formats remains relatively consistent.
digits to show that our insights on data sampling and
formatting hold true even in this regime. We also explore the effect of mixing arithmetic with text
data, and few-shot prompting.

                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Extending to longer digit addition. We repeat the experiment from Section 3 with up to 10 digit
integers. Figure 5 shows that the behavior of all data formats remains similar across varying number
of digits. In fact, the performance gap between the modified formats and plain grows with longer
digits. While plain requires an increasing number of samples to learn higher-digit additions, the
reverse and scratchpad formats maintain a consistent sample complexity. We also observe similar
results in the fine-tuning setting, where we fine-tune a model initially trained on k-digits on k + 1-digit
data. See Appendix C for details on the experimental setup and additional results.

Mixing Text with Arithmetic Data. While                                                            (a) Plain                                          (b) Detailed scratchpad
the models so far were trained exclusively on                         100                                                                    100
                                                                                                                                                                      Zero-shot


                                                      Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                             Test Accuracy (%)
arithmetic tasks, in practice, LLMs utilize a com-                        80                                                                     80                   1-shot
bination of arithmetic and text data for training.                        60                                   Zero-shot                         60                   2-shot
                                                                                                               1-shot                                                 3-shot
How does that affect the emergence of arith-                              40                                                                     40                   text_prompt
                                                                                                               2-shot
metic skills? To explore that we incorporate                              20                                   3-shot                            20
                                                                                                               text_prompt                        0
both addition samples and text into our train data                         00 5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k                                            1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
and evaluate the models with few-shot prompt-                                             # Plain Addition Samples                                    # Detailed Scratchpad Samples
ing (showing a few examples of addition in the         Figure 6: Performance of NanoGPT model trained with
prompt) to see if it is able to be effectively con-    the Shakespeare dataset, addition dataset in plain, and
ditioned for the appropriate context (arithmetic/-     detailed scratchpad format. The number of plain (left)
text generation). As we see in Figure 6, we            and detailed scratchpad (right) formatted samples are
find that few-shot prompting improves the per-         varied. Performance is evaluated on zero-shot, few-shot,
                                                       and text prompts, with the shaded area representing the
formance of the model, allowing it to perform
                                                       standard deviation across various prompt exemplar sets.
addition accurately even in the plain format.
Intriguingly, accuracy remains high using plain even with the inclusion of a text prompt preceding
“A+B=”. This is likely due to the structure of our mixed dataset where addition examples are
interspersed within Shakespeare text. With the incorporation of more addition examples, instances
where addition follows Shakespeare text increases, leading to a decrease in potential inconsistencies
when text content is present during addition test queries. We further analyze the effect of text on
prompting for both cases with and without text in the training data in Appendix E.

Teaching arithmetic operations beyond addition. We also note that the results on addition also
hold for broader mathematical operations such as subtraction, multiplication, sine, and square root
operations where each operation entails its unique challenges and intricacies. Refer to Appendix D
for detailed settings and results.

8    F INE - TUNING , S CALING , AND P RETRAINING IN L ARGER M ODELS

We extend our study from NanoGPT to larger                                                 80
                                                                                                                   NanoGPT, char-level, scratch
                                                                           Test Accuracy (%)


models like GPT-2 and GPT-3 to explore the
impact of pretraining and model size. Initially,                                           60                      GPT-2, char-level, scratch
                                                                                                                   GPT-2, tiktoken, scratch
we compare the performance of NanoGPT and                                                                          GPT-2, tiktoken, pretrained
GPT-2, both trained from scratch. This high-                                               40                      GPT-2, tiktoken+space, scratch
                                                                                                                   GPT-2, tiktoken+space, pretrained
lights the advantages of larger model scales, es-                                          20
pecially in zero-shot scenarios. Subsequently,
we delve into the impact of tokenization meth-                                                 0
ods and model pretraining in GPT-2 models.                                                          0     1000        2000                       3000       4000     5000
                                                                                                                    Train Iterations
We then fine-tune a pretrained GPT-3 on var-
                                             Figure 7: Performance of various configurations of the
ious arithmetic tasks using different data for-
                                             GPT-2 model on the addition task. We compare the ef-
mats, reaffirming the importance of data for-fects of tokenization methods, specifically character-level
matting for larger pretrained models.        tokenization versus Tiktoken (OpenAI’s BPE tokenizer),
                                             training initialization (training from scratch versus train-
Comparing NanoGPT and GPT-2: Tok- ing from a pretrained GPT-2 model), and the inclusion
enizer and Training Pretrained Models We or exclusion of spaces between numbers. The results
repeat our experiments on a GPT-2 model highlight the significance of utilizing pretrained models
with 85M parameters, with twice as many lay- and incorporating spaces for consistent tokenization of
ers, heads, and embedding size compared to numbers when training a model for arithmetic tasks.
NanoGPT. The transition to a GPT-2 setup ne-
cessitates several modifications. Firstly, we shift to OpenAI’s Tiktoken BPE tokenizer. We also


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


examined two different training approaches: training the model from random initialization (scratch)
and fine-tuning the pretrained model sourced from Huggingface. To circumvent potential inconsistent
tokenization of numbers, alterations were made in data formatting to include spaces between numbers.
Figure 7 shows that GPT-2 demonstrates high performance in addition tasks with both character-level
tokenization and Tiktoken with spaces between digits. This aligns with the results by Wallace et al.
(2019), suggesting that character-level tokenization exhibits stronger numeracy capabilities compared
to word or sub-word methods. Furthermore, comparing the models trained from scratch and the
models trained from the pretrained model, we observe that fine-tuning a pretrained model results in
better performance compared to training a model from scratch.
GPT-3 experiments. We consider three GPT-3 variants: Ada, Curie, and Davinci (OpenAI).
We fine-tune these models using the same four data formatting methods as our NanoGPT experiments.
Table 2: Evaluation of addition performance for fine-tuned GPT-3 models: Davinci, Curie, and Ada. In each
case, the model is finetuned on 1000 samples of addition in the corresponding format.

         GPT-3 Model Zero-shot Plain Reverse Simplified Scratchpad Detailed Scratchpad
           Davinci          2%      34%     80.9%            88.7%                 99.5%
            Curie          0.0%     1.4%    12.3%            10.7%                 99.7%
             Ada           0.0%     0.3%     6.3%             0.6%                 99.8%

The results in Table 2 show that starting with pretrained GPT-3 significantly improves performance
compared to training NanoGPT or GPT-2 from scratch with only 1000 examples (Figure 4a). Similar
to the result of training NanoGPT from scratch, the modified formats all outperform the plain format.
Detailed scratchpad data achieves near-perfect accuracy, albeit with increased training and inference
costs due to higher context length requirements. For our detailed experimental setup and further
experiments on larger models, including fine-tuning GPT-3 refer to Appendix F.

9    L IMITATIONS
Length generalization. In our experiments, we did not observe any instances where the model
could predict beyond the number of digits it had been trained on (see Appendix H). Shaw et al. (2018);
Sun et al. (2022) reported similar difficulties and proposed approaches such as relative positional
encodings. Anil et al. (2022) suggests that models can only perform out-of-distribution tasks by
combining fine-tuning, prompting, and scratchpad techniques.
Model/Data scale.           Due to the smaller scale of our experiments, we were able to thoroughly
examine the impact of individual components on the model’s arithmetic learning capabilities. Our
model was limited to decoder-only architectures, primarily focusing on character-level tokenization.
Although we have some preliminary results on scaling up and incorporating BPE-based tokenization,
it is not clear if all our findings can be generalized to the scale of LLMs being used in practice.
Beyond elementary arithmetic.             We choose to analyze simple arithmetic operations in order
to carefully isolate factors that contribute to emergence. While the existing literature has already
demonstrated the emergence of complicated abilities in practice, our work seeks to provide a better
understanding of this behavior by extensive ablations in a controlled setting.

10     C ONCLUSION
In this study, we investigate teaching arithmetic operations to small randomly initialized transformers
using the next-token prediction objective. We carefully ablate different aspects of the training setting
so as to isolate the factors that contribute to the emergence of arithmetic capabilities. Our results reveal
that traditional training data is sub-optimal for learning arithmetic, and training on data with detailed
intermediate steps or even simply reversing the output improves accuracy and sample complexity.
We also study the effects of few-shot prompting, pretraining, and model scale. Despite improvements
from detailed data, length generalization remains a challenge, highlighting the need for better-curated
training data to ensure successful learning of specific algorithms as opposed to just learning an
approximate function map. The correct approach for learning multiple arithmetic operations, of
different levels of complexity, is still unclear. We anticipate that this research will contribute to a
more nuanced understanding of the mechanisms by which transformers (approximately) acquire
algorithmic skills.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Institute for Foundations of Data Science (IFDS), ONR Grant No.
N00014-21-1-2806, N00014-23-1-2848, and a grant by FuriosaAI.

R EFERENCES
Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra, Vinay Ramasesh,
  Ambrose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur. Exploring length generalization
  in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04901, 2022.
Samuel R Bowman. Can recursive neural tensor networks learn logical reasoning? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6192, 2013.
Samuel R Bowman, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D Manning. Recursive neural networks for
  learning logical semantics. CoRR, abs/1406.1827, 5, 2014.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Jonathon Cai, Richard Shin, and Dawn Song. Making neural programming architectures generalize
  via recursion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06611, 2017.
François Charton. Linear algebra with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.01898, 2021.
François Charton. What is my math transformer doing?–three results on interpretability and general-
  ization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.00170, 2022.
Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Towards synthesizing complex programs from input-
  output examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.01284, 2017.
Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models to
  self-debug. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
 Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Mostafa Dehghani, Stephan Gouws, Oriol Vinyals, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Łukasz Kaiser. Universal
 transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03819, 2018.
Andrew Drozdov, Nathanael Schärli, Ekin Akyürek, Nathan Scales, Xinying Song, Xinyun Chen,
  Olivier Bousquet, and Denny Zhou. Compositional semantic parsing with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15003, 2022.
Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Peter West,
  Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena D. Hwang, Soumya Sanyal, Sean Welleck, Xiang
  Ren, Allyson Ettinger, Zaid Harchaoui, and Yejin Choi. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers on
  compositionality, 2023.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models, 2023.
Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How does gpt-2 compute greater-than?: Inter-
 preting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00586,
 2023.
Samy Jelassi, Stéphane d’Ascoli, Carles Domingo-Enrich, Yuhuai Wu, Yuanzhi Li, and François
  Charton. Length generalization in arithmetic transformers, 2023.
Łukasz Kaiser and Ilya Sutskever. Neural gpus learn algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.08228,
  2015.
Andrej Karpathy. char-rnn. https://github.com/karpathy/char-rnn, 2015.
Andrej Karpathy. Andrej karpathy’s lightweight implementation of medium-sized gpts. GitHub,
  2022. URL https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT.
Jeonghwan Kim, Giwon Hong, Kyung-min Kim, Junmo Kang, and Sung-Hyon Myaeng. Have you
  seen that number? investigating extrapolation in question answering models. In Proceedings of the
  2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7031–7037, 2021.
Franz J Király, Louis Theran, and Ryota Tomioka. The algebraic combinatorial approach for low-rank
  matrix completion. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 16(1):1391–1436, 2015.
Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. Generalization without systematicity: On the compositional skills
  of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  2873–2882. PMLR, 2018.
Yingcong Li, Kartik Sreenivasan, Angeliki Giannou, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak.
  Dissecting chain-of-thought: A study on compositional in-context learning of mlps. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.18869, 2023.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.
Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. Program induction by rationale genera-
 tion: Learning to solve and explain algebraic word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04146,
 2017.
Bingbin Liu, Jordan T Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Exposing attention
  glitches with flip-flop language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00946, 2023.
Eran Malach. Auto-regressive next-token predictors are universal learners, 2023.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.12837, 2022.
MosaicML. Introducing mpt-7b: A new standard for open source, commercially usable llms, 2023.
 URL www.mosaicml.com/blog/mpt-7b. Accessed: 2023-05-05.
Rodrigo Nogueira, Zhiying Jiang, and Jimmy Lin. Investigating the limitations of transformers with
  simple arithmetic tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.13019, 2021.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show your work:
 Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00114,
 2021.
Santiago Ontanón, Joshua Ainslie, Vaclav Cvicek, and Zachary Fisher. Making transformers solve
  compositional tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.04378, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


OpenAI. OpenAI platform. URL https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/
  gpt-3. Accessed: 2023-09-28.
Joshua Peterson, Stephan Meylan, and David Bourgin. Open clone of openai’s unreleased
  webtext dataset scraper. GitHub, 2019. URL https://github.com/jcpeterson/
  openwebtext.
Reiner Pope, Sholto Douglas, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Jacob Devlin, James Bradbury, Jonathan
  Heek, Kefan Xiao, Shivani Agrawal, and Jeff Dean. Efficiently scaling transformer inference.
  Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 5, 2023.
Jing Qian, Hong Wang, Zekun Li, Shiyang Li, and Xifeng Yan. Limitations of language models in
   arithmetic and symbolic induction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05051, 2022.
Alec Radford and Karthik Narasimhan. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training.
  2018.
Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Matt Gardner, and Sameer Singh. Impact of pretraining term
  frequencies on few-shot reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07206, 2022.
Benjamin Recht. A simpler approach to matrix completion. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  12(12), 2011.
Scott Reed and Nando De Freitas. Neural programmer-interpreters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06279,
  2015.
Subhro Roy and Dan Roth.           Solving general arithmetic word problems.          arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1608.01413, 2016.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools, 2023.
Peter Shaw, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Ashish Vaswani. Self-attention with relative position representations.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02155, 2018.
Freda Shi, Mirac Suzgun, Markus Freitag, Xuezhi Wang, Suraj Srivats, Soroush Vosoughi,
  Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Sebastian Ruder, Denny Zhou, et al. Language models are mul-
  tilingual chain-of-thought reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03057, 2022.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.
Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Barun Patra, Shuming Ma, Shaohan Huang, Alon Benhaim, Vishrav Chaudhary,
  Xia Song, and Furu Wei. A length-extrapolatable transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10554,
  2022.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Yi Tay, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Vinh Q Tran, David R So, Siamak Shakeri, Xavier Garcia,
  Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Jinfeng Rao, Aakanksha Chowdhery, et al. Transcending scaling laws with
  0.1% extra compute. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11399, 2022.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
 Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
  models, 2023.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Uesato, Nate Kushman, Ramana Kumar, Francis Song, Noah Siegel, Lisa Wang, Antonia
  Creswell, Geoffrey Irving, and Irina Higgins. Solving math word problems with process-and
  outcome-based feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14275, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Eric Wallace, Yizhong Wang, Sujian Li, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. Do nlp models know
  numbers? probing numeracy in embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.07940, 2019.
Cunxiang Wang, Boyuan Zheng, Yuchen Niu, and Yue Zhang. Exploring generalization ability of
  pretrained language models on arithmetic and logical reasoning. In Natural Language Processing
  and Chinese Computing: 10th CCF International Conference, NLPCC 2021, Qingdao, China,
  October 13–17, 2021, Proceedings, Part I 10, pp. 758–769. Springer, 2021.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency
  improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Taylor Webb, Keith J Holyoak, and Hongjing Lu. Emergent analogical reasoning in large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09196, 2022.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022a.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022b.
Zhen Yang, Ming Ding, Qingsong Lv, Zhihuan Jiang, Zehai He, Yuyi Guo, Jinfeng Bai, and Jie Tang.
  Gpt can solve mathematical problems without a calculator, 2023.
Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, and Songfang Huang. How well do large
  language models perform in arithmetic tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02015, 2023.
Wojciech Zaremba and Ilya Sutskever. Learning to execute. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.4615, 2014.
Wojciech Zaremba, Karol Kurach, and Rob Fergus. Learning to discover efficient mathematical
 identities. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
  Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022a.
Hattie Zhou, Azade Nova, Hugo Larochelle, Aaron Courville, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi.
  Teaching algorithmic reasoning via in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09066, 2022b.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Proofs                                                                                        15

     B Additional Experiments                                                                        16
       B.1 Zero-Padding, Symbol Wrapping, and Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            16
       B.2 Low-Rank Matrix Completion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          17
       B.3 Supplementary Experiments on Addition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           18
       B.4 The Importance of Intermediate Step Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19
       B.5 The Effect of Noisy Inputs on Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21
       B.6 Analyzing the results on Sine/Sqrt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23

     C Extending to Longer Digit Addition                                                            24
       C.1 Training from Random Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24
       C.2 Fine-Tuning from Pretrained Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          25
       C.3 Impact of Formats on Fine-Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          27

     D Teaching Arithmetic Operations Beyond Addition                                                28
       D.1 Extended Arithmetic Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        28
       D.2 Jointly Training on All Five Arithmetic Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30

     E Mixing Text with Arithmetic Data                                                              32
       E.1 Few-Shot Prompting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32
       E.2 Disentangling the effect of text on prompting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       32
       E.3 Prompting with Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       33

     F Fine-tuning, Scaling, and Pretraining in Larger Models                                        36

     G Token Efficiency Across Data Formats                                                          38

     H Length Generalization                                                                         40

     I   Experimental Setup                                                                          43
         I.1 Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
         I.2 Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     46
         I.3 Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    46
         I.4 Hyperparameter Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       47

     J   Prompt Examples                                                                             48
         J.1 Addition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    48
         J.2 Subtraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     50
         J.3 Multiplication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    51
         J.4 Sine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    51
         J.5 Square Root . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     52
         J.6 Noisy Simple Scratchpad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       52
         J.7 Example data for GPT-3 fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      53


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    P ROOFS
Here, we present the proofs of Lemma 1 and 2.
Lemma 1. Let A and B be two n-digit numbers, and let C = A + B. Suppose an algorithm A
outputs the digits of C in decreasing order of significance, then A must have access to all digits of A
and B starting from the first digit that it outputs.

Proof. We begin by assuming for contradiction that there does exist an algorithm Algo that does
not have access to all digits of A and B and still outputs C = A + B correctly for all n− digit
numbers A, B. Without loss of generality, say Algo does not have access to the k−th digit of A
where k ∈ [n] represents the position counting from the least significant digit. Then consider the
example B = (10n − 1) and (A = 000 . . . Ak 00 . . . 0) where B is just the integer with n 9’s and A
is just 0’s with Ak in the kth position. If Ak = 0, then Cn+1 = 0, but if Ak = 1, then Cn+1 = 1.
Therefore, without access to the k−th digit of A, there exist examples where the algorithm will surely
make a mistake. Therefore, by contradiction such an Algo cannot exist.
Lemma 2. There exists an algorithm that computes C = A + B for two n-digit numbers A and B
and outputs its digits in increasing order of significance such that, at each position i, the algorithm
only requires access to the ith digits of A and B, as well as the carry-on from the previous position.

Proof. First note that the trivial algorithm for addition is exactly the proof of this Lemma. However,
we present a more formal argument below for completeness. Let A, B be n−digit numbers and
C = A + B be at most an (n + 1) digit number. Define the digits of A, B, and C as Ai , Bi , and Ci ,
respectively, for i ∈ [n] counting from the least significant digit once again. Then, the addition can be
performed using the following steps. First, Ci = (Ai + Bi + carryi ) mod 10 where carryi is the
carry-on from the addition of digits at position i − 1. If there is no carry from the previous
                                                                                        j         position,
                                                                                                         k
                                                                                          Ai +Bi +carryi
then carryi = 0. The carry for the next position is then calculated as carryi+1 =               10        .

Putting this together, the algorithm for addition can be described as follows:
Step 1: Set carry1 = 0. Repeat
                        j      for i = k{1, . . . , n}: {Step 2: Compute Ci = (Ai + Bi + carryi )
                             Ai +Bi +carryi
mod 10 and carryi+1 =              10         , Step 3: Output Ci } Step 4: Output Cn+1 = carryn+1 .

It is easy to see that this algorithm computes the digits of the sum C correctly and requires only the
individual digits at position i and the carry from the previous position. Therefore, this algorithm
satisfies the conditions of the lemma.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
B.1    Z ERO -PADDING , S YMBOL W RAPPING , AND T ESTING

Zero-padding and Symbol wrapping As discussed briefly in Section 3, we found a significant
benefit to using padding for multi-digit addition. Throughout our experiments, we use the plain
format without any such padding (denoted as “vanilla” below) as the default baseline representing the
conventional data format used in training. Nonetheless, we explore modifications to this plain format
to enhance performance; zero-padding, and wrapping with a single symbol. Zero-padding ensures a
fixed length for operands and the output. In the case of 3-digit addition, this means 3-digit operands
and a 4-digit output. For example, ‘112 + 29 = 141’ becomes ‘112 + 029 = 0141’. As shown in
Table 3. this modification significantly improves model performance. Next, we wrap each sample
using the ‘$’ symbol as in ’$112 + 29 = 141$’. We found this performs on par with zero-padding.
As a result, we adopt the ‘$’ symbol for efficient data delimiter, extending its use to the reverse format.
Figure 8 shows ‘$’-wrapping also enhances the performance of the reverse format. Despite the plain
format being improved with the ‘$’ delimiter, it remains short of the reverse format’s accuracy and
sample efficiency. We continue to maintain the original plain format as a baseline since it not only
exemplifies conventional data but further emphasizes the need for improved data formatting to ensure
efficient training. As such, for the reverse format, we have incorporated the ‘$’ delimiter in our
formatting modifications.

Table 3: Test accuracy of NanoGPT model on 3-digit addition trained on 10, 000 samples of plain format data,
comparing (i) vanilla format without modifications, (ii) Zero-padding format, and (iii) ‘$’-wrapped format.
The results show significant performance enhancement through zero-padding for fixed length and similar
improvements when deploying a single-symbol wrapping.


                                                 Vanilla     Zero-pad                      ‘$’-Wrapped
                                                88.17%       97.74%                            97.76%


                        100                                                           100
                            80                                                            80
        Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                      Test Accuracy (%)


                            60                                                            60
                            40                                                            40
                                                  reverse, with $                                                 reverse, with $
                            20                    reverse, wihout $                       20                      reverse, wihout $
                                                  plain, with $                                                   plain, with $
                            0                     plain, wihout $                         0                       plain, wihout $
                                 2000   4000   6000 8000 10000                                  2000    4000   6000 8000 10000
                                  Number of train examples                                         Number of train examples
Figure 8: Performance of NanoGPT (left) and GPT-2 (right) models on 3-digit addition using plain and reverse
format, both with and without ‘$’ delimiter. The addition of the ‘$’ symbol noticeably enhances performance in
both formats. Nevertheless, the plain format underperforms compared to the reverse format, particularly in terms
of sample efficiency. While we maintain the original plain format as a baseline – emphasizing the necessity for
improved data formatting for efficient emergence – we incorporate the ‘$’ wrapping in our modified reverse
format.


                                                                  16
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     B.2      L OW-R ANK M ATRIX C OMPLETION

     In our Low-Rank Matrix Completion experiment for the addition matrix (which is of rank-2), we
     employ an iterative algorithm proposed by Király et al. (2015). This algorithm systematically searches
     for a 2 × 2 submatrix in which three entries are known and one entry is unknown. It then fills the
     unknown entry to ensure that the determinant of the 2 × 2 submatrix becomes zero, where the solution
     is known to be optimal. We present the full pseudo-code in Algorithm 1.
     To assess the performance of the algorithm, we generate n × n addition matrices for various values
     of n (e.g., 20, 50, 100, 500). We vary the number of revealed entries, randomly sampling a sparse
     matrix where only a specified number of entries between n and n × n are known, while the remaining
     entries are set to zero. We repeat this process 100 times for each number of revealed entries, tracking
     the algorithm’s success or failure in finding the solution. We calculate the average success rate across
     the trials and present the success probabilities in Figure 3a, where we observe a sharp phase transition
     when O(n) entries are observed, as expected.

     Algorithm 1: Iterative 2 × 2 Matrix Completion Algorithm
   Data: Data Matrix M ∈ Rn×n with partially revealed entries. Assumed to be of Rank 2.
   Result: M c ∈ Rn×n , Success/Fail.
 1 n1 ← 1 represents number of resolved submatrices.
 2 n2 ← 0 represents number of unresolved submatrices.
   c←M
 3 M
 4 while n1 ≥ 1 do
        /* As long as we resolved at least one submatrix in the previous
         iteration                                                                                    */
 5     n1 ← 0
 6     n2 ← 0
 7     for i = 1 to n do
 8          for j = 1 to n do
                 /* do something                                                                      */
 9

10                if M
                     ci,j is not revealed and all its neighbors are revealed then
                                ci+1,j ×M
11                    ci,j = M
                      M
                                         ci,j+1
                                  M
                                  ci+1,j+1
12                       n1 ← n1 + 1
13                if M
                     ci+1,j is not revealed and all its neighbors are revealed then
                                  ci,j ×M
14                    ci+1,j = M
                      M
                                         ci+1,j+1
                                       M
                                       ci+1,j
15                       n1 ← n1 + 1
16                if M
                     ci+1,j+1 is not revealed and all its neighbors are revealed then
                                    ci+1,j ×M
17                    ci+1,j+1 = M
                      M
                                             ci,j+1
                                          M
                                          ci,j
18                       n1 ← n1 + 1
19                if M
                     ci,j , M
                            ci+1,j , M
                                     ci,j+1 , M
                                              ci+1,j+1 are all revealed then
20                    continue
21                else
22                       n2 ← n2 + 1

23   if n2 > 0 then
24        return M
                 c, Fail
25   else
26          return M
                   c, Success



     B.2.1      G ENERALIZING TO UNSEEN DIGITS
     Building upon the model’s robustness to excluded numbers, we further investigate its ability to handle
     excluded digits, where a digit is absent from a particular ordinal position. Intuitively, this should


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


be even more challenging since excluding a digit means the model cannot learn directly how to
operate in that position. Instead, it would have to generalize and infer that digits act similarly across
all positions. We construct datasets with the number 5 excluded in 1st (LSB), 2nd, and 3rd (MSB)
positions, and train separate models on each of these datasets. We compare the resulting models
by evaluating overall accuracy on a test set of 10, 000 randomly sampled numbers, as well as their
accuracy specifically on samples with 5 in each position which we call exclusion accuracy.
The results presented in Table 4 indicate that the model is not as robust to excluding digits compared
to excluding numbers. However, it still achieves more than 66% accuracy on every test and maintains
an overall accuracy above 85%. Moreover, it appears that excluding a number in the least significant
position yields the worst performance. This can be attributed to the fact that learning addition in this
position is transferable to other positions since it is unaffected by carry-on operations. Failing to
learn addition in this position, however, will have a detrimental impact on other positions as well.
Table 4: Impact of excluding digits on addition task: We investigate whether GPT-based models can infer
addition on an excluded digit in a specific position from training data on other positions. We compare NanoGPT
models trained with and without an excluded digit and find that excluding digits is harder to learn but not entirely
impossible, with the worst performance observed when excluding the least significant digit.

                           Input                          “5” in the        “5” in the       “5” in the
        Excluded position format        Overall Acc    1st (LSB) digit      2nd digit     3rd (MSB) digit
                             Plain     92.65%(±2.53)    92.58%(±2.93)     93.59%(±2.57)     95.16%(±1.23)
          No exclusion
                            Reverse    99.87%(±0.24)    99.89%(±0.20)      99.95%(±0.1)     99.97%(±0.04)
                             Plain     93.87%(±1.64)     81.8%(±7.01)     94.04%(±1.45)     94.22%(±1.98)
         1st (LSB) digit
                            Reverse    98.00%(±1.30)    90.32%(±6.64)     98.22%(±1.27)     97.86%(±1.54)
                             Plain     92.53%(±1.87)    90.46%(±2.64)     83.87%(±3.47)     94.80%(±0.90)
            2nd digit
                            Reverse    97.91%(±1.47)    98.13%(±1.28)     91.4%(±6.13)      98.93%(±0.60)
                             Plain     90.85%(±2.77)    89.23%(±3.04)     90.94%(±2.78)     85.88%(±2.45)
        3rd (MSB) digit
                            Reverse    98.84%(±0.47)     98.7%(±0.54)     98.78%(±0.59)     94.47%(±1.99)


B.3     S UPPLEMENTARY E XPERIMENTS ON A DDITION

B.3.1     C OMMUTATIVITY IN A DDITION
We explore whether NanoGPT, trained with a plain data format on 10,000 training samples, captures
the commutativity property of addition. This inquiry involves testing the equation (A+B) = (B +A)
across 9,900 instances.
As shown in Table 5, out of these 9,900 test cases, 8,799 samples exhibit commutative behavior.
While a majority (8,700/8,799) of these instances are straightforward — the model correctly computes
both (A + B) and (B + A) — it is noteworthy that among 164 cases where both outcomes are
incorrect, 99 (60.3%) still preserve commutativity. This suggests a considerable, though imperfect,
understanding of commutativity post-full training.

Table 5: Commutativity analysis of NanoGPT on 3-digit addition, examining the validity of (A + B) = (B + A)
for 9,900 test examples.

 P(A + B = B + A, both correct) P(A + B and B + A both incorrect) P(A + B = B + A | both incorrect)
 0.878 (8,700 samples)                 0.016 (164 samples)                      0.603 (99/164 samples)



B.3.2     A DDITION I NVOLVING S IGNED N UMBERS
While our primary focus has been on adding positive numbers, we posit that these results can extend to
signed numbers, which effectively encompass both addition and subtraction operations. We conduct
a preliminary experiment, training the model on various signed combinations of two 3-digit numbers.
Figure 9 shows that training on signed numbers presents a more challenging task compared to training
on addition or subtraction on only positive numbers. Notably, test accuracy for addition involving
same-sign operands, (+, +) and (−, −), surpass those involving opposite-sign operands, (+, −) and


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(−, +). This observation aligns with the expectation that learning addition is relatively simpler than
learning subtraction.

                         100
                                                                                           100   Signed Addition with 20k examples
                             80                                                             95
         Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                           Test Accuracy (%)
                                                                                            90
                             60                                                             85
                                                                                            80
                             40
                                                                                            75
                                                       addition
                             20                        subtraction                          70
                                                       signed addition                      65
                             0                                                              60
                                  0 2.5k 5k 7.5k 10k 12.5k 15k 17.5k 20k                         +,+          +,-        -,+   -,-
                                       Number of train examples                                                  Sign pairs
Figure 9: Performance on training NanoGPT on addition of signed numbers. (Left) Training on addition and
subtraction tasks using only positive numbers up to 3 digits, contrasted with the signed addition task involving
various sign combinations. (Right) Performance of the model trained on signed addition with 20,000 training
examples, across different sign combinations in the test data.


B.3.3        P ERFORMANCE BASED ON D IFFERENT D IGIT L ENGTHS

We analyze the performance of NanoGPT models by segregating the test accuracy based on the digit
count of operands. In Table 6 and Table 7, rows and columns correspond to the digit count in the first
and second operands, respectively.
Notably, with the plain format, performance decreases with fewer digits in the operands, and an
asymmetry based on operand lengths is observed. We speculate that this asymmetry arises because,
despite efforts to ensure balanced sampling, combinations of small digits, such as (1, 3)-digit or
(2, 1)-digit pairs, are underrepresented in our training dataset.

                                         Table 6: Performance by digit length in plain format addition.

                                                                1-digit             2-digit         3-digit
                                                     1-digit    72.8%               42.2%           77.0%
                                                     2-digit    27.8%               60.0%           91.4%
                                                     3-digit    38.6%               61.2%           97.0%


In contrast, the reverse format result exhibits notably consistent performance across various digit
combinations, indicating near-perfect learning of addition by the model.

                                        Table 7: Performance by digit length in reverse format addition.

                                                               1-digit           2-digit               3-digit
                                                   1-digit     100.0%            99.8%                 99.0%
                                                   2-digit     96.4%             100.0%                100.0%
                                                   3-digit     94.0%             99.4%                 100.0%


B.4     T HE I MPORTANCE OF I NTERMEDIATE S TEP D ESIGN

In this section, we underscore the significance of meticulously designing the intermediate steps in
a Chain-of-Thought manner. Specifically, we investigate whether the enhanced sample efficiency
of NanoGPT in detailed scratchpad format arises from its longer length or from the breakdown of
intermediate steps into simpler components.


                                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Randomizing the intermediate steps To discern the impact of length, we modify the intermediate
steps, replacing them with either a uniform token “#” or random tokens within the vocabulary (see
examples in Figure 10).


                                                                                       100
                                                                                           80


                                                                       Test Accuracy (%)
                                                                                           60
                                                                                           40
                                                                                           20            vanilla scratchpad
                                                                                                         intermediate steps - "#"
                                                                                           0             intermediate steps - random
                                                                                             0 2.5k 5k 7.5k 10k 12.5k 15k 17.5k 20k
                                                                                                   Number of train examples

Figure 10: Replacing the intermediate steps with random characters. We ablate whether the sample efficiency
gain from the detailed scratchpad stems from the increased length in the format.


The results (Figure 10) indicate that the sample efficiency of the vanilla detailed scratchpad surpasses
the modified versions. This suggests that the advantage of detailed scratchpad format stems from the
breakdown into simpler functions rather than its increased length.


Subtraction - two different intermediate step design We further focus on the subtraction task and
conduct experiments to compare two different versions of the detailed scratchpad for this operation
(see examples in Figure 11). These trials shed light on the importance of decomposing the subtraction
task into simpler intermediate steps. Unlike addition, subtraction behaves differently depending on
whether the first operand (a) is greater than the second operand (b) or vice versa.
The first strategy (Version 1 in Figure 11) involves performing digit-wise subtraction starting from the
least significant bit (LSB) and considering borrows when necessary. However, this strategy produces
incorrect results when the first operand is smaller than the second operand. In such cases, we subtract
the number in the most significant bit (MSB) position multiplied by 10 to the power of (number
of digits in the output - 1) from the remaining digits in the output. An example illustrating this
approach is shown in Version 1, Case 2. Alternatively, we can adopt a more familiar strategy. If
the first operand is smaller than the second, we swap the operands and compute the negation of the
subtraction of the swapped operands: a − b = −(b − a) (referred to as Version 2).
The results in Figure 12 indicate that Version 2, which involves comparing two operands, performs
considerably worse than Version 1. In Version 1, each intermediate step only requires the simpler
1-digit subtraction, along with addition in the final result processing step. Upon analyzing the failure
cases of Version 2, we observe that the majority of errors stem from incorrectly identifying which of
the two operands is larger, while the intermediate steps are handled correctly. This finding underscores
the significance of breaking down arithmetic operations into simpler intermediate steps. Unless
otherwise specified, we use Version 1 in all detailed scratchpad experiments.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Detailed scratchpad formatting for different arithmetic tasks
  Examples of two variations of detailed scratchpad formatting for subtraction, considering the scenario
  where the first operand a is greater than the second operand b, and vice versa. In Version 1, a result
  processing step is included in the final stage to handle negative outputs. In Version 2, the operands are
  compared at the beginning, and if b is larger, their order is reversed.

  Prompt (Case 1. a − b ≥ 0) :
  Input:
  367-128
  Target:
                     Version 1.                                            Version 2.
  ...                                           ...
  <scratch>                                     <scratch>
  [3,6,7] has 3 digits.                         [3,6,7] has 3 digits.
  [1,2,8] has 3 digits.                         [1,2,8] has 3 digits.
  [3,6,7] - [1,2,8] , A=[] , C=0 , 7-8-0+10=9 , 367>=128 # comparison of two operands
   A->9 , C->-1                                 [3,6,7] - [1,2,8] , A=[] , C=0 , 7-8-0+10=9 ,
  [3,6] - [1,2] , A=[9] , C=-1 , 6-2-1=3 , A->3 A->9 , C->-1
   , C->0                                       [3,6] - [1,2] , A=[9] , C=-1 , 6-2-1=3 , A->3
  [3] - [1] , A=[3,9] , C=0 , 3-1-0=2 , A->2 ,   , C->0
  C->0                                          [3] - [1] , A=[3,9] , C=0 , 3-1-0=2 , A->2 ,
  [] - [] , A=[2,3,9]                           C->0
  200+39=239 , END # result processing          [] - [] , A=[2,3,9] , END
  </scratch>                                    </scratch>
  2 3 9                                         2 3 9

  Prompt (Case 2. a − b < 0) :
  Input:
  128-367
  Target:
                      Version 1.                                           Version 2.
  ...                                          ...
  <scratch>                                    <scratch>
  [1,2,8] has 3 digits.                        [1,2,8] has 3 digits.
  [3,6,7] has 3 digits.                        [3,6,7] has 3 digits.
  [1,2,8] - [3,6,7] , A=[] , C=0 , 8-7-0=1 , A 128<367 : 128-367=-(367-128) # comparison
  ->1 , C->0                                   [3,6,7] - [1,2,8] , A=[] , C=0 , 7-8-0+10=9 ,
  [1,2] - [3,6] , A=[1] , C=0 , 2-6-0+10=6 , A  A->9 , C->-1
  ->6 , C->-1                                  [3,6] - [1,2] , A=[9] , C=-1 , 6-2-1=3 , A->3
  [1] - [3] , A=[6,1] , C=-1 , 1-3-1=-3 , A->-3 , C->0
   , C->-1                                     [3] - [1] , A=[3,9] , C=0 , 3-1-0=2 , A->2 ,
  [] - [] , A=[-3,6,1]                         C->0
  -300+61=-239 , END # result processing       [] - [] , A=[2,3,9] , END
  </scratch>                                   </scratch>
  -2 3 9                                       -2 3 9



                 Figure 11: Two versions of detailed scratchpad formatting for subtraction.

B.5    T HE E FFECT OF N OISY I NPUTS ON ACCURACY

Noisy intermediate steps in the scratchpad data.            We further investigate the significance of
providing accurate intermediate steps in the scratchpad during the training process. While this was
inspired by the findings of Min et al. (2022), it is inherently different. Min et al. (2022) show that
using random labels in ICL demonstrations caused minimal degradation when compared to the gold
labels. However, those models were trained on gold labels and then evaluated on multiple downstream
tasks. In our setting, the model is trained and evaluated on a single arithmetic task. Further, the
final result(or label) is left untouched as the correct answer to the arithmetic operation. We only
replace the intermediate steps. The goal of this study is to verify whether the model actually learns to
reason using the given intermediate steps or merely uses the scratchpad to improve its expressivity.
We compare the performance of training with our simplified scratchpad formatting, which includes
accurate A (digit sum) and C (carry) information, with formatting that includes random A, random
C, or random A and C for each intermediate step, as depicted in Figure 1.
The results in Figure 13, demonstrate that the inclusion of noisy labels can impede sample efficiency.
However, with enough samples, the model ultimately achieves full accuracy. This suggests that while


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             100.0
                                                                          99.6% 100.0%
                                                              97.5
                                                              95.0


                                             Test Accuracy (%)
                                                              92.5
                                                              90.0                          89.9%
                                                              87.5
                                                              85.0
                                                              82.5
                                                                   80.5%
                                                              80.0 Plain Reverse (DS)Ver.1 (DS)Ver.2
                                                                      Data Formatting Methods
Figure 12: Comparison of performance among various data formatting approaches (plain, reverse, and two
versions of detailed scratchpad (DS)) for the subtraction task. The experiments were conducted on a NanoGPT
model trained on a dataset of 10,000 examples. Version 2, which incorporates operand comparison, exhibits
significantly lower performance compared to Version 1. This observation highlights the substantial impact of the
construction of intermediate steps on the model’s performance.


                          (a) Test accuracy on Addition                                                      (b) Test accuracy on Subtraction
                 100                                                                            100

                     80                                                                             80
 Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                Test Accuracy (%)
                     60                                                                             60

                     40                                                                             40
                                           correct A & C                                                                       correct A & C
                     20                    random A                                                 20                         random A
                                           random C                                                                            random C
                     0                     random A & C                                             0                          random A & C
                          2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000                                                0     2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000
                            Number of train examples                                                            Number of train examples
Figure 13: Comparison of training with simplified scratchpad formatting using correct A and C information with
formatting using random A/C and their effect on sample efficiency and accuracy. Results show that noisy labels
degrade sample efficiency, but with sufficient training data, the model eventually reaches full accuracy.



the model is capable of leveraging the information contained in the intermediate steps, it can also
gradually learn how to perform addition while disregarding the presence of noisy intermediate steps.


Model robustness to noise in the auto-regressive output.            In this analysis, we explore the
robustness of models trained on plain or reverse formatted data (without noise) when exposed to
noise during an auto-regressive generation process. In particular, we aim to unravel how much the
learned mapping of the i-th output relies on the operands and preceding tokens in the addition result,
given that transformer models generate tokens sequentially in an autoregressive manner, making them
prone to error propagation.
For this experiment, we focus on 3-digit addition. We train models on either plain or reverse format
data and evaluate the accuracy of next-token predictions when the output sequence contains noise.
Specifically, in the plain format setting, we expect a well-performing model to generate the correct
output tokens O3 , O2 , O1 sequentially, where O3 = C3 , O2 = C2 , O1 = C1 , and C3 C2 C1 represents
the correct answer. We consider two types of perturbation: (i) random perturbation, where we
modify the first two output tokens O3 O2 to random numbers different from C3 C2 , and (ii) precise
perturbation, where we perturb only the second output token O2 by 1. The second case is particularly
relevant since a common error case is where the model misses a digit by 1. We provide the model with
an expression of the form “A3 A2 A1 + B3 B2 B1 = O3 O2 ”, where O3 O2 can be either (i) a random
incorrect number, i.e., O3 O2 ̸= C3 C2 , or (ii) O2 = C2 ± 1 mod 10, and observe the next token
generated by the model. A corresponding process is deployed for the reverse format, introducing a
noisy sequence to models trained on reverse format data.


                                                                              22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To evaluate the performance, we define two accuracy criteria for O1 : exact accuracy, reckoning
O1 as accurate only when O1 = C1 , and relaxed accuracy, considering O1 correct if it deviates
from the original output C1 by at most 1. In other words, C1 = O1 , C1 = O1 + 1 mod 10 or
C1 = O1 − 1 mod 10.

Table 8: Prediction accuracy for the third digit output under different types of noise in the preceding output
tokens. Random perturbation, applies random flips whereas precise perturbation shifts the preceding output
tokens by 1. Relaxed accuracy, allows for a ±1 deviation from the true output whereas Exact accuracy is strict.
Reverse consistently outputs a number that is at most 1 different from the true output, even in the presence of
noise. The plain format has high exact accuracy in the presence of precise perturbation, as the noise in the output
token has a lower impact on predicting the next token, which is of lower significance. However, with completely
random noise, the plain format shows poor performance, suggesting a strong dependence on all digits. (See
Lemma 1 and 2).


                       Perturbation Type           Random                   Precise
                                               Plain   Reverse         Plain     Reverse
                       Exact Acc             49.88%      81.26%      99.85%      90.47%
                       Relaxed Acc           61.55%       100%        100%       100%

The results presented in Table 8 reveal intriguing findings. We observe that the reverse format
consistently outputs a result that deviates by no more than 1 from the true answer, regardless
of whether the preceding outputs O3 O2 are subjected to random or precise perturbation. This
consistency can be explained by Lemma 2, indicating that the reverse format only requires learning
a straightforward function of digit-wise addition for each corresponding position, along with the
carry-on (0 or 1). Therefore, even with noise in the preceding tokens, the model accurately performs
digit-wise addition, albeit with occasional carry-on prediction errors. With an exact accuracy of
81.26% even in the presence of random perturbation, the reverse format demonstrates the model’s
ability to rely less on the preceding output tokens, indicating a robust learned output mapping.
On the contrary, models using the plain format have to decipher a more intricate function drawing
from all digits within the sequence, as described by Lemma 1. Given that in addition, carry operations
transition from right to left (i.e., least to most significant digit), the introduction of precise perturbation
on preceding output tokens, which possess higher significance, has a minor impact on the output
(which has less significance). As a result, models trained using the plain format attain an exact
accuracy rate of 99.85% and a relaxed accuracy of 100% for cases involving precise perturbation.
Interestingly, under purely random perturbation, the plain format struggles, leading to a reduced
relaxed accuracy of 61.55% and exact accuracy of 49.88%. This suggests that the output mapping
learned by the plain format is not merely a function of the two operands but rather enmeshed in
complex dependencies on preceding output tokens.

B.6    A NALYZING THE RESULTS ON S INE /S QRT

Since sine and sqrt are arguably more complicated functions than the remaining arithmetic tasks, we
decided to more carefully analyze their performance. As shown in Figure 14, sin shows excellent
performance across all data formats around sin(x) = 0. We conjecture that this is because sin(x) ≈ x
for x ≈ 0, which is easy to learn. We also note that accuracy once again improves close to ±1
potentially for similar reasons.


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                   (a) Test accuracy on Sine                                             (b) Test accuracy on Square root
                                                 Sin                                                                      Sqrt
                       100                                                                         100

                           80                                                                      80

       Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                               Test Accuracy (%)
                                                             plain, =0                                                                    plain, =0
                           60                                ar, =0                                60                                     CoT, =0
                                                             plain, =5e-4                                                                 plain, =5e-4
                           40                                ar, =5e-4                             40                                     CoT, =5e-4

                           20                                                                      20

                                1.00 0.75 0.50 0.250.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                              1.0     1.5      2.0       2.5         3.0
                                              true y value                                                             true y value

Figure 14: Error analysis of sine and square root functions, considering varying error tolerance (eps) thresholds
to determine correct output. The sine function demonstrates excellent performance across all data formats,
particularly around sin(x) = 0, where sin(x) ≈ x for x ≈ 0. Additionally, we observe improved accuracy near
±1.


C     E XTENDING TO L ONGER D IGIT A DDITION

In this section, we extend our experiments beyond 3-digit addition and explore longer-digit settings,
ranging up to 10 digits. Our aim is to investigate whether our previous findings regarding the sample
efficiency of reverse and scratchpad formats hold true for larger numbers of digits.
We begin by observing that the phase transition behavior observed in previous sections also applies to
longer-digit addition. Furthermore, we discover that the advantages of using reverse and scratchpad
formats become even more pronounced as the number of digits increases. Next, we examine the
number of training samples required to learn k + 1 digit addition when fine-tuning a pretrained
model trained on k digit addition. We find that while the number of samples needed to further learn
k + 1 digit addition remains relatively consistent for reverse and scratchpad formats, the plain format
requires an increasing number of samples.

Experimental setup and data generation. To explore the performance of the model in higher-digit
addition scenarios, we extend the experimental setup described in Section 3. We adopt a balanced
sampling approach for training data with D digits, ensuring an equal number d of all combinations of
digits for both operands as follows:
We begin by sampling all 100-digit additions. For the remaining number of digits, ranging from
2 to D, we generate addition examples of the form “A + B = C”. The two operands, A and B,
are randomly sampled d = ⌊(N − 100)/(D(D + 1)/2 − 1)⌋ times for every D, where N is the
total number of training examples. Operand A is sampled between [10k1 −1 , 10k1 − 1] and operand
B is sampled between [10k2 −1 , 10k2 − 1], for all 1 ≤ k1 ≤ k2 ≤ D, excluding the case where
k1 = k2 = 1. After sampling the two operands, we randomly interchange them to cover cases where
A has fewer digits than B and vice versa.


C.1    T RAINING FROM R ANDOM I NITIALIZATION

We repeat the experiment from Section 3 on nanoGPT with longer digits. The results shown in
Figure 15 demonstrate a similar behavior to the findings observed in Figure 4a for 3-digit addition.
This indicates that our previous observations generalize to longer sequence lengths. Notably, the
performance gap between the modified formats (reverse, simplified scratchpad, and detailed scratch-
pad) and the plain format becomes even more significant in the context of higher digits. While the
plain format requires an increasing number of training examples to learn higher-digit additions, the
reverse or scratchpad formats exhibit a more consistent requirement in terms of the number of training
examples.
This prompts us to explore the differences between each format in a fine-tuning setting. Specifically,
we ask whether a model trained on reverse or scratchpad-formatted k digit addition data would find it
easier to learn k + 1 digit addition compared to a model trained with plain format addition.


                                                                              24
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              (a) 5-digit Addition                                                           (b) 7-digit Addition                                            (c) 10-digit Addition
                100                                                                             100                                                             100

Test Accuracy (%)   80                                                                              80                                                              80


                                                                                Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                Test Accuracy (%)
                    60                                                                              60                                                              60
                    40                   plain                                                      40                  plain                                       40                  plain
                    20                   reverse                                                    20                  reverse                                     20                  reverse
                                         simplified scratchpad                                                          simplified scratchpad                                           simplified scratchpad
                    0                    detailed scratchpad                                        0                   detailed scratchpad                          0                  detailed scratchpad
                         0       25k     50k       75k      100k                                         0      50k    100k 150k 200k                                    0     100k 200k 300k 400k 500k
                               Number of train examples                                                       Number of train examples                                         Number of train examples
  Figure 15: Comparison of sample efficiency for 5, 7 and 10-digit additions: performance of models trained with
  varying numbers of addition samples on each data format. The plain format data requires an increasing number
  of training examples for higher digits, while the number of samples required for other methods remains relatively
  consistent.


   C.2                       F INE -T UNING FROM P RETRAINED M ODELS

  In this section, we investigate the generalization ability of transformer models, specifically focusing
  on their capacity to learn higher-digit additions based on their knowledge of lower-digit additions.
  Additionally, we explore how the choice of data format affects the number of samples required to
  learn higher-digit additions.

  Forgetting of k-digit addition when trained on k + 1-digit addition.
 We begin by fine-tuning a model that was initially trained on 3-digit addition. We fine-tune this
 model using 4-digit addition training data, with each data format being used separately. To mitigate
 the “catastrophic forgetting” phenomenon, we experiment with different learning rates, gradually
 reducing the magnitude. We continue this process until the learning rate becomes too small for the
 model to effectively learn 4-digit addition.
                                                                                plain (lr=1e-4)                                simple (lr=1e-5)
                                                                                reverse (lr=5e-6)                              detailed (lr=1e-6)
                                                                                 1-digit accuracy                              2-digit accuracy
                                                               100
                                                                 1.0
                                                 Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                     50
                                                                      0.8



                                                                       0
                                                                      0.6

                                                                                   3-digit accuracy                            4-digit accuracy
                                                               100
                                                                 0.4


                                                                     50
                                                                      0.2


                                                                       0
                                                                      0.0
                                                                         0.00                            5000
                                                                                                         0.2       10000
                                                                                                                   0.4   0 0.6        5000
                                                                                                                                        0.8                         10000
                                                                                                                                                                       1.0

                                                                                                          Number of Iterations
  Figure 16: Accuracy of 1 to 4-digit additions during fine-tuning of a pretrained model on 3-digit additions using
  different data formats. The model is fine-tuned using only 4-digit addition data with corresponding formats. We
  observe that the plain format ‘forgets’ 1 to 3-digit additions entirely when learning 4-digit addition. In contrast,
  the detailed scratchpad method successfully learns 4-digit addition while maintaining high performance on 1 to
  3-digit additions.

  The results depicted in Figure 16 reveal interesting insights about the fine-tuning process. When
  training the model using the plain format with only 4-digit addition data, there is an immediate drop
  in accuracy for 1 to 3 digit additions. This indicates that the model experiences significant forgetting
  of previously learned additions. In contrast, the reverse and scratchpad methods exhibit a more
  favorable behavior. The model trained with these methods does not completely forget 1 or 2 digit
  additions while learning 4-digit addition. Remarkably, the detailed scratchpad method stands out by
  enabling the model to learn 4-digit addition without compromising its performance on 1 to 3 digit


                                                                                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


additions. Although there is a slight decrease in performance for 3-digit additions initially, the model
quickly recovers and picks up the knowledge again as it trains on 4-digit additions.
This result can be explained by the hypothesis that learning a k + 1 digit addition from a k-digit
model is an incremental process for the detailed scratchpad method. The model already has a solid
foundation in understanding the intermediate steps involved in addition, so it only needs to adapt to
longer sequences. In contrast, for the plain format, learning higher-digit additions requires the model
to establish new mappings to generate correct outputs, which is a more challenging task.

Sample efficiency of fine-tuning k-digit models with k + 1-digit examples. Building upon our
previous findings that fine-tuning a model solely on k + 1-digit addition leads to a loss in performance
for k-digit addition, we modify our approach to prevent the loss of performance in the k-digit addition
task. Instead of training solely on k + 1-digit examples, we construct a dataset that includes all
addition tasks from 1-digit to k + 1-digit, with the method described in the previous section. By
doing so, we aim to maintain the performance of 1 to k-digit addition while enabling the model to
learn k + 1-digit addition during fine-tuning.
In this experiment, we investigate the number of k + 1-digit training examples required for the model
to effectively learn k + 1-digit addition when fine-tuning a pretrained model on k-digit addition. It is
important to note that this setting differs from the previous section (Section C.1), where we focused
on training models from random initialization. Here, we specifically focus on the fine-tuning process.
We fine-tune individual models pretrained on each data format (using k-digit addition) and further
train them using the same data format on a new dataset that includes all addition examples from
1-digit to k + 1-digit.

                                                  (a) Plain                                                            (b) Reverse
                         100                                                                     100
                             80                                                                      80
                                                                                 Test Accuracy (%)
         Test Accuracy (%)


                             60                                                                      60
                             40                                                                      40
                                                                      3-digit                                                           3-digit
                             20                                       4-digit                        20                                 4-digit
                                                                      6-digit                                                           6-digit
                              0                                       8-digit                        0                                  8-digit
                                      0    10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000                            0       1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
                                      Number of k+1 digit train examples                                      Number of k+1 digit train examples
                                          (c) Simplified Scratchpad                                               (d) Detailed Scratchpad
                         100                                                                     100
                             80                                                                      80
         Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                 Test Accuracy (%)


                             60                                                                      60
                             40                                                                      40
                                                                     3-digit                                                             3-digit
                             20                                      4-digit                         20                                  4-digit
                                                                     6-digit                                                             6-digit
                             0                                       8-digit                          0                                  8-digit
                                  0        1000    2000   3000    4000 5000                                   0    500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
                                      Number of k+1 digit train examples                                      Number of k+1 digit train examples
Figure 17: Fine-tuning performance of pretrained k-digit models using varying numbers of k + 1-digit examples,
with corresponding data formats. The plain format requires an increasing number of k + 1-digit examples as the
number of digits (k + 1) increases. In contrast, the modified formats (reverse, scratchpad) exhibit consistent
performance across different numbers of digits, requiring a relatively consistent number of examples to learn the
additional digit.
The results in Figure 17 demonstrate the number of k + 1-digit addition samples required for a
pretrained model capable of performing k-digit addition to learn the addition of k + 1 digits. The
findings reveal that modified formats (reverse, scratchpad) require a relatively small number of
samples (between 1000 and 5000) to learn the addition of an extra digit. In contrast, the plain format


                                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


necessitates a significantly larger number of training examples, with the requirement increasing as
the number of digits grows.
This observation aligns with our previously established Lemma 2 and Lemma 1, which suggest that
learning higher-digit addition in the reverse format involves processing the i-th digit of the operands
and carrying from the previous position. This operation remains consistent regardless of the number
of digits being added. As a result, the model primarily needs to learn how to handle longer digits to
perform addition effectively.
In contrast, the plain addition format requires the model to learn a more complex function that
incorporates all digits from both operands. As the number of digits increases, the complexity of
this function grows as well. This highlights the greater difficulty faced by the plain format in
accommodating additions with a larger number of digits.

C.3    I MPACT OF F ORMATS ON F INE -T UNING

We delve deeper into the impact of different formats on the fine-tuning process. Specifically, we
investigate whether training a model in one format helps in learning addition in another format,
and vice versa. To conduct this analysis, we begin with a model trained on each data format using
3-digit addition examples. We then individually fine-tune these pretrained models using different
data formats, on 4-digit addition examples.
                                                                         plain            simple         random init
The results depicted in Figure 18 highlight some                         reverse          detailed
interesting findings. Firstly, we observe that a                        finetuning with plain finetuning with reverse
model trained with the same format as the fine-                   100
                                                                    1.0

tuning format exhibits faster learning in terms
                                                    Test Accuracy (%)


of the number of iterations. For instance, train-                       50
                                                                         0.8
ing a model with the plain format outperforms
training a model pretrained with scratchpad for-
                                                                          0
                                                                         0.6
mats. This suggests that the model benefits from                               finetuning with simple finetuning with detailed
the consistency and familiarity provided by the                   100
                                                                    0.4
same format throughout the training process.
Additionally, we notice that fine-tuning a de-        50
                                                       0.2
tailed scratchpad pretrained model on other for-
mats proves to be more challenging. This ob-            00.0
                                                       0.0
servation can be attributed to the need for the            0      5000
                                                                  0.2      10000
                                                                           0.4     0 0.6 50000.8    10000
                                                                                                       1.0

model to “unlearn” the intricacies of the ver-                      Number of Iterations
bose detailed scratchpad format and adapt to Figure 18: Performance of fine-tuning a 3-digit model
the new format. For example, the plain format trained on different data formats (plain, reverse, simple
does not involve the use of alphabet characters scratchpad, detailed scratchpad, and random initializa-
in the data, so a model pretrained with the plain tion) individually with different data formats of 4-digit
format would have a low probability of gener- addition. The results demonstrate that fine-tuning yields
ating alphabetic outputs. In contrast, a detailed the best performance when the pretrained model and the
scratchpad pretrained model would have encoun- fine-tuning format are consistent. Notably, fine-tuning
tered various alphabets and may have a tendency a detailed scratchpad format model shows suboptimal
to output them. Therefore, adjusting to a new performance. We hypothesize that this is due to the need
format requires additional effort for the model for the model to “unlearn” the rigid and verbose format
                                                   and adapt to the new format.
to “unlearn” the patterns specific to the previous
format and effectively learn the new format it is being trained on.
These findings highlight the importance of considering format consistency during the fine-tuning
process, as it can impact the efficiency and effectiveness of the learning process. We will delve further
into this topic in the upcoming section 8, where we fine-tune pretrained GPT-3 models. Notably, we
observe that fine-tuning with reverse or simplified scratchpad formats actually yields worse results
compared to fine-tuning with plain formats. For a detailed exploration of these observations, please
refer to the forthcoming section.


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     T EACHING A RITHMETIC O PERATIONS B EYOND A DDITION

While this study has a primary focus on the addition operation and aims to comprehend the signifi-
cance of data sampling and formatting, its findings are applicable beyond the realm of addition alone.
In this section, we expand our examination to include other arithmetic operations, thus demonstrating
the broader applicability of our insights. We consider a mix of arithmetic tasks, including binary
operations like subtraction and multiplication, and unary operations such as sine and square root.
Each operation entails its unique challenges and intricacies. For instance, subtraction introduces the
concept of negative numbers, multiplication can generate significantly longer outputs, and sine and
square root functions entail computations involving floating-point numbers, which are considered up
to four digits of precision in our work.
We acknowledge that while our examination is detailed, it does not encompass all the fundamental
arithmetic operations or the entire scope of floating-point arithmetic. Specifically, our focus is primar-
ily on integer arithmetic for binary operations, considering a limited length of digits. Additionally,
for unary operations, we confine ourselves to a restricted number of digits below the decimal point.
In Section D.1, we delve into each arithmetic operation individually, exploring the impact of data
formatting and determining the relevancy of our insights across disparate tasks. Further, in Section D.2,
we perform an analysis of joint training across all five tasks, investigating the potential performance
implications for each individual task.

D.1    E XTENDED A RITHMETIC O PERATIONS

In order to extend our analysis to arithmetic operations beyond addition, we consider the following
tasks:

Subtraction (−). We consider subtraction of positive numbers up to 3 digits, written as
A3 A2 A1 − B3 B2 B1 = C3 C2 C1 in (i) plain formatting, and $A3 A2 A1 − B3 B2 B1 = C1 C2 C3 $ in (ii)
reverse formatting. As with addition, scratchpad-based methods (iii, iv), present the intermediate steps
of digit-wise subtraction and handling of carry-ons. These steps proceed from the least significant
bit (LSB) to the most significant bit (MSB). If the final result after computing all the digit-wise
subtractions is negative, we subtract the number in the most significant bit (MSB) position multiplied
by 10 to the power of (number of digits in the output - 1) from the remaining digits in the output. In
Section B.4, we present an alternative version of the detailed scratchpad formatting for subtraction.

Multiplication (×). We consider multiplication of positive numbers up to 2-digits. (i) Plain
formatting examples are formatted as A2 A1 ∗ B2 B1 = C4 C3 C2 C1 , while (ii) reverse formatting is
formatted as $A2 A1 ∗ B2 B1 = C1 C2 C3 C4 $. The (iv) detailed scratchpad method simplifies each
intermediate step by conducting a series of multiplications between the first operand and each digit
of the second operand, starting from the least significant bit (LSB) and moving toward the most
significant bit (MSB). For each step, we multiply the result by an exponentiation of 10 corresponding
to the relative digit position.

Sine (sin ). We consider decimal numbers within the range [−π/2, π/2], truncated to 4-digit
precision. (i) Plain formatting examples are formatted as sin(A0 .A1 A2 A3 A4 ) = B0 .B1 B2 B3 B4 .
For (iv) detailed scratchpad method, we include the Taylor series expansion steps for sine, which
                                  1 3     1 5     1 7
is represented as sin(x) = x − 3!  x + 5!   x − 7!  x + · · · . These intermediate steps involve
exponentiation, which may not be any easier to compute than the sine operation itself.
                √
Square Root ( ). We consider decimal numbers within [1, 10), truncated to 4-digits of precision
with the format, written as sqrt(A0 .A1 A2 A3 A4 ) = B0 .B1 B2 B3 B4 for (i) plain formatting. For (iv)
detailed scratchpad method, we enumerate each step of Newton’s method to compute the square root
function. The iterative formula is given by xn = 21 (xn−1 + xn−1   x
                                                                      ), where x0 is initialized as the
floor of the square root value of the operand x. These intermediate steps involve a division operation,
which can be as complex as the square root operation itself.
For evaluation of sine and square root, we classify the result yˆi as correct if the absolute difference
between yˆi and the ground truth value yi is less than or equal to a predefined threshold ϵ ≥ 0.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For each arithmetic task, we explore both the plain format and the detailed scratchpad format. The
detailed scratchpad formatting for each task is illustrated in Figure 19 and Appendix J. For subtraction,
the process involves breaking down the operation into intermediate steps of digit-wise subtraction,
including carry-ons when necessary. Unlike addition, subtraction requires an additional step to
handle cases where the first operand is smaller than the second. Further details on the detailed
scratchpad for subtraction can be found in Section B.4. For multiplication, each intermediate step
carries out a 2-digit × 1-digit multiplication between the first operand and each separate digit of the
second operand. For sine and square root, we utilize a sequence of iterative approximations instead
of algorithmic explanations. Specifically, Taylor’s series expansion steps for sine and Newton’s
method steps for square root are used. It is important to note that while addition, subtraction, and
multiplication are broken down into simpler operations at each step, CoT for sine and square root
functions requires intermediate steps involving operations like exponentiation or division, which
might not be inherently simpler.

     Detailed scratchpad formatting for different arithmetic tasks
  Examples of detailed scratchpad formatting for different arithmetic
  tasks:
  (1) Subtraction - includes borrows for intermediate steps, (2)
  Multiplication - decomposes the second operand for 2-digit × 1-digit
  multiplication at each step, (3) Sine - utilizes Taylor series
  expansion, and (4) Square root - employs Newton’s method.

                    Subtraction                                               Sine
  Input:                                             Input:
  128-367                                            sin(1.5707)
  Target:                                            Target:
  <scratch>                                          <scratch>
  [1,2,8] has 3 digits.                              x_0=1.5707
  [3,6,7] has 3 digits.                              x_1: x_0 - 1/3! * (x^3) , x_1=0.9247
  [1,2,8] - [3,6,7] , A=[] , C=0 , 8-7-0=1 ,         x_2: x_1 + 1/5! * (x^5) , x_2=1.0043
  A->1 , C->0                                        x_3: x_2 - 1/7! * (x^7) , x_3=0.9996
  [1,2] - [3,6] , A=[1] , C=0 , 2-6-0+10=6 ,         x_4: x_3 + 1/9! * (x^9) , x_4=0.9997 , END
  A->6 , C->-1                                       </scratch>
  [1] - [3] , A=[6,1] , C=-1 , 1-3-1=-3 , A          0.9997
  ->-3 , C->-1
  [] - [] , A=[-3,6,1]
  -300+61=-239 , END
  </scratch>
  -2 3 9

                   Multiplication                                             Sqrt
  Input:                                             Input:
  12*36                                              sqrt(2.7174)
  Target:                                            Target:
  <scratch>                                          <scratch>
  [1,2] has 2 digits.                                x_0=1
  [3,6] has 2 digits.                                x_1: 1/2*(1+2.7175/1)=1.8587, x_1=1.8587
  [1,2] * 6 , A=[7,2] , k=1 , B=[7,2] , C            x_2: 1/2*(1.8587+2.7175/1.8587)=1.6603, x_2
  =0+72=72                                           =1.6603
  [1,2] * 3 , A=[3,6] , k=10 , B=[3,6,0] , C         x_3: 1/2*(1.6603+2.7175/1.6603)=1.6485, x_3
  =72+360=432 , END                                  =1.6485
  </scratch>                                         x_4: 1/2*(1.6485+2.7175/1.6485)=1.6484, x_4
  4 3 2                                              =1.6484 , END
                                                     </scratch>
                                                     0.6484



Figure 19: Examples of the detailed scratchpad format for different arithmetic tasks such as subtraction, sine,
multiplication, and square root.

The results depicted in Figure 20 indicate that similar to the findings of addition, the detailed
scratchpad format significantly improves performance over plain or reverse formats and yields
efficient results even with few samples for subtraction and multiplication tasks. Interestingly, we
find reverse is not particularly effective in multiplication. On the other hand, the detailed scratchpad
                                                    √
format exhibits reduced efficiency for sin and          compared to other operations (+, −, ×). This


                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        (a) Subtraction                                                (b) Multiplication
                       100                                                              100

                           80                                                               80

       Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                        Test Accuracy (%)
                           60                                                               60                      plain
                                                                                                                    reverse
                           40                                                               40                      detailed scratchpad

                           20                   plain                                       20
                                                reverse
                           0                    detailed scratchpad
                                                                                             0
                             0 2.5k 5k 7.5k 10k 12.5k 15k 17.5k 20k                              1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
                                      Number of train examples                                         Number of train examples
                                           (c) Sine                                                     (d) Square Root
                       100                                                              100

                           80                                                               80
       Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                        Test Accuracy (%)
                           60                                                               60
                                                     plain, =0                                                        plain, =0
                           40                        plain, =5e-4                           40                        plain, =5e-4
                                                     plain, =5e-3                                                     plain, =5e-3
                                                     detailed, =0                                                     detailed, =0
                           20                        detailed, =5e-4                        20                        detailed, =5e-4
                                                     detailed, =5e-3                                                  detailed, =5e-3
                           0                                                                0
                                0   5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k                               0   5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k
                                      Number of train examples                                         Number of train examples
Figure 20: Performance of 3−digit subtraction, 2−digit multiplication, 4−digit precision sine and square
root with varying data formats. As with addition, reverse always produces improved sample complexity and
performance for all operations. For sine and square root, scratchpad formatting provides limited improvement.
This discrepancy can be attributed to the complexity of the intermediate steps involved in the detailed scratchpad.


discrepancy can be traced back to the complexity of the intermediate steps involved in the detailed
scratchpad. While addition, subtraction, and multiplication are decomposed into simpler functions,
sine and square root operations involve more intricate operations. For a broader analysis of the error
profile, see Appendix B.6.

D.2      J OINTLY T RAINING ON A LL F IVE A RITHMETIC TASKS

So far, we only considered the problem of learning different arithmetic operations individually. In
this section, we study the effect of jointly training on all five arithmetic tasks - addition, subtrac-
tion, multiplication, sine, and square root.√ We construct a single train dataset incorporating all
                   +     −        ×        sin
task Dtrain = {Dtrain , Dtrain , Dtrain , Dtrain , Dtrain }, and randomize the sequence of tasks in our train
samples. For example, a randomly chosen segment of the training data may exhibit a task order
                                 √
such as (+, −, sin .−, ×, ×, , ...). We consider 10, 000 training examples for each task of addition,
subtraction, sine, and square root and 3, 000 for multiplication.
The model’s performance, after training on our joint dataset Dtrain , is evaluated in both zero-shot and
few-shot settings. These results are also compared with the      √
                                                                     performance of models that were trained
                                   +     −      ×       sin
separately on each dataset (Dtrain , Dtrain , Dtrain , Dtrain , Dtrain ), identical to those used to construct
Dtrain . In the few-shot setting, each task is given examples from any of the five arithmetic tasks (not
necessarily related to the test task under consideration) or prompt texts, followed by test queries
specific to the task of interest. For further details on the few-shot prompting methods used, please
refer to Section E.
Table 9 shows that joint training significantly enhances the zero-shot performance for multiplication
and square root tasks, yet it slightly reduces the performance for subtraction. Generally, few-shot
prompting exhibits improved performance. Notably, the performance of few-shot prompting remains
consistent regardless of whether the exemplars provided are from unrelated tasks or are task-specific.
We propose that this consistency is due to our randomized task sequence during training, which


                                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


presents the model with numerous instances where one task directly follows another, thus simulating
few-shot prompting with different tasks. Furthermore, we observe that text prompting performs
similar to zero-shot. We conjecture that this is because the training data does not include text data
and the model has never encountered text and therefore, text prompting serves as a random prefix
attached to our test query.

Table 9: Performance of models trained individually and jointly on five arithmetic tasks. The threshold ϵ for sin
    √
and functions is set to 0. For the models trained jointly on all five tasks, we evaluate their performance in
both a zero-shot setting and a few-shot setting. In the few-shot setting, each task is presented with exemplars
from one of the five arithmetic tasks or prompted with text, followed by task-specific test queries. The results
show that few-shot prompting with any arithmetic operators (even unrelated to the test task) generally improves
performance. However, text prompting shows performance similar to the zero-shot setting.


                                                     Trained jointly on all 5 tasks
                     Trained on
                   individual task Zero-shot               Few-shot exemplar format
                                                     +       –       ×       sin    sqrt       text
             +         84.06           87.96       96.45    96.90   96.92    97.06   97.01    88.71
             –         79.97           72.83s      81.28    79.59   81.39    81.84   81.74    68.91
             ×          4.58           14.28       18.86    18.96   15.43    19.20   19.59    15.48
            sin        35.03           34.74       34.35    34.31   34.34    32.64   33.42    33.96
            sqrt       19.85           27.37       26.65    26.74   26.70    25.60   25.61    26.02


                                                       31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     M IXING T EXT WITH A RITHMETIC DATA
Until now, our focus was primarily on models trained exclusively on arithmetic tasks. However,
in practice, large language models (LLMs) utilize a combination of arithmetic and text data for
training. In this section, we broaden our scope by incorporating both addition samples and text into
our pretraining data. We then evaluate the trained models with various few-shot prompts to analyze if
the model is able to effectively identify the correct context.
Experimental Setup. We mix addition and text data in our experiment using the Shakespeare
dataset (Karpathy, 2015) that includes 1, 115, 394 tokens of text, 10, 000 plain addition examples
(120, 027 tokens) without the $ delimiter, and 3, 000 detailed scratchpad formatted addition examples
(813, 510 tokens). We fix the number of detailed scratchpad examples and plain addition examples
(3, 000 and 10, 000 respectively) while varying the number of each example type in the training pro-
cess. The Shakespeare text is segmented into dialogue chunks, with a random number of consecutive
plain addition data and detailed scratchpad data inserted between them. We use a character-level
tokenizer with a vocabulary size of 80, containing all characters present in the dataset, including
alphabets, digits, and certain symbols like +, = and \n.

E.1    F EW-S HOT P ROMPTING

Given the mixed nature (arithmetic and text) of our dataset, introducing relevant examples seems an
effective strategy to prime the model to generate the desired type of output. To assess the performance
of such few-shot (1/2/3−shot) prompting, we provide task-specific exemplars as illustrated in
Figure 21. Plain addition formatted exemplars are used for testing plain addition inputs, while
detailed scratchpad formatted exemplars are utilized for assessing performance on detailed scratchpad
formatted inputs. Additionally, we experiment with demonstrating text (see Appendix E.3. for details)
before querying addition (which we denote, Text-prompt). For each 1/2/3-shot and text prompting,
average performance is reported over a fixed set of exemplars. Standard deviations of these prompts
are denoted by shaded areas in the plots. The term “few-shot” refers to the reported mean of all
1/2/3-shot prompting results.


Figure 21: Few-shot prompting method. Few-shot prompting performance is evaluated by presenting relevant
exemplars of addition and detailed scratchpad formatted inputs. Each 1/2/3-shot prompting is tested on a fixed
five set of exemplars, and the accuracy is averaged over these evaluations.

Figure 22 shows that few-shot prompting directs the enhancement of performance, thereby allowing
plain addition to perform almost perfectly with 40,000 train samples. Intriguingly, performance
remains high on plain addition even with the inclusion of a text prompt, given a substantial number
of addition examples. We hypothesize that this is due to the structure of our mixed dataset where
addition examples are interspersed within Shakespeare data. With the incorporation of more addition
examples, instances where addition examples directly follow Shakespeare text increase, leading to a
decrease in potential inconsistencies when text content is present during addition test queries.

E.2    D ISENTANGLING THE EFFECT OF TEXT ON PROMPTING

To disentangle the effects of the textual content in the training data, we train a model strictly on plain
addition, utilizing an enlarged vocabulary that also includes alphabet characters, thereby enabling text


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         (a) Test accuracy on plain addition                                        (b) Test accuracy on detailed scratchpad
                      100                                                                           100
                                                                                                                                      Zero-shot
                          80                                                                            80                            1-shot
      Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                    Test Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                      2-shot
                                                                                                        60                            3-shot
                          60                                                                                                          text_prompt
                          40                       Zero-shot                                            40
                                                   1-shot
                                                   2-shot                                               20
                          20                       3-shot
                                                   text_prompt                                          0
                          00   5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k                                                   1000    2000   3000   4000    5000
                                Number of Addition Samples                                                   Number of Detailed Scratchpad Samples
Figure 22: Performance of NanoGPT model trained with the Shakespeare dataset, addition dataset in plain, and
detailed scratchpad format. The number of plain (left) and detailed scratchpad (right) formatted addition samples
are varied. Performance is evaluated on zero-shot, few-shot, and text prompts, with the shaded area representing
the standard deviation across various prompt exemplar sets. The results indicate a consistent enhancement in
model performance using few-shot prompting.


prompting. (Note that previous experimental settings on plain formatted additions used a vocabulary
size of 13, which only includes 10 numerals and 3 symbols - “+”,“=”,“\n”). We introduce a variant
of few-shot prompting, termed as noisy-prompt, which prompts the model with erroneous addition
exemplars, i.e., , A + B = C, where C ̸= A + B.
                                                            100

                                                                80
                                            Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                60
                                                                                         Zero-shot
                                                                40                       1-shot
                                                                                         2-shot
                                                                                         3-shot
                                                                20                       Noisy-prompt
                                                                                         Text-prompt
                                                                0 0   5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k
                                                                      Number of Addition Samples
Figure 23: Performance of NanoGPT model trained exclusively on plain addition, but with an extended
vocabulary including both addition and alphabets (vocabulary size = 80). Few-shot prompting, using both correct
addition examples (1, 2, 3-shot) and incorrect addition examples (noisy-prompt) leads to enhanced performance,
while the use of text prompts results in a degradation of performance when the model is trained solely on
addition.

Figure 23 shows that few-shot prompting contributes to performance enhancement even when the
model is confined to training on a single plain addition task. Even in the presence of noisy prompting,
simply providing the model with the A + B = C format yields performance nearly identical to few-
shot prompting, aligning with the result observed by Min et al. (2022). Conversely, we notice that
text prompts negatively influence performance when the model is trained only on addition. This
finding reinforces our earlier observation in Figure 6 that the advantageous impact of text prompts
originates from the combined text and addition data.

E.3     P ROMPTING WITH T EXT

To extend on the few-shot prompting experiments from Section D.2, we also evaluate the effect of
prompting the model with pure-text prompts. If few-shot prompting with addition samples improves
accuracy through in-context learning, we expect few-shot prompting with text to hurt accuracy since
the text exemplars are out-of-context. We use five different types of text exemplars: (i) Prompt1: a
short text prompt that is not present in the Shakespeare dataset, (ii) Prompt2: a short text prompt
extracted from within Shakespeare dataset, (iii) Prompt3: a longer form text prompt extracted from
within the Shakespeare dataset, (iv) Prompt4: a prompt that includes numbers, and (v) Prompt5: a


                                                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


long text prompt that is not present in the Shakespeare dataset. More details on the text prompts can
be found in Figure 24.

    Text prompts for few-shot experiments
  Examples of the different text prompts used in the few-shot
  experiment. Each exemplar is separated by ‘---’.

      Prompt 1. Short, ∈
                       / Shakespeare                   Prompt 3. Long, ∈ Shakespeare
  et tu brute                                 JULIET:
  ---                                         Romeo!
  hello, world                                ROMEO:
  ---                                         My dear?
  how are you doing?                          ---
  ---                                         MENENIUS:
  agi is coming                               This is good news:
  ---                                         I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia
  boom! stability                             Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians,
                                              ---
      Prompt 2. Short, ∈ Shakespeare          LADY ANNE:
                                              Foul devil, for God's sake, hence, and trouble us
  JULIET:                                      not;
  Romeo!                                      For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell,
  ---                                         Fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.
  All:                                        ---
  Resolved. resolved.                         BUCKINGHAM:
  ---                                         I fear he will.
  VOLUMNIA:                                   How now, Catesby, what says your lord?
  Why, I pray you?                            ---
  ---                                         CATESBY:
  CORIOLANUS:                                 Bad news, my lord: Ely is fled to Richmond;
  Nay! prithee, woman,--                      And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen,
  ---                                         Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
  MENENIUS:
  I mean, thy general.

                             Prompt 4. Has number, ∈
                                                   / Shakespeare
  I go 16-12
  That's the code to my heart, ah
  I go 1-6-1-2
  Star
  ---
  Like a river flows 17-23
  Surely to the sea 15-22
  Darling, so it goes 46-92
  Some things are meant to be
  ---
  I got my first real 6-string
  Bought it at the five and dime
  Played it 'til my fingers bled
  Was the summer of '69
  ---
  I think someday I might just 5-3-2-1 get a real job
  I spent half of my life 1-2-3 in a bus or on a flight
  I'm getting off 17-36-8-2 the road and in a real job
  ---
  Every time that 27-67-29 I look in the mirror
  All these lines on my 1-3-92-5 face getting clearer
  The past 45-5-3 is gone

                                 Prompt 5. Long, ∈
                                                 / Shakespeare
  Is this the real life? Is this just fantasy? Caught in a landside, no escape from reality.
  Open your eyes, look up to the skies and see.
  I'm just a poor boy, I need no sympathy. Because I'm easy come, easy go,
  Little high, little low,
  Any way the wind blows doesn't really matter to me, to me.
  ---
  It's my life
  And it's now or never
  I ain't gonna live forever
  I just want to live while I'm alive
  My heart is like an open highway
  Like Frankie said, I did it my way
  ---
  Destruction leads to a very rough road but it also breeds creation


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  And earthquakes are to a girl's guitar, they're just another good vibration
  And tidal waves couldn't save the world from Californication
  ---
  I want to stay
  But I need to go
  I want to be the best for you
  But I just don't know what to do
  'Cause baby, say I've cried for you
  The time we have spent together
  Riding through this English whether
  ---
  Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Vestibulum mattis in leo vel
  gravida.
  Pellentesque libero elit, scelerisque varius vehicula a, hendrerit et tellus.
  Proin convallis neque nisl, nec lobortis est scelerisque tincidunt.
  Nunc venenatis auctor urna.
  Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra.


                                            Figure 24: Text prompt exemplars for few-shot experiments.


                          (a) NanoGPT, Test accuracy on plain addition                        (b) GPT-2, Test accuracy on plain addition
                         100                                                                100

                             80                                                                 80
         Test Accuracy (%)


                             60
                                                                            Test Accuracy (%)   60
                                                           Zero-shot                                                          Zero-shot
                             40                            Prompt1                              40                            Prompt1
                                                           Prompt2                                                            Prompt2
                                                           Prompt3                                                            Prompt3
                             20                            Prompt4                              20                            Prompt4
                                                           Prompt5                                                            Prompt5
                             00      5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k                             00      5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k
                                       Number of Addition Samples                                         Number of Addition Samples
                  (c) NanoGPT, Test accuracy on detailed scratchpad                         (d) GPT-2, Test accuracy on detailed scratchpad
                         100                                                                100
                                                              Zero-shot
                             80                               Prompt1
         Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                            Test Accuracy (%)


                                                              Prompt2                           80
                             60                               Prompt3
                                                              Prompt4                           60
                                                              Prompt5                                                            Zero-shot
                             40                                                                                                  Prompt1
                                                                                                40                               Prompt2
                             20                                                                                                  Prompt3
                                                                                                                                 Prompt4
                              0                                                                 20                               Prompt5
                                     1000     2000   3000   4000    5000                                1000    2000   3000    4000 5000
                                  Number of Detailed Scratchpad Samples                              Number of Detailed Scratchpad Samples
Figure 25: Experiments on few-shot prompting with different text prompts: (i) Prompt1: short text not
in Shakespeare dataset (ii) Prompt2: short text within Shakespeare dataset (iii) Prompt3: long text within
Shakespeare dataset (iv) Prompt4: text with numbers (v) Prompt5: long text not in the Shakespeare dataset. Each
prompt (Prompt 1-5) consists of five distinct exemplars. The solid lines represent the mean performance across
the five exemplars, while the shaded area indicates the standard deviation. We observe that the effectiveness of
text prompts varies greatly depending on the exemplars used.
The results presented in Figure 25 show notable variations in evaluation accuracy for addition,
depending on the chosen text prompts. Longer text prompts (Prompt 5) typically result in a more
significant decline in performance. With the exception of NanoGPT trained on plain addition, the
result in Figure 26 indicates that employing text prompts followed by test addition queries tends to
have an adverse impact on the overall model performance, whereas incorporating relevant few-shot
exemplars (1/2/3-shot) is beneficial. This aligns well with our intuition on the benefits on in-context
learning.


                                                                           35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          (a) NanoGPT, Test accuracy on plain addition                        (b) GPT-2, Test accuracy on plain addition
                         100                                                                100

                             80                                                                 80

         Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                            Test Accuracy (%)
                             60                                                                 60

                             40                          Zero-shot                              40                           Zero-shot
                                                         1-shot                                                              1-shot
                                                         2-shot                                 20                           2-shot
                             20                          3-shot                                                              3-shot
                                                         text_prompt                                                         text_prompt
                             00                                                                 0
                                     5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k                                  0   5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k
                                       Number of Addition Samples                                         Number of Addition Samples
                  (c) NanoGPT, Test accuracy on detailed scratchpad                         (d) GPT-2, Test accuracy on detailed scratchpad
                    100                                                                     100
                                                       Zero-shot
                                                       1-shot                                90
                     80
         Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                            Test Accuracy (%)
                                                       2-shot                                80
                     60                                3-shot
                                                       text_prompt                           70
                     40                                                                      60                                 Zero-shot
                                                                                             50                                 1-shot
                             20                                                                                                 2-shot
                                                                                             40                                 3-shot
                              0                                                              30                                 text_prompt
                                     1000    2000   3000   4000     5000                           1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
                                  Number of Detailed Scratchpad Samples                              Number of Detailed Scratchpad Samples
Figure 26: Performance of NanoGPT and GPT-2 model trained with entire Shakespeare dataset and a varying
number of samples of plain addition, and addition with detailed scratchpad dataset. Performance is evaluated on
test prompts formatted as plain addition and detailed scratchpad. Few-shot experiments are based on an average
of 5 exemplars, while text prompts involve an average of 25 exemplars. The shaded area represents the standard
deviation. Our observations indicate that few-shot prompting consistently improves performance, whereas test
prompts generally have a negative impact.


F    F INE - TUNING , S CALING , AND P RETRAINING IN L ARGER M ODELS
This section focuses on bridging the gap between our experiments on NanoGPT and the more realistic
setting of larger language models like GPT-2 and GPT-3. We begin by comparing the performance of
NanoGPT and GPT-2 models when trained from random initialization. This comparison highlights
the improved performance achieved with the larger model scale, especially in the zero-shot setting.
Subsequently, we delve into the impact of tokenization methods and model pretraining in GPT-2
models. Our exploration reveals the crucial role of pretrained models and the consistent tokenization
of numbers (achieved by introducing spaces) during the training phase for arithmetic tasks. Building
on these findings, we proceed to fine-tune a pretrained GPT-3 model on various arithmetic tasks,
employing different data formats.

Comparing NanoGPT and GPT-2. To examine the impact of scale on arithmetic performance,
we explore a larger GPT-2 model with 85 million parameters, featuring twice as many self-attention
layers, heads, and embedding size compared to the previously used NanoGPT model. We train
the GPT-2 model from scratch using character-level tokenization, jointly on text and addition tasks,
adopting both plain and detailed scratchpad formats; an approach mirroring the setting in Section 7.
The results depicted in Figure 27 demonstrate that the larger model outperforms in both plain and
detailed scratchpad evaluations. For a comprehensive analysis of GPT-2, including few-shot learning
and the influence of text prompts, refer to Figure 25 and Figure 26.

Going from character-level tokenization to BPE. The transition to a GPT-2 setup necessitates
several modifications. Firstly, we shift to OpenAI’s Tiktoken BPE tokenizer, which is the default
tokenizer for the pretrained GPT-2 model, featuring a vocabulary size of 50,257. We also examined
two different training approaches: training the model from random initialization (scratch) and
fine-tuning the pretrained model sourced from Huggingface. To ensure uniform digit tokenization,


                                                                           36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          (a) Test acc. on plain addition                             (b) Test acc. on detailed scratchpad
                 100                                                         100.0
                                                                              99.5


                                                             Test Accuracy (%)
 Test Accuracy (%)
                     80                                                       99.0
                     60                                                       98.5
                                     NanoGPT, Zero-shot                       98.0                NanoGPT, Zero-shot
                     40              NanoGPT, Few-shot                        97.5                NanoGPT, Few-shot
                     20              GPT2, Zero-shot                          97.0                GPT2, Zero-shot
                                     GPT2, Few-Shot                           96.5                GPT2, Few-Shot
                      0 5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k                        96.0      1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
                          # Plain Addition Samples                                   # Detailed Scratchpad Samples
Figure 27: Performance of NanoGPT and GPT-2 model trained with entire Shakespeare dataset and a varying
number of samples of plain addition, and addition with detailed scratchpad dataset. Performance is evaluated on
test prompts formatted as plain addition and detailed scratchpad. Few-shot experiments are based on an average
of 5 exemplars, while text prompts involve an average of 25 exemplars. The shaded area represents the standard
deviation. Our observations indicate that few-shot prompting consistently improves performance, whereas test
prompts generally have a negative impact.



alterations were made in data formatting to include spaces between numbers. This change aims to
circumvent potential inconsistent tokenization of numbers while utilizing the Tiktoken tokenizer.
Figure 7 shows that GPT-2 demonstrates high performance in addition tasks with both character-level
tokenization and Tiktoken with spaces between digits. This aligns with the results by Wallace et al.
(2019), suggesting that character-level tokenization exhibits stronger numeracy capabilities compared
to a word or sub-word methods. Furthermore, comparing the models trained from scratch and the
models trained from the pretrained model, we observe that fine-tuning a pretrained model results in
better performance compared to training a model from scratch.

GPT-3 experiments: Supervised fine-tuning. We extend our experiments to verify if our observa-
tions hold while fine-tuning larger pre-trained models. In the following, we consider three GPT-3
variants: Ada, Curie, and Davinci. Note that since we perform fine-tuning using the OpenAI APIs, by
default only the completions are loss generating tokens. Therefore, these experiments are slightly
different when compared to the previous settings. We fine-tune these models using the same four
data formatting methods as our NanoGPT experiments: (i) plain formatting, (ii) reverse formatting,
(iii) simplified scratchpad, and (iv) detailed scratchpad. These formats are identical to those from our
NanoGPT experiments except for one aspect. We introduce spaces between numbers in plain and
reverse formatting to ensure consistent tokenization.
Due to budget constraints, all experiments were conducted using a fine-tuning dataset of 1, 000
examples, and models were trained for 4 epochs. Performance evaluation was carried out on 1, 000
examples that were disjoint from the training dataset. Note that this training scale is significantly
smaller than our experiments on NanoGPT, which employed 10, 000 training examples for 5, 000
iterations, with evaluations conducted on 10, 000 test examples. However, given these models’
extensive pretraining on large data corpora, this scale can be deemed rational.
The results for addition and subtraction tasks are presented in Table 2 and Table 10, respectively. We
observed that initiating with a pretrained GPT-3 model significantly improves performance compared
to training NanoGPT or GPT-2 models from random initialization with only 1000 samples. This
indicates the utility of leveraging pretrained models for improved arithmetic performance. Interest-
ingly, while reverse formatting and simplified scratchpad formats improve addition performance,
they adversely affect subtraction performance. This observation is consistent with our earlier finding
depicted in Figure 18, wherein transitioning from one data format to another often results in lower
performance compared to initiating training from random initialization. We postulate that this discrep-
ancy may be due to the pretrained GPT-3 model’s requirement to adapt to the reversed approach and
“unlearn” its knowledge of plain formatting arithmetic, thereby introducing additional complexity. On


                                                            37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the other hand, the detailed scratchpad method achieves excellent performance, albeit with increased
training and inference costs due to higher token requirements.

Table 10: Evaluation of subtraction performance for fine-tuned GPT-3 models: Davinci, Curie, and Ada. In each
case, the model is finetuned on 1000 samples of addition in the corresponding format.

         GPT-3 Model Zero-shot       Plain     Reverse Simplified Scratchpad Detailed Scratchpad
           Davinci         0.1%      84.8%     66.0%           15.4%                    99.5%
            Curie          0.1%      24.1%       6%            3.8%                     92.5%
             Ada           0.0%       3.7%      2.6%            3.4%                    81.5%


Table 11: Evaluation of sine and square root performance for fine-tuned GPT-3 models: Davinci, Curie, and Ada.
In each case, the model is finetuned on 1000 samples of addition in the corresponding format.

                                            Sine                                 Square Root
 GPT-3 Model     eps   Zero-shot    Plain     Detailed Scratchpad Zero-shot     Plain    Detailed Scratchpad
                 0        0%       11.0%            10.3%              0%       0.7%             4.6%
    Davinci     5e-4      0%       35.9%            29.7%              0%       7.5%            17.2%
                5e-3     0.4%      85.5%            72.8%              0%       59%             60.5%
                 0       0.0%      8.6%              1.2%            0.0%       0.7%            2.1%
     Curie      5e-4     0.4%      32.7%             5.4%            0.1%       6.5%            6.0%
                5e-3     0.9%      80.8%             15%              0%       52.7%            30.2%
                 0       0.0%      5.8%              4.3%            0.0%       0.3%             2.7%
     Ada        5e-4     0.0%      21.4%             9.1%            0.0%       3.8%            11.9%
                5e-3     0.3%      67.8%            25.2%            0.0%      32.2%            45.8%


For the more complex sine and square root tasks as shown in Table 11, we found that training with
only 1000 samples is insufficient to generate exact answers (eps=0). The GPT-3 model, fine-tuned
with 1,000 samples, performs worse than the NanoGPT model trained with 10,000 samples. Further
experiments with larger training datasets are necessary for deeper insights and improved performance
on these tasks.
It is worth mentioning that while few-shot prompting notably improves the performance of all
three GPT-3 models, their zero-shot performance is quite poor (as shown in the leftmost column
of the tables). However, post-training, few-shot prompting becomes less effective as OpenAI’s
fine-tuning process trains the model on individual prompts and desired completions serially, rather
than in concatenation with multiple examples like in our NanoGPT experiments. Consequently, our
comparisons primarily focus on the zero-shot performances of each task.


G     T OKEN E FFICIENCY ACROSS DATA F ORMATS

Figure 4a demonstrates that more detailed training data leads to improved sample efficiency. However,
this comparison does not account for the cost associated with training and inference. To address this,
we conduct a cost analysis based on (i) the number of tokens within the train dataset (measuring
the efficiency of the training dataset), and (ii) the number of tokens encountered during training.
For (i) token-efficiency of train dataset, we calculate the number of tokens within the dataset which
can be derived by number of samples × number of tokens per sample. For instance, the mean
token count for a single training example in a 3-digit addition task is 13 for plain format, 15 for
reverse format, 64 for simplified scratchpad format, and 281 for detailed scratchpad format. For (ii)
token-efficiency for training, we calculate the number of tokens encountered by the model which
is number of iterations × context length of the model × batch size. This approach ensures our cost
calculation accounts for a vanilla implementation of attention with no additional optimizations (Pope
et al., 2023). Table 12 presents the number of tokens required for prompting and completion in each
data format, per example. Evidently, the detailed scratchpad method uses considerably more tokens
compared to other techniques.


                                                       38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The result in Figure 4b indicates that reverse formatting is the most token-efficient approach for train-
ing dataset construction. While detailed scratchpad training is more sample efficient, it necessitates a
larger number of tokens per sample, both during training and inference. Given that the inference cost
for commercial models is determined by the number of tokens utilized per inference call (sum of
prompting and completion tokens), the use of models trained on detailed scratchpad formats may
escalate overall costs. Furthermore, since the cost of a single forward pass is quadratic in the number
of tokens, this is important to consider. On the other hand, the result in Figure 28 shows that for the
same number of tokens input to the model to be trained on, the model is trained faster with detailed
scratchpad data. Therefore, for practical usage, it is crucial to evaluate both the number of samples
needed for achieving the desired performance and the actual token demands during training and
inference.
     Table 12: Token requirements for prompting and completion per single example of 3-digit addition.
                               Plain                Reverse     Simplified Scratchpad    Detailed Scratchpad
             Prompt                  8                   9                 23                     23
             Completion              5                   6                 41                    258
             Total                  13                  15                 64                    281

                                           100
                                               95
                           Test Accuracy (%)


                                               90
                                               85
                                               80                          plain
                                                                           reverse
                                               75                          simple scratchpad
                                                                           detailed scratchpad
                                               70 0.0    0.5    1.0    1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 1e8
                                                             Number of Tokens (1e8)
         Figure 28: Model performance by the number of tokens input to the model during training.


                                                                      39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H                    L ENGTH G ENERALIZATION
In this section, we present results from experiments conducted to assess the model’s ability to gener-
alize across different digit lengths. Initially, we exclude training examples featuring 2-digit operands
from the 10,000-sample addition dataset, yielding a reduced dataset of 7,655 samples, consisting
solely of 1 or 3-digit operands. The model is trained with reverse format and its performance is evalu-
ated on test dataset containing 100 random samples of 1-digit, 2-digit, 3-digit, and 4-digit additions.
The results in Figure 29 demonstrate that the NanoGPT model is incapable of performing 2-digit
and 4-digit additions. This suggests an inherent necessity for exposure to all digit combinations to
perform accurate calculations and lacks generalization capabilities for unseen digit lengths.
Additionally, we investigate the model’s ability to extrapolate over larger digit lengths. The model is
trained on 7-digit plain-formatted additions (each digit addition comprises 16650 samples, except
1-digit addition, which is trained on 100 samples). Its ability to add add 8-digit numbers is then put to
test. The results in Figure 29 show that the model is unable to generalize to a greater number of digits
beyond what it has been trained on. Similarly, when training the model on 10-digit binary numbers, it
fails to generalize to 11-digit binary additions, further confirming its limited ability to handle unseen
digit combinations.

                          (a) Trained on 1 and 3 digit addition                                     (b) Trained on 1 – 7 digit addition
                 100                                                                       100
                     80                                                                        80                                       1 digit
 Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                           Test Accuracy (%)

                                                                                                                                        2 digit
                     60                                        1 digit                         60                                       3 digit
                                                               2 digit                                                                  4 digit
                                                               3 digit                                                                  5 digit
                     40                                        4 digit                         40                                       6 digit
                                                                                                                                        7 digit
                     20                                                                        20                                       8 digit
                      0                                                                        0
                           0       5000     10000      15000      20000                             0       5000     10000      15000      20000
                                          Iterations                                                               Iterations
Figure 29: Generalization experiments testing NanoGPT’s performance on unseen numbers of digits in addition
tasks. (Left): NanoGPT trained on reverse formatted addition with 1 and 3 digits, and tested on additions ranging
from 1 to 4 digits. (Right): NanoGPT trained on up to 7-digit plain formatted addition and tested on additions
ranging from 1 to 8 digits. In both cases, NanoGPT exhibits an inability to perform addition on digits it has not
been exposed to.

We further explore the impact of detailed scratchpad formatting. The model trained on additions of
up to 3 digits, struggles to generalize to 4-digit additions. Notably, it randomly drops a single digit
from the 4-digit number, erroneously perceiving it as a 3-digit number. We illustrate this difficulty
in Figure 30 through multiple detailed error cases, ranging from instances in which only the test
query is provided (Case 1) to scenarios where all intermediate steps are provided except only the final
answer (Case 5). The prompts are highlighted in light grey and the responses generated by our trained
NanoGPT model are highlighted in light green. These cases emphasize the model’s shortcomings in
accurately managing larger digit lengths.

                Examples for length generalization prompts
     Results obtained by prompting the NanoGPT model with larger digits
     than those it was trained on. The model is trained using detailed
     scratchpad formats with 3-digit numbers. We evaluate its performance
     on 4-digit numbers, with varying levels of provided information. The
     prompt input is highlighted in a light blue box, while the model’s
     output is highlighted in a light green box.

     Case 1: Just asking the question



                                                                          40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Input:
  8465+3541
  Target:
  <scratch>
  [8,4,6] has 3 digits.
  [3,5,1] has 3 digits.
  [8,4,6] + [3,5,1] , A=[] , C=0 , 6+1+0=7 , A->7 , C->0
  [8,4] + [3,5] , A=[7] , C=0 , 4+5+0=9 , A->9 , C->0
  [8] + [3] , A=[9,7] , C=0 , 8+3+0=11 , A->1 , C->1
  [] + [] , A=[1,9,7] C=1 , END
  </scratch>
  1 1 9 7

  Case 2: Giving number of digits
  Input:
  8465+3541
  Target:
  <scratch>
  [8,4,6,5] has 4 digits.
  [3,5,4,1] has 4 digits.
  [8,4,6] + [3,5,4] , A=[] , C=0 , 6+4+0=10 , A->0 , C->1
  [8,4] + [3,5] , A=[0] , C=1 , 4+5+1=10 , A->0 , C->1
  [8] + [3] , A=[0,0] , C=1 , 8+3+1=12 , A->2 , C->1
  [] + [] , A=[2,0,0] C=1 , END
  </scratch>
  1 2 0 0

  Case 3: Giving 1 intermediate steps
  Input:
  8465+3541
  Target:
  <scratch>
  [8,4,6,5] has 4 digits.
  [3,5,4,1] has 4 digits.
  [8,4,6,5] + [3,5,4,1] , A=[] , C=0 , 5+1+0=6 , A->6 , C->0
  [8,4] + [3,5] , A=[6] , C=0 , 4+5+0=9 , A->9 , C->0
  [8] + [3] , A=[9,6] , C=0 , 8+3+0=11 , A->1 , C->1
  [] + [] , A=[1,9,6] C=1 , END
  </scratch>
  1 1 9 6

  Case 4: Giving all but one intermediate steps
  Input:
  8465+3541
  Target:
  <scratch>
  [8,4,6,5] has 4 digits.
  [3,5,4,1] has 4 digits.
  [8,4,6,5] + [3,5,4,1] , A=[] , C=0 , 5+1+0=6 , A->6 , C->0
  [8,4,6] + [3,5,4] , A=[6] , C=0 , 6+4+0=10 , A->0 , C->1
  [8,4] + [3,5] , A=[0,6] , C=1 , 4+5+1=10 , A->0 , C->1
  [8] + [3] , A=[0,0,6] , C=1 , 8+3+1=12 , A->2 , C->1
  [] + [] , A=[2,0,6] C=1 END
  </scratch>
  1 0 0 6

  Case 5: Giving all intermediate steps, all it has to do is aggregate the answer
  Input:
  8465+3541
  Target:
  <scratch>
  [8,4,6,5] has 4 digits.
  [3,5,4,1] has 4 digits.
  [8,4,6,5] + [3,5,4,1] , A=[] , C=0 , 5+1+0=6 , A->6 , C->0
  [8,4,6] + [3,5,4] , A=[6] , C=0 , 6+4+0=10 , A->0 , C->1
  [8,4] + [3,5] , A=[0,6] , C=1 , 4+5+1=10 , A->0 , C->1
  [8] + [3] , A=[0,0,6] , C=1 , 8+3+1=12 , A->2 , C->1
  [] + [] , A=[2,0,0,6] C=1 END
  </scratch>
  1 2 0 6

  Case 6: Giving 1 in-context example
  Input:
  8465+3541
  Target:
  <scratch>


                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  [8,4,6,5] has 4 digits.
  [3,5,4,1] has 4 digits.
  [8,4,6,5] + [3,5,4,1] , A=[] , C=0 , 5+1+0=6 , A->6 , C->0
  [8,4,6] + [3,5,4] , A=[6] , C=0 , 6+4+0=10 , A->0 , C->1
  [8,4] + [3,5] , A=[0,6] , C=1 , 4+5+1=10 , A->0 , C->1
  [8] + [3] , A=[0,0,6] , C=1 , 8+3+1=12 , A->2 , C->1
  [] + [] , A=[2,0,0,6] C=1 , END
  </scratch>
  1 2 0 0 6
  Input:
  1946+3598
  Target:
  <scratch>
  [1,9,4] has 3 digits.
  [3,5,8] has 3 digits.
  [1,9,4] + [3,5,8] , A=[] , C=0 , 4+8+0=12 , A->2 , C->1
  [1,9] + [3,5] , A=[2] , C=1 , 9+5+1=15 , A->5 , C->1
  [1] + [3] , A=[5,2] , C=1 , 1+3+1=5 , A->5 , C->0
  [] + [] , A=[5,5,2] C=0 , END
  </scratch>
  5 5 2

  Case 7: Giving 1 In-context example, and all intermediate steps
  Input:
  8465+3541
  Target:
  <scratch>
  [8,4,6,5] has 4 digits.
  [3,5,4,1] has 4 digits.
  [8,4,6,5] + [3,5,4,1] , A=[] , C=0 , 5+1+0=6 , A->6 , C->0
  [8,4,6] + [3,5,4] , A=[6] , C=0 , 6+4+0=10 , A->0 , C->1
  [8,4] + [3,5] , A=[0,6] , C=1 , 4+5+1=10 , A->0 , C->1
  [8] + [3] , A=[0,0,6] , C=1 , 8+3+1=12 , A->2 , C->1
  [] + [] , A=[2,0,0,6] C=1 , END
  </scratch>
  1 2 0 0 6
  Input:
  1946+3598
  Target:
  <scratch>
  [1,9,4,6] has 4 digits.
  [3,5,9,8] has 4 digits.
  [1,9,4,6] + [3,5,9,8] , A=[] , C=0 , 6+8+0=14 , A->4 , C->1
  [1,9,4] + [3,5,9] , A=[4] , C=1 , 4+9+1=14 , A->4 , C->1
  [1,9] + [3,5] , A=[4,4] , C=1 , 9+5+1=15 , A->5 , C->1
  [1] + [3] , A=[5,4,4] , C=1 , 1+3+1=5 , A->5 , C->0
  [] + [] , A=[5,5,4,4] C=0 , END
  </scratch>
  5 5 4


Figure 30: Example results on the model’s output when prompted with a larger number of digits than those it
was trained on.


                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I         E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

In this section, we summarize the datasets, models and hyperparameters used for experiments. All
of our experiments on NanoGPT and GPT-2 models are run using PyTorch 2.1 and CUDA 11.7 on
Nvidia 2808 TIs and NVIDIA 3090s. Detailed dependencies are provided on our github repository4 .

I.1        DATASET

In this section, we explain the details of the datasets used for our experiments. For arithmetic tasks,
we construct our own datasets as described below while we use the standard shakespeare (Karpathy,
2015) dataset for text.

Arithmetic Tasks As mentioned above, for all arithmetic tasks, we prepare our own datasets.
We refer to the training dataset for a binary operator f (·) as Dtrain = {(x1i , x2i ), yi }N
                                                                                            i=1 where
yi = f (x1i , x2i ). Similarly, the test dataset Dtest is constructed by randomly sampling pairs of
operands that do not appear in Dtrain . During both training and inference, we then apply different
formatting techniques (see Section 3), to construct the final sequence that is input to the model. We
would like to repeat that both the careful choice of samples in the training dataset as well as their
formatting play a crucial role in the final performance of the model.

Text For text data, we use the Shakespeare dataset which was introduced by Karpathy (2015)
originally featured in the blog post “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Recurrent Neural Networks”.
It consists of 40,000 lines of dialogue carefully curated from William Shakespeare’s plays. The dataset
comprises of a total of 1,115,394 characters and 64 unique tokens(when using the character-level
tokenizer that we employed in all NanoGPT experiments).

I.1.1       DATA BALANCING

As mentioned in Section 3, we carefully sample our data to ensure that they are “balanced” with
respect to the number of carries and number of digits. As mentioned earlier, sampling the operands
uniformly at random would lead to an extremely skewed dataset. To avoid this, we try to (i) Balance
digits by sampling lower-digit numbers with higher weights and (ii) Balance carry-ons by sampling
such that we have equal number of examples with 0, 1, 2 and 3 carry-on operations.
Specifically, we create a balanced dataset of 10, 000 samples. This dataset includes all 100 1-digit
additions and a random sampling of 900 2-digit additions (including both (2 + 1) and (1 + 2)
digit additions) and 9, 000 3-digit additions. For the 3-digit addition samples, we employ rejection
sampling to ensure an equal distribution of carry-ons (0, 1, 2, or 3). For the test dataset, we uniformly
sample 10, 000 addition examples that do not overlap with the train dataset. Results in Figure 2 and
Table 13 demonstrate a clear advantage of the employed data balancing methods.
For the train dataset, we follow a specific approach based on the number of examples. For sample
sizes smaller than 10, 000 (e.g., 500, 1, 000, 2, 000, 3, 000, 4, 000, 5, 000), we include all 1-digit
additions and a proportionate number of 2-digit samples (e.g., for a total of 5, 000 samples, we
include 900 × 5, 000/10, 000 = 450 two-digit additions). The remaining samples are filled with
3-digit additions from the constructed train dataset of 10,000 samples. For sample sizes larger than
10,000 (e.g., 20,000, 40,000), we include all examples from the 10,000-sample train dataset and then
add additional samples as needed. Similar to before, we perform rejection sampling to maintain an
equal number of carry operations. Table 14. provides detailed information on the number of samples
with 1-digit, 2-digit, and 3-digit additions, as well as the number of carry-ons.
For the other arithmetic operations (subtraction, multiplication, sine, and square root), we construct
the train dataset using the following approach: (i) For subtraction, we use the same pairs of operands
that were used for addition. (ii) For multiplication, we include all 100 cases of a 1-digit number
multiplied by a 1-digit number. Additionally, we randomly sample multiplications involving operands
of up to 2 digits. (iii) For sine, we sample a random number in [π/2, π/2] and truncate it to 4 decimal
places. (iv) For square root, we sample a random number between [1, 10] and truncate it to 4 decimal
      4
          https://github.com/lee-ny/teaching_arithmetic


                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


places. For the test dataset, we sample 10, 000 data points (7, 000 for multiplication) that do not
overlap with the train dataset.


Table 13: Performance of addition on various data sampling methods used: (i) Random - uniform sampling of
operands; (ii) Balanced digits - sampling more 1 and 2-digit operations ; (iii) Balanced carry - balancing the
dataset to contain an equal number of carry-on operations. Experiments on addition with zero-padding each
operand and output to have 3 and 4 digits, respectively. We observe that balancing the dataset can significantly
improve the performance or arithmetic operations.


           Data Sampling          Overall 1-digit 2-digit Carry-0 Carry-1 Carry-2 Carry-3
           Random                   97.74 98.00       96.20     95.88     98.61      98.74    94.98
           Balanced Digits          98.13 100.00      99.70     98.87     98.64      98.13    95.93
           Balanced Carry-Ons       98.29 100.00      99.70     98.38     97.56      99.02    98.22


Table 14: Number of examples of digit 1/2/3 and 0/1/2/3 carry-ons for NanoGPT experiments on addition for
different number of samples varying from 500 to 40, 000.


        Total number 1-digit 2-digit 3-digit 0-carry-ons 1-carry-ons 2-carry-ons 3-carry-ons
            500         100       45       355         163          141              97         99
            1000        100       90       810         283          268             236        213
            2000        100       180     1720         535          502             481        482
            3000        100       270     2630         781          782             748        689
            4000        100       360     3540        1020         1016            958         1006
            5000        100       450     4450        1279         1271            1229        1221
           10000        100       900     9000        2500         2500            2500        2500
           20000        121      1937    17942        5000         5000            5000        5000
           40000        132      3939    35929       10000        10000           10000       10000


I.1.2    DATA F ORMATTING


For each of the four formatting techniques, as applied to each arithmetic operation we provide the
details below. (i) Plain refers to the simplest formatting where we simply create a sequence as the
mathematical representation of the corresponding operation (e.g., A3 A2 A1 + B3 B2 B1 = C3 C2 C1 ).
For (ii) Reverse, we simply reverse the digits of the output so that they appear in increasing order
from LSB to MSB (e.g., $A3 A2 A1 + B3 B2 B1 = C1 C2 C3 $). (iii) Simplified Scratchpad and (iv)
Detailed Scratchpad provide algorithmic reasoning steps like (Nye et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022b)
so as to help the model get more “information” per sample. Our intuition is that this approach nudges
the model towards actually learning the algorithm of addition or subtraction rather than merely trying
to fit the training examples. Refer to Appendix J for detailed examples of data formatting for each
arithmetic operation.


                                                      44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Different data formatting methods for addition

  Four input formatting methods used for the addition task:
  (i) Plain: standard formatting of addition
  (ii) Reverse: flips the order of the output and encapsulates each data sample with the‘$’ symbol
  at the start and end.
  (iii) Simplified Scratchpad: provides carry and digit-sum information for each step of addition,
  from the LSB to the MSB5 .
  (iv) Detailed Scratchpad: provides explicit details of intermediate steps of addition.

                   Plain                                         Detailed Scratchpad
   128+367=495                             Input:
                                           128+367
                 Reverse                   Target:
                                           <scratch>
   $128+367=594$                           [1,2,8] has 3 digits.
                                           [3,6,7] has 3 digits.
        Simplified Scratchpad              [1,2,8] + [3,6,7] , A=[] , C=0 , 8+7+0=15 , A->5 , C->1
                                           [1,2] + [3,6] , A=[5] , C=1 , 2+6+1=9 , A->9 , C->0
   Input:                                  [1] + [3] , A=[9,5] , C=0 , 1+3+0=4 , A->4 , C->0
   128+367                                 [] + [] , A=[4,9,5] C=0 , END
   Target:                                 </scratch>
   A->5 , C->1                             4 9 5
   A->9 , C->0
   A->4 , C->0.
   495


Figure 31: The four input formatting methods used for the addition task. We progressively increase the amount
of detail with each format.


Note that we wrap each data sample in the reverse format with the ‘$’ symbol at the beginning and end
as a delimiter. We originally observed improved performance in both the plain and reverse formats
when the operands and outputs were zero-padded to a fixed length (e.g., 3 and 4 digits, respectively,
for 3-digit addition). But later realized that a single symbol can effectively replace zero-padding.
While we maintain the original plain format without padding as a baseline – emphasizing the necessity
for improved data formatting for efficient emergence – we incorporate the ‘$’-encapsulation in our
modified reverse format. For further details, refer to Appendix B.1.

Addition (+). We focus on additions of positive numbers up to 3-digits, in which the plain
formatting would look like A3 A2 A1 + B3 B2 B1 = C3 C2 C1 . For experiments on comparing data
sampling presented in Figure 2, we pad the two operands and the output with zero, to be of length 3
and 4 respectively. For all other experiments, we do not utilize zero-padding. For Scratchpad-based
methods (iii, iv), we provide the digit-wise addition (denoted as A) and carry-on (denoted as C)
information for intermediate steps from the least significant bit (LSB) to the most significant bit
(MSB).

Subtraction (−). We consider subtraction of positive numbers up to 3 digits, written as
A3 A2 A1 − B3 B2 B1 = C3 C2 C1 in (i) plain formatting, and $A3 A2 A1 − B3 B2 B1 = C1 C2 C3 $ in (ii)
reverse formatting. As with addition, scratchpad-based methods (iii, iv), present the intermediate steps
of digit-wise subtraction and handling of carry-ons. These steps proceed from the least significant
bit (LSB) to the most significant bit (MSB). If the final result after computing all the digit-wise
subtractions is negative, we subtract the number in the most significant bit (MSB) position multiplied
by 10 to the power of (number of digits in the output - 1) from the remaining digits in the output. In
Section B.4, we present an alternative version of the detailed scratchpad formatting for subtraction.

Multiplication (×). We consider multiplication of positive numbers up to 2-digits. (i) Plain
formatting examples are formatted as A2 A1 ∗ B2 B1 = C4 C3 C2 C1 , while (ii) reverse formatting is
    5
      We deviate from the strict definition of “most significant bit” (MSB) and “least significant bit” (LSB),
typically associated with binary numbers, and reinterpret them for the purpose of this paper as the most significant
“digit” and least significant “digit”, respectively.


                                                        45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


formatted as $A2 A1 ∗ B2 B1 = C1 C2 C3 C4 $. The (iv) detailed scratchpad method simplifies each
intermediate step by conducting a series of multiplications between the first operand and each digit
of the second operand, starting from the least significant bit (LSB) and moving toward the most
significant bit (MSB). For each step, we multiply the result by an exponentiation of 10 corresponding
to the relative digit position.

Sine (sin ). We consider decimal numbers within the range [−π/2, π/2], truncated to 4-digit
precision. (i) Plain formatting examples are formatted as sin(A0 .A1 A2 A3 A4 ) = B0 .B1 B2 B3 B4 .
For (iv) detailed scratchpad method, we include the Taylor series expansion steps for sine, which
                                  1 3     1 5     1 7
is represented as sin(x) = x − 3!  x + 5!   x − 7!  x + · · · . These intermediate steps involve
exponentiation, which may not be any easier to compute than the sine operation itself.

                √
Square Root ( ). We consider decimal numbers within [1, 10), truncated to 4-digits of precision
with the format, written as sqrt(A0 .A1 A2 A3 A4 ) = B0 .B1 B2 B3 B4 for (i) plain formatting. For (iv)
detailed scratchpad method, we enumerate each step of Newton’s method to compute the square root
function. The iterative formula is given by xn = 21 (xn−1 + xn−1   x
                                                                      ), where x0 is initialized as the
floor of the square root value of the operand x. These intermediate steps involve a division operation,
which can be as complex as the square root operation itself.
For evaluation of sine and square root, we classify the result yˆi as correct if the absolute difference
between yˆi and the ground truth value yi is less than or equal to a predefined threshold ϵ ≥ 0.

I.2   M ODEL

For all experiments, we use a Decoder-only Transformer architecture. Specifically, we primarily use
the NanoGPT model, a scaled-down variant of the GPT-2 model with half the number of self-attention
layers, heads, and embedding dimension. Note that we use character-level tokenization instead of
using the OpenAI’s BPE tokenizer (Tiktoken) of vocabulary size 50257, making the vocabulary
size significantly smaller. We use a learnable absolute positional embedding initialized randomly,
following the GPT-2 model. Are results are generated using a temperature of 0.8.
In the case of arithmetic tasks performed on plain and reverse formatting, we set a context length of
256 for NanoGPT experiments. The length of a single train example falls within the range of 13 to
15, approximately. However, when conducting experiments on scratchpad formatting, we increase
the context length to 1024. This adjustment allows us to accommodate more examples per batch. In
the case of simplified scratchpad, the length of each train example is approximately 64, while the
detailed scratchpad has a length of approximately 281. For GPT-2 experiments we fix the context
length to 1024 for all experiments. See Table 15 for details on model configuration.
For experiments on fine-tuning a pretrained large language model, we use OpenAI’s GPT-3 model -
Ada, Curie, and Davinci.

                           Table 15: NanoGPT and GPT-2 model configuration

       Model  Input Formatting Context Length Self-Attn Layers Num Heads Embedding Dim
      NanoGPT Plain,  Reverse
                 Scratchpad
                                    256
                                   1024
                                                      6
                                                      6
                                                                   6
                                                                   6
                                                                             384
                                                                             384
       GPT-2   Plain, Reverse      1024              12           12         768
                 Scratchpad        1024              12           12         768



I.3   T RAINING

Our overall experimental setup closely follows the standard training procedures for language mod-
els Karpathy (2022); Brown et al. (2020). We train models using the autoregressive loss for all tokens,
including the prompts, rather than limiting the training to only the answers. In addition, unlike
popular approaches for synthetic tasks, we pack multiple training examples to fill up the entire context
window. We also randomly sample the starting position, allowing the model to process shifted inputs.


                                                  46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 32: The GPT-2 Architecture. Image from (Radford & Narasimhan, 2018). NanoGPT model is a smaller
model with half the number of self-attention layers, multi-heads, and embedding dimensions.


I.4   H YPERPARAMETER C ONFIGURATIONS

In this section, we provide a detailed overview of the hyperparameter configuration used in our
experiments in Table 16 and 17. To enhance memory efficiency and training speed, we employ flash
attention. For most experiments, we utilize the bfloat16 data type. However, when working with
Nvidia 2080 GPUs, which do not support bfloat16, we switch to float16. It is worth noting that we
did not observe significant differences in training and evaluation performance between the two data
types.
The learning rate is chosen from {1e-3, 5e-4, 1e-4, 5e-5} based on validation loss. For the scratchpad
format, NanoGPT is trained longer since the number of tokens per sample is higher and it requires
more iterations to converge.
For the GPT-2 experimentation, we reduced the batch size to 8 to accommodate the GPU memory
limitations. However, to mitigate the impact of the smaller batch size, we employed gradient accu-
mulation steps. This approach involves taking multiple steps between gradient updates, effectively
increasing the effective batch size to 64. For specific hyperparameter details, please refer to Table 17.

                Table 16: Hyper Parameters used for NanoGPT experiments on arithmetic tasks

 Input Format     Batch Size Optimizer      LR      Betas      Iterations Warmup Iter Wt decay Dropout
 Plain, Reverse      256       AdamW      0.001 (0.9, 0.99)      5000         100             0.1    0.2
  Scratchpad         16        AdamW      0.001 (0.9, 0.99)     50000          0              0.1    0.2


                  Table 17: Hyper Parameters used for GPT-2 experiments on arithmetic tasks


 Input Format     Batch Size Optimizer      LR        Betas     Iterations Warmup Iter Wt decay Dropout
 Plain, Reverse       64       AdamW      0.0005 (0.9, 0.99)     5000          100             0.1    0.2
  Scratchpad          64       AdamW      0.0005 (0.9, 0.99)     20000          0              0.1    0.2


                                                     47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Table 18: Hyper Parameters used for tandem training experiments in Section 7.


                    Model          Batch Size Optimizer                           LR          Betas           Iterations Warmup Iter Wt decay Dropout
       NanoGPT                          16          AdamW                   0.001 (0.9, 0.99)                   5000                     0               0.1            0.2
        GPT-2                           40          AdamW                   0.0006 (0.9, 0.95)                 50000                   2000              0.1            0.2


                            (a) NanoGPT, plain addition               (b) NanoGPT, detailed scratchpad addition                               (c) NanoGPT, Perplexity
                                                                            100
                80
                                                                                                                                   1.30
                                                            Test Accuracy (%)   80
Test Accuracy (%)


                60
                                                                                                                                   1.25


                                                                                                                          Perplexity
                                                                                60
                40                                                                                                                 1.20
                                                                                40
                20                                                              20                                                 1.15

                    0                                                            0                                                 1.10
                        0      10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                         0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                    0     10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
                                       Iterations                                                Iterations                                            Iterations
                             (d) GPT-2, plain addition                          (e) GPT-2, detailed scratchpad addition                        (f) GPT-2, Perplexity
                                                                            100
                80                                                                                                                 2.0
                                                                                80
                                                            Test Accuracy (%)
Test Accuracy (%)


                60                                                                                                                 1.8
                                                                                                                          Perplexity
                                                                                60
                40                                                                                                                 1.6
                                                                                40
                20                                                              20                                                 1.4

                    0                                                            0                                                 1.2
                        0      10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                         0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                    0    10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
                                       Iterations                                                Iterations                                            Iterations

Figure 33: Training loss curves for NanoGPT and GPT-2 trained with varying numbers of plain (Add) and
detailed scratchpad (DS) samples as well as the shakespeare dataset as described in Section 7. As we can see,
the model continues to improve in addition accuracy as the number of iterations increases. However, the training
perplexity on Shakespeare also tends to increase, which indicates some overfitting. However, we note that the
model still outputs “reasonable” text when prompted with shakespeare text.


J                       P ROMPT E XAMPLES


In this section, we provide three examples of each formatting (plain, reverse, simplified scratchpad,
                                                             √
detailed scratchpad) of arithmetic operations (+, −, ×, sin , ).


J.1                     A DDITION


                                                                                                 48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Addition Examples

                 Plain                              Detailed Scratchpad
  266+738=1004                    Input:
  980+743=1723                    396+262
  41+34=75                        Target:
                                  <scratch>
                                  [3,9,6] has 3 digits.
             Reverse              [2,6,2] has 3 digits.
                                  [3,9,6] + [2,6,2] , A=[] , C=0 , 6+2+0=8 , A->8 , C->0
  $913+524=1437$                  [3,9] + [2,6] , A=[8] , C=0 , 9+6+0=15 , A->5 , C->1
  $226+598=824$                   [3] + [2] , A=[5,8] , C=1 , 3+2+1=6 , A->6 , C->0
  $35+58=93$                      [] + [] , A=[6,5,8] C=0 , END
                                  </scratch>
                                  6 5 8
      Simplified Scratchpad       Input:
                                  796+890
  Input:                          Target:
  922+244                         <scratch>
  Target:                         [7,9,6] has 3 digits.
  A->6 , C->0                     [8,9,0] has 3 digits.
  A->6 , C->0                     [7,9,6] + [8,9,0] , A=[] , C=0 , 6+0+0=6 , A->6 , C->0
  A->1 , C->1.                    [7,9] + [8,9] , A=[6] , C=0 , 9+9+0=18 , A->8 , C->1
  1166                            [7] + [8] , A=[8,6] , C=1 , 7+8+1=16 , A->6 , C->1
  Input:                          [] + [] , A=[6,8,6] C=1 , END
  285+43                          </scratch>
  Target:                         1 6 8 6
  A->8 , C->0                     Input:
  A->2 , C->1                     788+989
  A->3 , C->0.                    Target:
  328                             <scratch>
  Input:                          [7,8,8] has 3 digits.
  993+849                         [9,8,9] has 3 digits.
  Target:                         [7,8,8] + [9,8,9] , A=[] , C=0 , 8+9+0=17 , A->7 , C->1
  A->2 , C->1                     [7,8] + [9,8] , A=[7] , C=1 , 8+8+1=17 , A->7 , C->1
  A->4 , C->1                     [7] + [9] , A=[7,7] , C=1 , 7+9+1=17 , A->7 , C->1
  A->8 , C->1.                    [] + [] , A=[7,7,7] C=1 , END
  1842                            </scratch>
                                  1 7 7 7


                                               49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J.2   S UBTRACTION

      Subtraction Examples

                  Plain                              Detailed Scratchpad
  266-738=-472                    Input:
  980-743=237                     396-262
  41-34=7                         Target:
                                  <scratch>
                                  [3,9,6] has 3 digits.
             Reverse              [2,6,2] has 3 digits.
                                  [3,9,6] - [2,6,2] , A=[] , C=0 , 6-2-0=4 , A->4 , C->0
  $913-524=983$                   [3,9] - [2,6] , A=[4] , C=0 , 9-6-0=3 , A->3 , C->0
  $226-598=273-$                  [3] - [2] , A=[3,4] , C=0 , 3-2-0=1 , A->1 , C->0
  $35-58=32-$                     [] - [] , A=[1,3,4]
                                  100+34=134 , END
                                  </scratch>
       Simplified Scratchpad      1 3 4
                                  Input:
  Input:                          796-890
  396-262                         Target:
  Target:                         <scratch>
  A->4 , C->0                     [7,9,6] has 3 digits.
  A->3 , C->0                     [8,9,0] has 3 digits.
  A->1 , C->0                     [7,9,6] - [8,9,0] , A=[] , C=0 , 6-0-0=6 , A->6 , C->0
  100+34=134.                     [7,9] - [8,9] , A=[6] , C=0 , 9-9-0=0 , A->0 , C->0
  134                             [7] - [8] , A=[0,6] , C=0 , 7-8-0=-1 , A->-1 , C->-1
  Input:                          [] - [] , A=[-1,0,6]
  796-890                         </scratch>
  Target:                         -9 4
  A->6 , C->0                     Input:
  A->0 , C->0                     788-989
  A->-1 , C->-1                   Target:
  -100+6=-94.                     <scratch>
  -94                             [7,8,8] has 3 digits.
  Input:                          [9,8,9] has 3 digits.
  788-989                         [7,8,8] - [9,8,9] , A=[] , C=0 , 8-9-0+10=9 , A->9 , C->-1
  Target:                         [7,8] - [9,8] , A=[9] , C=-1 , 8-8-1+10=9 , A->9 , C->-1
  A->9 , C->-1                    [7] - [9] , A=[9,9] , C=-1 , 7-9-1=-3 , A->-3 , C->-1
  A->9 , C->-1                    [] - [] , A=[-3,9,9]
  A->-3 , C->-1                   -300+99=-201 , END
  -300+99=-201.                   </scratch>
  -201                            -2 0 1


                                               50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J.3   M ULTIPLICATION
      Multiplication Examples

           Plain                                 Detailed Scratchpad
  5*32=160               Input:
  66*76=5016             22*52
  67*74=4958             Target:
                         <scratch>
                         [2,2] has 2 digits.
          Reverse        [5,2] has 2 digits.
                         [2,2] * 2 , A=[4,4] , k=1 , B=[4,4] , C=0+44=44
  $5*32=061$             [2,2] * 5 , A=[1,1,0] , k=10 , B=[1,1,0,0] , C=44+1100=1144 , END
  $66*76=6105$           </scratch>
  $67*74=8594$           1 1 4 4
                         Input:
                         8*69
                         Target:
                         <scratch>
                         [8] has 1 digits.
                         [6,9] has 2 digits.
                         [8] * 9 , A=[7,2] , k=1 , B=[7,2] , C=0+72=72
                         [8] * 6 , A=[4,8] , k=10 , B=[4,8,0] , C=72+480=552 , END
                         </scratch>
                         5 5 2
                         Input:
                         52*34
                         Target:
                         <scratch>
                         [5,2] has 2 digits.
                         [3,4] has 2 digits.
                         [5,2] * 4 , A=[2,0,8] , k=1 , B=[2,0,8] , C=0+208=208
                         [5,2] * 3 , A=[1,5,6] , k=10 , B=[1,5,6,0] , C=208+1560=1768 , END
                         </scratch>
                         1 7 6 8



J.4   S INE
      Sine Examples

  Plain                            Detailed Scratchpad
  sin(1.0313)=0.8579               Input:
  sin(-0.6909)=-0.6373             sin(1.0313)
  sin(-0.5719)=-0.5413             Target:
                                   <scratch>
                                   x_0=1.0313
                                   x_1: x_0 - 1/3!   * (xˆ3) , x_1=0.8484
                                   x_2: x_1 + 1/5!   * (xˆ5) , x_2=0.8581
                                   x_3: x_2 - 1/7!   * (xˆ7) , x_3=0.8578
                                   x_4: x_3 + 1/9!   * (xˆ9) , x_4=0.8578 , END
                                   </scratch>
                                   0.8578
                                   Input:
                                   sin(-0.6909)
                                   Target:
                                   <scratch>
                                   x_0=-0.6909
                                   x_1: x_0 - 1/3!   * (xˆ3) , x_1=-0.636
                                   x_2: x_1 + 1/5!   * (xˆ5) , x_2=-0.6374
                                   x_3: x_2 - 1/7!   * (xˆ7) , x_3=-0.6374
                                   x_4: x_3 + 1/9!   * (xˆ9) , x_4=-0.6375 , END
                                   </scratch>
                                   -0.6375
                                   Input:
                                   sin(-0.5719)
                                   Target:
                                   <scratch>
                                   x_0=-0.5719
                                   x_1: x_0 - 1/3!   * (xˆ3) , x_1=-0.5408
                                   x_2: x_1 + 1/5!   * (xˆ5) , x_2=-0.5414
                                   x_3: x_2 - 1/7!   * (xˆ7) , x_3=-0.5414
                                   x_4: x_3 + 1/9!   * (xˆ9) , x_4=-0.5415 , END
                                   </scratch>
                                   -0.5415


                                                51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J.5   S QUARE ROOT

      Square Root Examples

  Plain                         Detailed Scratchpad
  sqrt(7.2726)=2.6967           Input:
  sqrt(3.6224)=1.9032           sqrt(7.1042)
  sqrt(1.0895)=1.0437           Target:
                                <scratch>
                                x_0=2
                                x_1: 1/2*(2+7.1042/2)=2.776, x_1=2.776
                                x_2: 1/2*(2.776+7.1042/2.776)=2.6675, x_2=2.6675
                                x_3: 1/2*(2.6675+7.1042/2.6675)=2.6653, x_3=2.6653
                                x_4: 1/2*(2.6653+7.1042/2.6653)=2.6653, x_4=2.6653 , END
                                </scratch>
                                2.6653
                                Input:
                                sqrt(6.2668)
                                Target:
                                <scratch>
                                x_0=2
                                x_1: 1/2*(2+6.2668/2)=2.5667, x_1=2.5667
                                x_2: 1/2*(2.5667+6.2668/2.5667)=2.5041, x_2=2.5041
                                x_3: 1/2*(2.5041+6.2668/2.5041)=2.5033, x_3=2.5033
                                x_4: 1/2*(2.5033+6.2668/2.5033)=2.5033, x_4=2.5033 , END
                                </scratch>
                                2.5033
                                Input:
                                sqrt(8.3216)
                                Target:
                                <scratch>
                                x_0=2
                                x_1: 1/2*(2+8.3216/2)=3.0804, x_1=3.0804
                                x_2: 1/2*(3.0804+8.3216/3.0804)=2.8909, x_2=2.8909
                                x_3: 1/2*(2.8909+8.3216/2.8909)=2.8847, x_3=2.8847
                                x_4: 1/2*(2.8847+8.3216/2.8847)=2.8847, x_4=2.8847 , END
                                </scratch>
                                2.8847


J.6   N OISY S IMPLE S CRATCHPAD

We provide one example for each case of adding noise in the simplified scratchpad experiments
discussed in Section B.5.


      Noisy Simple Scratchpad Examples
  We provide one example for each case of adding noise in the simplified
  scratchpad experiments discussed in Section B.5. The input prompt
  is highlighted in light blue, while the remaining part is highlighted
  in light green. We construct the dataset to have either correct or
  random digit-sum A and carry information C. For all cases, the final
  answer remains accurate.

  Prompt:
  Input:
  686+886
  Target:


  Correct A & C          Random C               Random A             Random A & C
  A->2 , C->1            A->2 , C->0                A->0 , C->1      A->8 , C->1
  A->7 , C->1            A->7 , C->0                A->9 , C->1      A->1 , C->0
  A->5 , C->1.           A->5 , C->1.               A->9 , C->1.     A->2 , C->1.
  1572                   1572                       1572             1572


                                               52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J.7     E XAMPLE DATA FOR GPT-3 FINE - TUNING

We provide an example from the training dataset consisting of one prompt-completion pair used for
fine-tuning the GPT-3 model using OpenAI’s API. The prompt is highlighted in light grey, while
the completion is highlighted in light green. Note that for plain and reverse formatting, we include
spacing between digits to ensure consistent tokenization of numbers. “###” is used as the stop
sequence for generation.

J.7.1    A DDITION

      Addition Examples

                 Plain                                  Detailed Scratchpad
  6 7 7 + 8 9 8 =1 5 7 5###         Input:
                                    356+787
                                    Target:
               Reverse              <scratch>
                                    [3,5,6] has 3 digits.
  7 4 9 + 7 8 5 = 4 3 5 1###        [7,8,7] has 3 digits.
                                    [3,5,6] + [7,8,7] , A=[] , C=0 , 6+7+0=13 , A->3 , C->1
                                    [3,5] + [7,8] , A=[3] , C=1 , 5+8+1=14 , A->4 , C->1
         Simplified Scratchpad      [3] + [7] , A=[4,3] , C=1 , 3+7+1=11 , A->1 , C->1
                                    [] + [] , A=[1,4,3] C=1 , END
  Input:                            </scratch>
  32+981                            1 1 4 3###
  Target:
  A->3 , C->0
  A->2 , C->1
  A->0 , C->1.
  1013###



J.7.2    S UBTRACTION

      Subtraction Examples

                 Plain                                  Detailed Scratchpad
  2 0 4 - 5 0 1 = - 2 9 7###        Input:
                                    848-367
                                    Target:
               Reverse              <scratch>
                                    [8,4,8] has 3 digits.[3,6,7] has 3 digits.
  7 3 4 - 9 6 7 = 3 3 2 -###        [8,4,8] - [3,6,7] , A=[] , C=0 , 8-7-0=1 , A->1 , C->0
                                    [8,4] - [3,6] , A=[1] , C=0 , 4-6-0+10=8 , A->8 , C->-1
                                    [8] - [3] , A=[8,1] , C=-1 , 8-3-1=4 , A->4 , C->0
         Simplified Scratchpad      [] - [] , A=[4,8,1]
                                    400+81=481 , END
  Input:                            </scratch>
  695-489                           4 8 1###
  Target:
  A->6 , C->-1
  A->0 , C->0
  A->2 , C->0
  200+6=206.
  206###


                                                53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J.7.3   S INE

    Sine Examples

                 Plain                               Detailed Scratchpad
  sin(-0.8649)                    Input:
   -0.7611###                     sin(-1.3516)
                                  Target:
                                  x_0=-1.3516
                                  x_1: -1.3516 - 1/3!   * (x*x*x) , x_1=-0.9401
                                  x_2: -0.9401 + 1/5!   * (x*x*x*x*x) , x_2=-0.9777
                                  x_3: -0.9777 - 1/7!   * (x*x*x*x*x*x*x) , x_3=-0.9761
                                  x_4: -0.9761 + 1/9!   * (x*x*x*x*x*x*x*x*x) , x_4=-0.9762 , END
                                  </scratch>
                                  -0.9762###



J.7.4   S QUARE ROOT

    Square Root Examples

                 Plain                               Detailed Scratchpad
  sqrt(1.2178)                    Input:
   1.1035###                      sqrt(5.5808)
                                  Target:
                                  <scratch>
                                  x_0=2
                                  x_1: 1/2*(2+5.5808/2)=2.3952, x_1=2.3952
                                  x_2: 1/2*(2.3952+5.5808/2.3952)=2.3625, x_2=2.3625
                                  x_3: 1/2*(2.3625+5.5808/2.3625)=2.3623, x_3=2.3623
                                  x_4: 1/2*(2.3623+5.5808/2.3623)=2.3623, x_4=2.3623 , END
                                  </scratch>
                                  2.3623###


                                               54
