Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N ECESSARY AND S UFFICIENT WATERMARK                                                               FOR
L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable perfor-
         mances in various NLP tasks. They can generate texts that are indistinguishable
         from those written by humans. Such remarkable performance of LLMs increases
         their risk of being used for malicious purposes, such as generating fake news ar-
         ticles. Therefore, it is necessary to develop methods for distinguishing texts writ-
         ten by LLMs from those written by humans. Watermarking is one of the most
         powerful methods for achieving this. Although existing watermarking methods
         have successfully detected texts generated by LLMs, they significantly degrade
         the quality of the generated texts. In this study, we propose the Necessary and
         Sufficient Watermark (NS-Watermark) for inserting watermarks into generated
         texts without degrading the text quality. More specifically, we derive minimum
         constraints required to be imposed on the generated texts to distinguish whether
         LLMs or humans write the texts. Then, we formulate the NS-Watermark as a
         constrained optimization problem and propose an efficient algorithm to solve it.
         Through the experiments, we demonstrate that the NS-Watermark can generate
         more natural texts than existing watermarking methods and distinguish more ac-
         curately between texts written by LLMs and those written by humans. Especially
         in machine translation tasks, the NS-Watermark can outperform the existing wa-
         termarking method by up to 30 BLEU scores.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable performances in a wide range of NLP
tasks, including language generation (Chen et al., 2021), question answering (Joshi et al., 2017;
Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), and reasoning tasks (Bisk et al., 2020; Kojima et al., 2022). Recently,
many pre-trained LLMs have been released (Brown et al., 2020; Chung et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2022; Touvron et al., 2023), which can now generate natural and fluent texts that are indistinguish-
able from texts written by humans. For instance, Brown et al. (2020) evaluated the quality of the
news articles generated by GPT-3, demonstrating that humans cannot distinguish between news ar-
ticles generated by GPT-3 and those written by humans.
As the performance of LLMs improves for various tasks, the risk that LLMs are used for malicious
purposes, such as generating fake news, also increases (Zellers et al., 2019). Thus, it is crucial
to develop methods to identify whether LLMs or humans write texts. Watermarking is one of the
powerful techniques for this purpose, which inserts information into texts such that the inserted in-
formation is imperceptible to humans and can be easily identified by some algorithms (Venugopal
et al., 2011; He et al., 2021; 2022; Zhao et al., 2023b; Kuditipudi et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023a;
Kirchenbauer et al., 2023a;b; Christ et al., 2023). Recently, Kirchenbauer et al. (2023a) proposed
the Hard/Soft-Watermark,1 which inserts watermarks by generating text using only a subset of vo-
cabulary. Texts generated by LLMs consist only of a subset of vocabulary, whereas texts written by
humans consist of an entire vocabulary. Thus, we can identify whether LLMs or humans write text
using statistical hypothesis testing. Kirchenbauer et al. (2023a) demonstrated that the Hard/Soft-
Watermark can identify whether LLMs or humans write texts almost perfectly. However, because
LLMs generate texts with only a subset of vocabulary, the generated texts are often of low quality.
   1
     We coined the name “Hard/Soft-Watermark” in this work to refer to the watermarking methods by Kirchen-
bauer et al. (2023a).


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this study, we propose a novel method for inserting watermarks into generated text without sac-
rificing both text quality and detection accuracy, which we refer to as the Necessary and Sufficient
Watermark (NS-Watermark). Our method is based on the observation that the constraint imposed
by the Hard/Soft-Watermark is overly conservative for identifying LLM-generated texts, especially
when the generated texts are long. Hence, we derive minimum constraints required to be imposed
on the generated texts to detect LLM-generated texts. We find that the constraints on the generated
text can be relaxed without decreasing the detection accuracy as the length of the generated text in-
creases. Based on this observation, we propose the NS-Watermark, which can change the constraints
according to the length and impose minimum constraints on the generated text. Owning to the min-
imum constraints, the text generated with the NS-Watermark can be more natural than the text with
the Hard/Soft-Watermark. We experimentally evaluate the effectiveness of the NS-Watermark and
demonstrate that the NS-Watermark can outperform the Soft-Watermark in terms of both text quality
and detection accuracy. Particularly in the machine translation tasks, we demonstrate that the NS-
Watermark can outperform the Soft-Watermark by up to 30 BLEU scores and achieve competitive
BLEU scores compared to conventional decoding methods without watermarks.

2     BACKGROUND
In this section, we briefly describe the watermarking methods proposed by Kirchenbauer et al.
(2023a). Further discussions on related studies are deferred to Sec. 6.
Hard-Watermark. Let xprompt be a prompt, V be vocabulary, and γ ∈ (0, 1) be a hyperparameter.
Given a word xt , using xt as the seed value, we randomly split V into two disjoint subsets: green
words V green (xt ) and red words V red (xt )(:= V \ V green (xt )) such that |V green (xt )| = γ|V |. Then,
the Hard-Watermark generates text as follows:
              arg max p(x1:T | xprompt ) s.t. xt+1 ∈ V green (xt ) (t = 1, 2, · · · , T − 1).           (1)
               x1:T ,T

If humans write the text, the green words appear with probability γ, whereas texts written by LLMs
consist of only green words. Thus, using statistical hypothesis testing, we can identify whether
LLMs or humans write the text. Specifically, the null and alternative hypotheses are given as follows:
                H0 : The green words appear in a text with probability γ.
                H1 : The green words appear in a text with probability greater than γ.
If we reject the null hypothesis, we can conclude that the text is generated by LLMs. The number
of green words follows a binomial distribution in texts written by humans. Thus, we can test this by
checking whether the z-score of text x1:T , defined below, exceeds a given threshold Z.
                        |x1:T |G − γ(T − 1)
            z(x1:T ) := p                   , |x1:T |G := |{xt+1 | xt+1 ∈ V green (xt )}| .             (2)
                           γ(1 − γ)(T − 1)

Soft-Watermark. Although the Hard-Watermark is a simple and efficient method for distinguish-
ing the texts written by LLMs from those written by humans, the generated texts are often of low
quality. One reason for this is that the constraints of the Hard-Watermark may prevent the genera-
tion of common phrases, e.g., “Barack Obama,” even if the probabilities of these phrases are very
high because “Obama” may not be contained in V green (“Barack”). To mitigate this issue, Kirchen-
bauer et al. (2023a) also proposed the Soft-Watermark: instead of making all words contained in
the generated text green words, the Soft-Watermark adds an offset and increases the probability of
generating green words. This relaxation allows the Soft-Watermark to generate “Barack Obama”
when the probability that “Obama” appears after “Barack” is high, and the Soft-Watermark can gen-
erate higher-quality text than the Hard-Watermark. However, the Soft-Watermark still suffers from
low-quality text, as we demonstrate in the experiments.

3     P ROPOSED M ETHOD
3.1   N ECESSARY AND S UFFICIENT WATERMARK

In this section, we show that the constraints of the Hard/Soft-Watermark are too restrictive and derive
the minimum constraint to identify whether LLMs or humans write the text. Rewriting Eq. (1), the


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hard-Watermark is reformulated as follows:
                                                             |x1:T |G
                                                       arg max p(x1:T | xprompt ) s.t.
                                                                      = 1.                         (3)
                               x1:T ,T                        T −1
                                                                   √
Let x̂1:T be the solution of Eq. (3). The z-score z(x̂1:T ) is O( T ), and we can identify whether
LLMs or humans write the text by testing whether the z-score exceeds the hyperparameter Z. How-
ever, the z-score z(x̂1:T ) increases with the length of the generated text T , whereas the threshold
Z remains constant. Therefore, the above formulation in Eq. (3) imposes too restrictive constraint
on the generated text, especially when ensuring z(x1:T ) ≥ Z for long texts. More specifically, the
following constraint is sufficient to ensure that the z-score of the generated text is greater than or
equal to the threshold Z:
                                                                      r
                                                    |x1:T |G            γ(1 − γ)
                   arg max p(x1:T | xprompt ) s.t.           ≥γ+Z                 .                (4)
                     x1:T ,T                         T −   1               T −1

If text x1:T is written by humans, the proportion of green words contained in a text |xT1:T |G
                                                                                          −1 is γ on
average. Thus, the second term in the constraint is the minimum margin for identifying whether the
texts are written by LLMs. We refer to the above problem as the Necessary and Sufficient Water-
mark (NS-Watermark). By comparing Eq. (3) with Eq. (4), the constraint of the NS-Watermark
is looser than that in Eq. (3), although the z-score of the generated text is guaranteed to be greater
than or equal to Z because of the constraint in Eq. (4). Thus, the NS-Watermark can generate higher
quality and more natural texts than the Hard/Soft-Watermark without decreasing detection accuracy.
In the next section, we propose an efficient algorithm for computing the NS-Watermark.

3.2                         NAIVE A LGORITHM FOR N ECESSARY AND S UFFICIENT WATERMARK

The Hard/Soft-Watermark can be computed using the conventional beam search because the Hard-
Watermark generates texts using only green words, and the Soft-Watermark just adds an offset to the
probability that green words appear. However, the NS-Watermark needs to control the proportion
of green words contained in generated texts and needs to optimize where green words should be
inserted. Moreover, the constraint in Eq. (4) depends on the length of the generated text T , which
is unknown until the text is generated. This makes solving the NS-Watermark more challenging,
which hinders the application of the conventional beam search to the NS-Watermark. In this section,
we propose an algorithm to solve the NS-Watermark.
Let k be the beam size. Let T [t][g] be a set of k texts of length t containing g green words. For
simplicity, we explain the cases in which 1 ≤ g and 1 ≤ t. Texts of length t + 1 containing g green
words can be generated by adding a green word to texts of length t containing g − 1 green words

                           199                                                            199                                                        199
                                                                                                                           Number of green words g
 Number of green words g


                                                                Number of green words g


                           150                                                            150                                                        150


                           100                                                            100                                                        100

                            63                                                             63                                                         63
                            50                                                             50                                                         50


                             01    50    100     150      200                               01    50    100   150    200                               01        50   75 100    150     200
                                  Number of words t                                              Number of words t                                              Number of words t
                                               (a) Illustration of Alg. 1                                                                                  (b) Illustration of Alg. 2

Figure 1: Visualization of the table T [t][g] for Tmax = 200, γ = 0.2, Tb = 75, α = 2, Z = 4, and
Gmax = 63. The areas colored in blue and light blue indicate the range in T [t][g] where we need
to calculate, and the areas colored in blue indicate the range that satisfies the constraint of Eq. (4).
The red line indicates the minimum number of green words required to satisfy the constraint. Note
that in the middle and right figures, T [t][Gmax ] does not denote the set of texts of length t containing
Gmax green words, but denotes the set of texts containing at least Gmax green words.


                                                                                                       3
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Algorithm 1: Naive algorithm for the NS-Watermark.
    Input: Maximum number of     pwords Tmax , vocabulary V , beam size k, and hyperparameter γ, Z.
 1 Gmax ← ⌈γ(Tmax − 1) + Z          γ(1 − γ)(Tmax − 1)⌉.
 2 Let T be a Tmax × (Gmax + 1) table and S be an empty set.
 3 Function update(X: feasible set, t: the number of words g: the number of green words) is
 4     T [t][g] ← ∅.
 5     while |T [t][g]| < k do
 6         x1:t = arg maxx1:t ∈X\T [t][g] p(x1:t | xprompt ).
 7         if the last word xt is EOSpthen
 8              if g ≥ γ(t − 1) + Z γ(1 − γ)(t − 1) then
  9                  S ← S ∪ {x1:t }.
10         else
11              T [t][g] ← T [t][g] ∪ {x1:t }.

12 Function feasible set(t: the number of words, g: the number of green words) is
13     if g = 0 then
14          X ← {x1:t | x1:t−1 ∈ T [t − 1][g], xt ∈ V red (xt−1 )}.
15     else if g = t − 1 then
16          X ← {x1:t | x1:t−1 ∈ T [t − 1][g − 1], xt ∈ V green (xt−1 )}.
17     else if 1 ≤ g < Gmax then
18          X ← {x1:t | x1:t−1 ∈ T [t − 1][g − 1], xt ∈ V green (xt−1 )}.
19          X ← X ∪ {x1:t | x1:t−1 ∈ T [t − 1][g], xt ∈ V red (xt−1 )}.
20     else if g = Gmax then
21          X ← {x1:t | x1:t−1 ∈ T [t − 1][g − 1], xt ∈ V green (xt−1 )}.
22          X ← X ∪ {x1:t | x1:t−1 ∈ T [t − 1][g], xt ∈ V }.
23     return X
24 T [1][0] ← arg top-k x ∈V p(x1 | xprompt ).
                            1
25 for t = 2, · · · , Tmax do
26     for g = 0, · · · , min{t − 1, Gmax } do
27          X ← feasible set(t, g).
28          update(X, t, g).
29   return arg maxx1:t ∈S∪T [Tmax ][Gmax ] p(x1:t | xprompt ).



     or adding a red word to texts of length t containing g green words. Formally, we generate text of
     length t + 1 containing g green words as follows:
                                 X1 = {x1:t+1 | x1:t ∈ T [t][g − 1], xt+1 ∈ V green (xt )},
                                X2 = {x1:t+1 | x1:t ∈ T [t][g], xt+1 ∈ V red (xt )},
                        T [t + 1][g] = arg top-k p(x1:t+1 | xprompt ).
                                         x1:t+1 ∈X1 ∪X2

     By calculating T [t][g] for all g and t and generating the text with the highest probability among the
     texts that satisfy the constraint in Eq. (4), we can solve Eq. (4).
     Let Tmax a hyperparameter that controls the maximum length of generated texts. We need to fill
     the table T [t][g] for all (t, g) ∈ {(t, g) ∈ N2 | 1 ≤ t ≤ Tmax , 0 ≤ g ≤ t − 1}, which requires
                                    2
     the timepcomplexity O(kTmax       ) (see the left figure in Fig. 1a). However, if Gmax (:= ⌈γ(Tmax −
     1) + Z γ(1 − γ)(Tmax − 1)⌉) green words appear after generating t words, it is not necessary to
     count the number of green words that appear in the remaining text because the constraint in Eq. (4)
     is satisfied regardless of the remaining text. Based on this observation, we can reduce the time
     complexity by changing T [t][Gmax ] to store texts of length t containing at least Gmax green words,
     instead of texts containing exactly Gmax green words. Owning to this modification, we do not need
     to count the number of green words after Gmax green words appear in texts and can reduce the time
                             2
     complexity to O(γkTmax     ). We provide a visual explanation in the figure on the right side of Fig. 1a
     and show the pseudo-code in Alg. 1.


                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   L INEAR T IME A LGORITHM FOR N ECESSARY AND S UFFICIENT WATERMARK

In the previous section, by combining dynamic programming and beam search, we proposed an
                                                                    2
algorithm to solve the NS-Watermark with time complexity of O(γkTmax  ). However, because LLMs
have an extremely large number of parameters, Alg. 1 still cannot be used in practice due to its
expensive time complexity. To address this issue, we propose approximation methods to reduce the
time complexity of Alg. 1 to linear.
The major bottleneck of the quadratic time complexity in Tmax is that Alg. 1 requires us to fill the
entire table T [t][g] for all (t, g) ∈ {(t, g) | 1 ≤ t ≤ Tmax , 0 ≤ g ≤ min{t − 1, Gmax }}. This
aims at taking into account generated texts in which many green words appear locally, because the
constraint in Eq. (4) only restricts the green words to appear above a certain number in generated
texts. To reduce this time complexity, we propose imposing an additional constraint on the generated
texts such that the green words appear periodically in generated texts. Technically, it is challenging
because, as shown in Eq. (4), the proportion of green words appearing in the generated text depends
on its length T , which is unknown until it is generated. For instance, if a given prompt is a closed-
ended question, the length of a generated text is short, and the proportion of green words needs to
be large. On the other hand, when LLMs generate news articles, the generated text becomes long,
and the proportion of green words can be reduced. Thus, to make green words appear periodically
in the generated text, we need to estimate the length of the generated text before generating it.
To estimate the text length, we leverage the observation that the length of generated texts remains
almost the same regardless of watermarks because the text length is generally determined by the
content of the generated texts, i.e., the prompt. Inspired by this observation, we propose generating
the texts without watermarks using the conventional beam search, obtaining the length of generated
text Tb, and generating text with watermarks by solving the following problem:
  arg max p(x1:T | xprompt )                                                                      (5)
   x1:T ,T
                       r
       |x1:T |G           γ(1 − γ)
 s.t.           ≥γ+Z               ,                                                         (6)
        T −1               T −1
                    (         s          )
      |x1:t |G                  γ(1 − γ)       α
               − min 1, γ + Z              ≤       or |x1:t−1 |G ≥ Gmax (t = 2, · · · , T ), (7)
       t−1                       T −1
                                  b          t − 1
where α ≥ 1 denotes a hyperparameter that controls the approximation rate. Intuitively, the first
inequality in Eq. (7) makes green words appear periodically, and the second inequality in Eq. (7)
verifies whether Gmax green words appear before the first t − 1 words. As explained in the previous
section, if Gmax green words appear after generating t−1 words, the number of green words added in
the remaining texts needs not be counted anymore. Thus, we only need to impose the first inequality
on the generated text until Gmax green words appear. We show the visual explanation in Fig. 1b.
Owning to this additional constraint, we do not need to fill the table T [t][g] for all (t, g) ∈ {(t, g) ∈
N2 | 1 ≤ t ≤ Tmax , 0 ≤ g ≤ min{t − 1, Gmax }}. We only need to fill the table T [t][g] for (t, g) that
satisfies the inequality Eq. (7) (i.e., the colored area in Fig. 1b). Subsequently, the time complexity
can be reduced to O(αkTmax ). We show the pseudo-code in Sec. C.

3.4   ROBUSTNESS TO P OST- EDITING

In the previous sections, we proposed the watermarking methods that impose the minimum con-
straint to detect LLM-generated texts. However, due to the minimality of the constraint, the NS-
Watermark can be removed from the generated texts by replacing only one green word with a red
word. To make the watermarks robust against such editing, we can tighten the constraint as follows:
                                                                    r
                                                  |x1:T |G             γ(1 − γ)
                  arg max p(x1:T | xprompt ) s.t.          ≥γ+β+Z                ,              (8)
                   x1:T ,T                         T −1                  T −1
where β ≥ 0 is a hyperparameter that controls the robustness. Owning to the constraint in Eq. (8),
the z-score of the generated texts exceeds Z even if β(T − 1) green words are replaced with red
words, and we can identify them as the texts generated by LLMs. Moreover, the constraint in Eq. (8)
is also the minimum constraint required to be imposed on the generated texts such that the z-score
exceeds Z after 50β% words are replaced. In Sec. 4.4, we experimentally evaluate the trade-off
between text quality and robustness.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4      E XPERIMENTS

4.1     C OMPARISON M ETHODS

In the following section, we evaluate the following three methods: (1) The Soft-Watermark
(Kirchenbauer et al., 2023a), which generates texts such that almost all words contained in the
texts become green words by increasing the probability that green words appear. A hyperparameter
δ ≥ 0 is a positive offset for the probability that green words appear. When δ is set to a larger
value, more green words appear in the generated texts. (2) The NS-Watermark, which can generate
texts containing the minimum number of green words to detect LLM-generated texts, unlike the
Soft-Watermark. (3) The Adaptive Soft-Watermark, a simple extension of the Soft-Watermark. The
original Soft-Watermark uses the same hyperparameter δ for all texts, and the proportion of green
words contained in a generated text is almost constant regardless of text length. Thus, the probability
offset δ used by the Soft-Watermark increases the number of green words more than necessary to
detect LLM-generated texts, especially for long texts. We improve the Soft-Watermark such that δ
is tuned for each text, which we refer to as the Adaptive Soft-Watermark. Specifically, the Adaptive
Soft-Watermark finds δ by binary search and uses δ such that the z-score is minimum and exceeds
the threshold Z. The pseudo-code of the Adaptive Soft-Watermark is presented in Sec. C.


4.2     M ACHINE T RANSLATION

Experimental Setting. We evaluate the effectiveness of the NS-Watermark on machine transla-
tion tasks. We used NLLB-200-3.3B model (Team et al., 2022) with the test dataset of WMT’14
French (Fr) ↔ English (En) and WMT’16 German (De) ↔ English (En). Following the prior work
(Kirchenbauer et al., 2023a), we set the hyperparameter Z to 4. For other hyperparameters, we
split the data into the validation and test datasets with 10/90 ratio and used the validation dataset to
tune. For the NS-Watermark, we selected the hyperparameter γ with the best BLEU score (Papineni
et al., 2002) on the validation dataset using a grid search. The z-score of texts generated by the
NS-Watermark is guaranteed to be greater than or equal to Z, and the FNR of the NS-Watermark
becomes exactly 0% for any hyperparameters. By contrast, the z-score of text generated by the Soft-
Watermark and Adaptive Soft-Watermark is not guaranteed to be greater than or equal to Z. Thus,
to fairly compare the NS-Watermark with the Soft-Watermark and Adaptive Soft-Watermark, we
selected the hyperparameters of these methods with the best BLEU score while achieving more than
95% FNR in the validation dataset using a grid search. See Sec. B for more detailed hyperparameter
settings.
Results. Table 1 indicates that the NS-Watermark can outperform the Soft-Watermark and Adaptive
Soft-Watermark in terms of both text quality and detection accuracy. For all datasets, the Soft-
Watermark significantly degraded the BLEU scores. The Adaptive Soft-Watermark improved the
BLEU scores by tuning δ for each text, although the Adaptive Soft-Watermark still achieved lower
BLEU scores than the generated texts without watermarks. By contrast, the NS-Watermark out-
performed the Soft-Watermark by approximately 30 BLEU scores and achieved competitive BLEU
Table 1: BLEU scores and detection accuracy with NLLB-200-3.3B and WMT. For the NS-
Watermark, we set α to one and β to zero (see Secs. 3.3 and 3.4 for α and β.).

                                           En → De                                  De → En
                              BLEU ↑   FNR ↓ / TPR ↑ / FPR ↓ / TNR ↑   BLEU ↑   FNR ↓ / TPR ↑ / FPR ↓ / TNR ↑
    w/o Watermark              36.4                n.a.                 42.6                 n.a.
    Soft-Watermark              5.2    3.0% / 97.0% / 0.4% / 99.6%       7.5     3.3% / 96.7% / 0.5% / 99.5%
    Adaptive Soft-Watermark    20.5    0.0% / 100.0% / 2.6% / 97.4%     20.6    0.0% / 100.0% / 1.9% / 98.1%
    NS-Watermark               32.7    0.0% / 100.0% / 0.3% / 99.7%     38.2    0.0% / 100.0% / 0.0% / 100.0%

                                           En → Fr                                  Fr → En
                              BLEU ↑   FNR ↓ / TPR ↑ / FPR ↓ / TNR ↑   BLEU ↑   FNR ↓ / TPR ↑ / FPR ↓ / TNR ↑
    w/o Watermark              42.6                n.a.                 40.8                n.a.
    Soft-Watermark              9.6    5.4% / 94.6% / 0.3% / 99.7%       7.6    3.6% / 96.4% / 0.6% / 99.4%
    Adaptive Soft-Watermark    23.3    0.0% / 100.0% / 2.2% / 97.8%     19.5    0.0% / 100.0% / 2.8% / 97.2%
    NS-Watermark               38.8    0.0% / 100.0% / 0.3% / 99.7%     36.8    0.0% / 100.0% / 0.1% / 99.9%



                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        50                                  = 0.1                              300        = 0.1                                                       300       = 0.1
                                                            = 0.01                                        = 0.01                                                                = 0.01
                                                            = 0.001                            250        = 0.001                                                               = 0.001
                        40                                                                                                                                            250
                                                            = 0.0001
                                                                                               200                                                                    200


                                                                       z-score


                                                                                                                                              z-score
z-score
                        30
                                                                                               150                                                                    150
                        20                                                                     100                                                                    100

                        10                                                                      50                                                                     50
                         4                                                                       4                                                                      4
                             0    20         40   60   80        100                                 0     20        40       60   80   100                                 0   20         40   60   80           100
                                       Number of words                                                          Number of words                                                      Number of words
                                 (a) NS-Watermark                                                        (b) Soft-Watermark                                           (c) Adaptive Soft-Watermark
Figure 2: Relationships between z-score and the length of generated texts. We used the validation
datasets of WMT’16 En→De. For each γ, we tuned the hyperparameter δ of the Soft-Watermark by
increasing 4, 6, 8, · · · and selecting the smallest value such that the FNR becomes less than 5%. We
omit the results of the Soft-Watermark and Adaptive Soft-Watermark for γ = 0.0001 because the
z-scores become too large. Full results are deferred to Sec. D.2.

                        30                                                                     100                                                                    100
                                  = 0.1                                                                   = 0.1                                                                 = 0.1
                                                                                                          = 0.01                                                                = 0.01
                                                                       Number of green words


                                                                                                                                              Number of green words
                                  = 0.01
Number of green words


                        25        = 0.001                                                       80        = 0.001                                                      80       = 0.001
                                  = 0.0001                                                                = 0.0001                                                              = 0.0001
                        20
                                                                                                60                                                                     60
                        15
                                                                                                40                                                                     40
                        10
                                                                                                20                                                                     20
                         5
                                                                                                 0                                                                      0
                         0
                             0    20         40   60   80        100                                 0     20        40       60   80   100                                 0   20         40   60   80           100
                                       Number of words                                                          Number of words                                                      Number of words
                                 (a) NS-Watermark                                                        (b) Soft-Watermark                                           (c) Adaptive Soft-Watermark
Figure 3: Relationships between the length of generated texts and the number of green words con-
tained in generated texts. The experimental settings are the same as in Fig. 2.
scores with the conventional beam search without watermarks. Moreover, the NS-Watermark can
achieve 100.0% TPR because the NS-Watermark is guaranteed to insert a sufficient number of green
words into the generated texts.
Analysis of z-score and Number of Green Words. Figure 2 shows the z-scores and length of
generated texts, and Fig. 3 shows the number of green words in the generated texts. In the Soft-
Watermark, the number of green words and z-score increased as generated texts became longer. As
discussed in Sec. 3.3, the proportion of green words can be reduced as the length of generated texts
increases. However, the Soft-Watermark cannot change the proportion of green words adaptively
to the length of generated texts, resulting in generating texts with unnecessarily many green words
for long texts. The Adaptive Soft-Watermark mitigates this problem by tuning δ for each text, al-
though its z-score still increased as the length increased. By contrast, the NS-Watermark can change
the proportion of green words adaptively to the length,          35
and Figs. 2 and 3 indicate that the z-score of the NS-
Watermark does not increase even if the length of the gen-       30
erated text increases. Thus, the NS-Watermark imposes
the minimum constraint to make the z-score of generated          25
                                                                                                                                    BLEU


texts exceed the threshold Z(= 4) and can generate more
natural and higher-quality texts than the Soft-Watermark         20
and Adaptive Soft-Watermark.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          = 0.1
Analysis of Approximation Rate α. In the above                  15                          = 0.01
                                                                                            = 0.001
experiments, we demonstrated that the NS-Watermark                                          = 0.0001
can outperform the Soft-Watermark and Adaptive Soft-            10
                                                                   1      2        3     4         5
Watermark when α is set to one. As we explained in
Sec. 3.3, the text quality can be increased using the larger Figure 4: Text quality when varying α.
α. In the following, we analyze the sensitivity of α on We evaluated BLEU scores using the
text quality. Figure 4 shows the results when varying α. validation dataset of WMT’16 En→De.


                                                                                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Text quality and detection accuracy with LLaMA-7B and C4 dataset. For the NS-
Watermark, we set α to one and β to zero.
                                                            PPL ↓        FNR ↓ / TPR ↑ / FPR ↓ / TNR ↑
              w/o Watermark                                 1.85                        n.a.
              Soft-Watermark                                6.25            2.8% / 97.2% / 0.1% / 99.9%
              Adaptive Soft-Watermark                       2.48            0.2% / 99.8% / 0.8% / 99.2%
              NS-Watermark                                  1.92            0.0% / 100.0% / 0.3% / 99.7%
                    10                                                      35
                                = 0.1                                                                           = 0.1
                                = 0.01                                                                          = 0.01
                                = 0.001                                     30                                  = 0.001
                     8
                                = 0.0001                                                                        = 0.0001
                                                                            25
                     6


                                                                     BLEU
              PPL



                                                                            20
                     4
                                                                            15

                     2                                                      10

                     0
                         0.00      0.05       0.10   0.15     0.20               0.00      0.05   0.10   0.15        0.20


                                           (a) C4                                       (b) WMT’16 En→De
Figure 5: Trade-off between text quality and robustness against post-editing. We set the hyperpa-
rameter α to one.
The results indicate that when γ is large, the BLEU scores increase with α, but when γ is small,
the BLEU scores are almost the same. This is because more green words need to be contained in
the generated texts when γ is large. Therefore, the larger γ, the greater the influence of the ap-
proximation, and we need to use large α to generate high-quality texts. Fortunately, because the
NS-Watermark achieved the best BLEU score when γ was small, we can use the small α without
degrading text quality in practice. In Sec. D.1, the running time is presented when α is varied.

4.3   NATURAL L ANGUAGE G ENERATION

Experimental Setting. Next, we compare the NS-Watermark and the Soft-Watermark in terms
of perplexity (PPL). We used LLaMA-7B model (Touvron et al., 2023) with the subsets of C4,
realnews-like dataset (Raffel et al., 2020). Based on the prior work (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023a), we
split each text and used the first 90% of words as the prompt to infer the remaining 10% of words
using LLMs. We regarded the last 10% of words contained in the data as the text written by humans
and compared the NS-Watermark with the Soft-Watermark (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023a) and Adap-
tive Soft-Watermark in terms of PPL and detection accuracy. Then, we set the hyperparameter Z to
4. To tune hyperparameters, we split the dataset into validation and test datasets with 10/90 ratio.
As in the previous section, we selected the hyperparameters of the Soft-Watermark and Adaptive
Soft-Watermark with the best PPL while achieving more than 95% FNR in the validation dataset
using a grid search. See Sec. B for more detailed hyperparameter settings.
Results. The results are listed in Table 2. The results were consistent with those presented in
Sec. 4.2. The Soft-Watermark significantly degraded the PPL. The Adaptive Soft-Watermark im-
proved the PPL by tuning δ for each text, although the Adaptive Soft-Watermark still degraded the
text quality. By contrast, the NS-Watermark achieved the competitive PPL with the conventional
beam search without watermarks. Then, the NS-Watermark can outperform the Soft-Watermark and
Adaptive Soft-Watermark in terms of text quality and detection accuracy.

4.4   ROBUSTNESS TO P OST- EDITING

In the above experiments, we evaluated the NS-Watermark with β = 0. Next, we evaluate the
NS-Watermark when varying β. Figure 5 shows the trade-off between text quality and robustness
β. The Soft-Watermark cannot precisely control the robustness of watermarks against post-editing
because the Soft-Watermark cannot control the number of green words inserted into generated texts.
By contrast, the NS-Watermark can precisely control the robustness using the hyperparameters β
and can minimize the degradation of text quality, owning to the minimum constraint.


                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5   N ECESSARY AND S UFFICIENT WATERMARK IS P ROVABLY B ETTER THAN
    S OFT-WATERMARK
In Sec. 4, we demonstrated that the Soft-Watermark imposes overly restrictive constraints on gener-
ated texts and inserts too many green words into texts to detect LLM-generated texts. The Adaptive
Soft-Watermark tunes the hyperparameter δ for each text, but Sec. 4 showed that the Adaptive Soft-
Watermark remains to insert too many green words into texts. We rigorously analyze this issue, pro-
viding the following theorem, which shows that no matter how well the hyperparameter δ is tuned
for each text, the Soft-Watermark cannot precisely control the number of green words in generated
texts and generates text that contains more than the required number of green words.
Theorem 1 (Informal). If we select minimum δ ⋆ ∈ R such that the z-score of the text generated by
the Soft-Watermark exceeds the threshold Z, the Soft-Watermark generates a text that contains more
than the required number of green words with non-zero probability.

The formal theorem and its proof are presented in Sec. A. Unlike the Soft-Watermark and Adaptive
Soft-Watermark, the NS-Watermark can insert the minimum number of green words into generated
texts using dynamic programming and thus can generate more natural and higher-quality texts than
these existing methods.

6   R ELATED W ORK
Watermarking Methods. Watermarking methods detect LLM-generated texts by inserting imper-
ceptible information into generated texts. Watermarking methods have been extensively studied for
images and audio (Luo et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023). However, due to the discrete structure of
language, watermarking methods for natural language have been more challenging than those for
images and audio. Recently, Kirchenbauer et al. (2023a) proposed the first practical watermarking
method for LLMs. Kuditipudi et al. (2023) have extended it and proposed methods that are ro-
bust against post-editing, and Christ et al. (2023) proposed undetectable methods. These methods
skew the distributions of generated texts (e.g., the distribution of green and red words) and detect
LLM-generated texts using statistical hypothesis testing. One advantage of watermarking methods
is their high detection accuracy. Furthermore, thanks to statistical hypothesis testing, the FPR can
be explicitly adjusted by the hyperparameter. However, because watermarking methods need to
modify generated texts, generated texts are often of low quality. Our experiments indicated that the
existing methods underestimated the degradation of text quality caused by watermarking, and the
NS-Watermark differs from them in that it aims at minimizing text-quality degradation.
In addition to identifying whether LLMs or humans write each text, watermarking methods have
been also applied to detect model extraction attacks (He et al., 2021; 2022; Zhao et al., 2023b;
Peng et al., 2023). These methods insert watermarks into the released models and detect the model
extraction attacks by checking whether the suspect models have the same watermarks.
Post-hoc Detection Methods. As an alternative approach, post-hoc detection methods have been
proposed (Zellers et al., 2019; Gehrmann et al., 2019; Tian & Cui, 2023; Mitchell et al., 2023).
Zellers et al. (2019) and Tian & Cui (2023) proposed training additional models to detect LLM-
generated texts. Mitchell et al. (2023) also found that LLM-generated texts tend to be texts at which
the curvature of the LLMs’ log-likelihood becomes negative and demonstrated that those can be
identified without training additional models. These post-hoc detection methods do not degrade text
quality because they do not need to modify generated texts. However, post-hoc detection methods
are inferior to watermarking methods in terms of detection accuracy (Krishna et al., 2023).

7   C ONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed the Necessary and Sufficient Watermark (NS-Watermark) for inserting
watermarks into generated texts without degrading text quality. More specifically, we derived the
minimum constraint required to be imposed on generated texts to detect LLM-generated texts. Then,
we formulated the NS-Watermark as a constrained optimization problem and proposed an efficient
algorithm to solve it. We conducted the experiments on various tasks, demonstrating that the NS-
Watermark can achieve 0% false negative rate with negligible text quality degradation.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras, Jianfeng Gao, and Yejin Choi. PIQA: reasoning about
  physical commonsense in natural language. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde, Jared Kaplan, Harrison
 Edwards, Yura Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger,
 Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick
 Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter,
 Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, David W. Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis,
 Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William H. Guss, Alex Nichol, Igor Babuschkin, S. Arun
 Balaji, Shantanu Jain, Andrew Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
 Alec Radford, Matthew M. Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder,
 Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluat-
 ing large language models trained on code. In ArXiv, 2021.

Miranda Christ, Sam Gunn, and Or Zamir. Undetectable watermarks for language models. In arXiv,
 2023.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
  Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu,
  Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pel-
  lat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao,
  Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin,
  Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
  models. In arXiv, 2022.

Sebastian Gehrmann, Hendrik Strobelt, and Alexander Rush. GLTR: Statistical detection and visu-
  alization of generated text. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2019.

Xuanli He, Qiongkai Xu, L. Lyu, Fangzhao Wu, and Chenguang Wang. Protecting intellectual
  property of language generation apis with lexical watermark. In AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2021.

Xuanli He, Qiongkai Xu, Yi Zeng, Lingjuan Lyu, Fangzhao Wu, Jiwei Li, and Ruoxi Jia. CATER:
  Intellectual property protection on text generation APIs via conditional watermarks. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly
 supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Annual Meeting of the Association
 for Computational Linguistics, 2017.

John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. A
  watermark for large language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023a.

John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Manli Shu, Khalid Saifullah, Kezhi Kong, Kasun
  Fernando, Aniruddha Saha, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. On the reliability of water-
  marks for large language models. In arXiv, 2023b.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang (Shane) Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kalpesh Krishna, Yixiao Song, Marzena Karpinska, John Wieting, and Mohit Iyyer. Paraphrasing
  evades detectors of ai-generated text, but retrieval is an effective defense. In arXiv, 2023.

Rohith Kuditipudi, John Thickstun, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Robust distortion-free
  watermarks for language models. In arXiv, 2023.

Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion
  Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav
  Petrov. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering research. In Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.

Chang Liu, Jie Zhang, Han Fang, Zehua Ma, Weiming Zhang, and Nenghai Yu. Dear: A deep-
  learning-based audio re-recording resilient watermarking. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence, 2023.

Xiyang Luo, Ruohan Zhan, Huiwen Chang, Feng Yang, and Peyman Milanfar. Distortion agnostic
  deep watermarking. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2020.

Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn. De-
  tectGPT: Zero-shot machine-generated text detection using probability curvature. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: A method for automatic eval-
  uation of machine translation. In Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2002.

Wenjun Peng, Jingwei Yi, Fangzhao Wu, Shangxi Wu, Bin Bin Zhu, Lingjuan Lyu, Binxing Jiao,
 Tong Xu, Guangzhong Sun, and Xing Xie. Are you copying my model? protecting the copyright
 of large language models for EaaS via backdoor watermark. In Annual Meeting of the Association
 for Computational Linguistics, 2023.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. In Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2020.

NLLB Team, Marta R. Costa-jussà, James Cross, Onur Çelebi, Maha Elbayad, Kenneth Heafield,
 Kevin Heffernan, Elahe Kalbassi, Janice Lam, Daniel Licht, Jean Maillard, Anna Sun, Skyler
 Wang, Guillaume Wenzek, Al Youngblood, Bapi Akula, Loic Barrault, Gabriel Mejia Gonzalez,
 Prangthip Hansanti, John Hoffman, Semarley Jarrett, Kaushik Ram Sadagopan, Dirk Rowe, Shan-
 non Spruit, Chau Tran, Pierre Andrews, Necip Fazil Ayan, Shruti Bhosale, Sergey Edunov, Angela
 Fan, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Francisco Guzmán, Philipp Koehn, Alexandre Mourachko,
 Christophe Ropers, Safiyyah Saleem, Holger Schwenk, and Jeff Wang. No language left behind:
 Scaling human-centered machine translation. In arXiv, 2022.

Edward Tian and Alexander Cui. Gptzero: Towards detection of ai-generated text using zero-shot
  and supervised methods, 2023. URL https://gptzero.me.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. In arXiv, 2023.

Ashish Venugopal, Jakob Uszkoreit, David Talbot, Franz Och, and Juri Ganitkevitch. Watermark-
  ing the outputs of structured prediction with an application in statistical machine translation. In
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2011.

Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Hannah Rashkin, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, Franziska Roesner, and
  Yejin Choi. Defending against neural fake news. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2019.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  OPT: Open pre-trained transformer language models. In arXiv, 2022.
Xuandong Zhao, Prabhanjan Ananth, Lei Li, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Provable robust watermarking
  for ai-generated text. In arXiv, 2023a.
Xuandong Zhao, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Lei Li. Protecting language generation models via invisible
  watermarking. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023b.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Assumption 1. The beam size is set to one.
Assumption 2. The length of generated texts T is sufficiently long.
Assumption 3. ∆ = R.
Assumption 4. The hyperparameter γ is sufficiently small such that the text generated by the greedy
search does not contain green words, and texts containing a single green word have a z-score greater
than the threshold Z for any length T .
Assumption 5. For any prompt xprompt and generated text x1:T , Lt (x1:T ), defined below, is an
independent and identically distributed random variable that follows the distribution Lt (x1:T ) ∼
p(·):
          Lt (x1:T ) := logit(xt | x1:t−1 , xprompt ) −          max            logit(x | x1:t−1 , xprompt ),
                                                            x∈V green (xt−1 )

where logit(· | ·) is the output just before the last softmax layer in LLMs. Furthermore, we assume
that its cumulative distribution function is strictly increasing.
Lemma 1. Let r1:T be the text generated by greedy search (i.e., text without watermarks). We
then select the minimum δ ⋆ ∈ ∆ such that the z-score of the text generated by the Soft-Watermark
exceeds the threshold Z. Under Assumptions 1, 2, 4, and 5, the selected hyperparameter δ ⋆ satisfies
the following:
                                δ ⋆ := min{δ ∈ ∆ | δ ≥ min Lt (r1:T )}.
                                        δ                         t

Furthermore, under Assumption 3, δ ⋆ satisfies
                                            δ ⋆ = min Lt (r1:T ).
                                                   t


Proof. If δ < mint Lt (r1:T ), the text generated by the Soft-Watermark is r1:T and does not contain
green words. If δ ≥ mint Lt (r1:T ), (min{t | Lt (r1:T ) ≤ δ})-th word becomes a green word, and
the text contains at least one green word. Thus, we can obtain the statement.
Theorem 1 (Formal). We select the minimum δ ⋆ ∈ ∆ such that the z-score of the text generated by
the Soft-Watermark exceeds the threshold Z. Under Assumptions 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, the text generated
by the Soft-Watermark with δ ⋆ contains two or more green words with probability 1 − log 2.

Proof. Let r1:T be the text generated by the greedy search. We define c(·) and Lmin as follows:
                                               Z ∞
                                       c(a) :=      p(l)dl ,
                                                       a
                                         Lmin := min Lt (r1:T ).
                                                       t

From Lemma 1, we have δ = mint Lt (r1:T ) and t⋆ (:= min{t | Lt (r1:T ) ≤ δ})-th word becomes
                            ⋆

a green word in the text generated by the Soft-Watermark. Then, the probability that the remaining
                                               ⋆
text has no green words is c(Lmin )T −t . Moreover, giving that the t⋆ has equal probabilities for
2, 3, · · · , T , the probability that the texts generated by the Soft-Watermark with δ ⋆ contain only one
green word is given as
                                  T
                             1 X                       1 − c(Lmin )T −1
                                     c(Lmin )T −t =                       .                                     (9)
                           T − 1 t=2                (T − 1)(1 − c(Lmin ))
Next, we consider the distribution of Lmin . Now, we have
                                       Pr(Lmin ≥ a) = c(a)T −1 .
Thus, by substituting a = c−1 (1 − T −1
                                     s
                                        ), we can get
                                              s                s T −1
                          Pr(Lmin ≥ c−1 (1 −       )) = (1 −      )   ,
                                            T −1             T −1
                                   s                           s T −1
                             Pr(      ≤ 1 − c(Lmin )) = (1 −      )   .
                                 T −1                        T −1


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Defining Y = (T − 1)(1 − c(Lmin )), we obtain
                                                   s T −1 T →∞
                        Pr(Y ≤ s) = 1 − (1 −          )   −−−−→ 1 − e−s .                      (10)
                                                 T −1
By substituting the definition of Y , we can rewrite Eq. (9) as follows:
                         T
                    1 X                    1 − (1 − TY−1 )T −1 T →∞ 1 − e−Y
                            c(Lmin )T −t =                     −−−−→        .                  (11)
                  T − 1 t=2                        Y                   Y

Combining Eqs. (10) and (11), we can obtain the statement.

Assumption 4 indicates that a single green word is sufficient to make the z-score exceed the thresh-
old. However, Theorem 1 indicates that texts generated by the Soft-Watermark contain two or more
green words with non-zero probability, even if we tune the hyperparameter δ for each text.

B    H YPERPARAMETER S ETTING
In our experiments, we set the hyperparameters as follows.

                      Table 3: Hyperparameter settings for the NS-Watermark.

                 Pre-trained model     NLLB-200 / LLaMA
                 k                     1
                 Tmax                  100
                 γ                     Grid search over {0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001}.


                     Table 4: Hyperparameter settings for the Soft-Watermark.

                 Pre-trained model     NLLB-200 / LLaMA
                 k                     1
                 Tmax                  100
                 γ                     Grid search over {0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001}.
                 δ                     Grid search over {4, 6, 8}.


                Table 5: Hyperparameter settings for the Adaptive Soft-Watermark.

                 Pre-trained model     NLLB-200 / LLaMA
                 k                     1
                 Tmax                  100
                 γ                     Grid search over {0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001}.
                 ∆                     {4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14}
                 δ                     Binary search over ∆ for each text.


                                                  14
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     C    P SEUDO - CODES

   Algorithm 2: Linear time algorithm for the NS-Watermark.
   Input: Maximum number of words Tmax , vocabulary V , beam size k, the length of generated
                              p T , hyperparameter γ, Z, α.
          texts without watermarks  b
 1 Gmax ← ⌈γ(Tmax − 1) + Z      γ(1 − γ)(Tmax − 1)⌉
                      q
                         γ(1−γ)
 2 L ← min{1, γ + Z             }
                          Tb−1
 3 Let T be a Tmax × Gmax table and S be an empty set.
 4 T [1][0] ← arg top-k x1 ∈V p(x1 | xprompt ).
 5 for t = 2, · · · , Tmax do
 6     gmin ← min{Gmax , max{0, ⌈L(t − 1) − α⌉}}
 7     gmax ← min{Gmax , t − 1, ⌊L(t − 1) + α⌋}
 8     for g = gmin , · · · , gmax do
 9          X ← feasible set(t, g)
10          update(X, t, g).
11   return arg maxx1:t ∈S∪T [Tmax ][Gmax ] p(x1:t | xprompt )



   Algorithm 3: Adaptive Soft-Watermark.
   Input: Maximum number of words Tmax , vocabulary V , beam size k, hyperparameter γ, Z, α,
             and set ∆.
 1 Let δ1 , · · · , δ|∆| be the elements in ∆ in ascending order.

 2 a, c ← 1, |∆|.
           ⋆
 3 zmin , δ ← ∞, δ|∆| .

 4 while a ≤ c do
 5     b ← ⌈ a+c   2 ⌉.
 6     Generate a text using the Soft-Watermark with δb .
 7     if the z-score of the generated text is greater than or equal to Z then
 8           c←b
 9           if the z-score is greater than zmin then
10                 Store z-score in zmin .
11                 δ ⋆ ← δb .
12       else
13           a←b
14   return the text generated by the Soft-Watermark with δ ⋆ .


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D              A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R EUSLTS
D.1                RUNNING T IME

Figure 6 shows the running time when varying α. The results indicate that the running time increases
as α increases when γ is large. This result was consistent with the time complexity of Alg. 2, which
we discussed in Sec. 3.3. Then, when γ was small, the running time was almost the same even if α
increased. This is because when γ is small, Gmax is small, and the range in the table T [t][g] where
we need to fill in Alg. 1 is small. Thus, the range in T [t][g] where we need to calculate does not
increase even if α increases when γ is small.

                                                           25
                                                                                = 0.1
                                                                                = 0.01
                                                           20                   = 0.001
                                                                                = 0.0001
                                                                               Soft-Watermark
                                                 Seconds
                                                           15

                                                           10

                                                            5

                                                            0
                                                                   1                 2             3             4            5


Figure 6: Time required to generate a text when varying α. To measure the running time, we
used the validation dataset of WMT’16 En→De and reported the average running time. For γ =
0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, Gmax is 22, 5, 2, and 1, respectively.


D.2                V ISUALIZATION

          50                                 = 0.1                1000             = 0.1                                             1000       = 0.1
                                             = 0.01                                = 0.01                                                       = 0.01
                                             = 0.001                               = 0.001                                                      = 0.001
          40                                 = 0.0001              800                                                                800
                                                                                   = 0.0001                                                     = 0.0001

                                                                   600                                                                600
z-score


                                                        z-score


                                                                                                                           z-score


          30

                                                                   400                                                                400
          20
                                                                   200                                                                200
          10
           4                                                           4                                                                4
               0     20      40   60    80        100                      0       20         40       60   80       100                    0   20         40   60   80   100
                          Number of words                                                Number of words                                             Number of words
                    (a) NS-Watermark                                            (b) Soft-Watermark                                    (c) Adaptive Soft-Watermark
Figure 7: Relationships between z-score and the length of generated texts. We used the validation
datasets of WMT’16 En→De. For each γ, we tuned the hyperparameter δ of the Soft-Watermark by
increasing 4, 6, 8, · · · and selecting the smallest value such that the FNR becomes less than 5%.


                                                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3       E XAMPLES OF G ENERATED T EXTS

                        Table 6: Texts generated by the NS-Watermark on WMT’16 Ge→En.
 w/o Watermark                                                          NS-Watermark                                                             z-score
 The station and the majority of the staff move from Peißenberg to      The station and the majority of the staff move from Peicaenberg to       22.9
 Schongau.                                                              Schongau.

 A Downing Street spokeswoman said the text was likely from             A Downing Street spokeswoman said himself that the text probably         21.3
 Cameron’s constituency office.                                         came from Cameron’s constituency office.

 Accurate records of the early years could not be produced by the       Accurate indicators of the early years could not be provided by the      24.2
 defendants.                                                            defendants.

 For some products, such as televisions and washing machines, more      For some products, such as televisions and washing machines, more        17.9
 than a third of purchases are now made through online shops.           than a third of purchases are now made mechanically via web shops.

 Knowles said that Prentiss, who had a dog named Lightning, had         Knowles said himself that Prentiss, who had a dog named Lightning,       19.6
 been seeing Lamb for about three years.                                had been seeing Lamb for about three years.

 A 16-year-old girl from Rhineland-Palatinate, who has been missing     A 16-year-old girl from Rhineland Austrian Palatinate, who has been      17.6
 since Saturday, has been the victim of a violent crime.                missing since Saturday, has been the victim of a violent crime.

 Phillip Cocu, the PSV coach, said, ''It’s a very bad injury''.         Phillip Cocu, the PSV coach, said himself: ''It’s a very bad injury''.   21.8

 Austrian Interior Minister Johanna Mikl-Leitner told Austrian broad-   Austrian Interior Minister Johanna Mikl-Leitner told Austrian broad-     17.4
 caster ORF on Tuesday evening that no one would be sent back to        caster ORF on Tuesday evening that no one would apply for repatri-
 Hungary.                                                               ation to Hungary.


                       Table 7: Texts generated by the Soft-Watermark on WMT’16 Ge→En.
 w/o Watermark                                                          Soft-Watermark                                                           z-score
 The station and the majority of the staff move from Peißenberg to      The radio factory and most of the agents moved from Peinenberg to        11.4
 Schongau.                                                              Schongau.

 A Downing Street spokeswoman said the text was likely from             A Downing Street spokeswoman said the text most likely did come          3.8
 Cameron’s constituency office.                                         from Cameron’s constituency office.

 Accurate records of the early years could not be produced by the       Accurate logs cover previous years but some accusers cannot claim        35.1
 defendants.                                                            total incarcvi˜oirs have returned.

 For some products, such as televisions and washing machines, more      For several products, such as televisions and washing machines,          5.2
 than a third of purchases are now made through online shops.

 Knowles said that Prentiss, who had a dog named Lightning, had         Knowles said thatprentiss,whoisposedby adishen Iissimathyrdishen         37.3
 been seeing Lamb for about three years.                                thathe keptor went dating lamb.

 A 16-year-old girl from Rhineland-Palatinate, who has been missing     A 16-year-old girl from Rhineland-Palatinate is missing since Satur-     6.0
 since Saturday, has been the victim of a violent crime.                day. However,

 Phillip Cocu, the PSV coach, said, ''It’s a very bad injury''.         Phillip Cocu, the PSV coach, did say,                                    5.5

 Austrian Interior Minister Johanna Mikl-Leitner told Austrian broad-   Austrian Commissioner Johannes Leiner highlighted that work-             31.8
 caster ORF on Tuesday evening that no one would be sent back to        protection measures required prior investigation upon abduction oc-
 Hungary.                                                               curred. However,


               Table 8: Texts generated by the Adaptive Soft-Watermark on WMT’16 Ge→En.
 w/o Watermark                                                          Adaptive Soft-Watermark                                                  z-score
 The station and the majority of the staff move from Peißenberg to      The major part of the agents and office staff move from Peißenberg       21.1
 Schongau.                                                              to Schongau.

 A Downing Street spokeswoman said the text was likely from             A Downing Street spokeswoman said the text was likely developed          6.8
 Cameron’s constituency office.                                         by Cameron’s constituency office.

 Accurate records of the early years could not be produced by the       Accurate indicators of the early years them? Litiny impossible vtor-     250.5
 defendants.                                                            dia but historicula reports testing integration bo tools thus study e
                                                                        susminine simple intermitenen grewt whether both thhing acts lost
                                                                        caase realization faster slow lo repayment barrs -declarisoh program
                                                                        said full seriesx comment To ob through ly demader sularin some-
                                                                        thing liana tea makes

 For some products, such as televisions and washing machines, more      For some products, such as televisions and washing machines, more        5.8
 than a third of purchases are now made through online shops.           than a third of purchases are now made through online shops.

 Knowles said that Prentiss, who had a dog named Lightning, had         Knowles said that Prentiss, who had, uh, a dog named Lightning,          11.2
 been seeing Lamb for about three years.                                had, uh, been seeing Lamb for about three years.

 A 16-year-old girl from Rhineland-Palatinate, who has been missing     A 16-year-old girl from Magdeburg, Landsbaziera regional compre-         269.5
 since Saturday, has been the victim of a violent crime.                ondenzinga previously/ ontically missing!lt hereso seems thhing acts
                                                                        of violence At His urling Uneleught ganglands monthlie for Marshad
                                                                        no More weekend 635 hatg treat Bagnanaa L 635 hatg treat Bag-
                                                                        nanaa L 635 hatg treat Bagnanaa L 635 hatg treat Bagnanaa L 635
                                                                        hatg treat Bagnanaa L

 Phillip Cocu, the PSV coach, said, ''It’s a very bad injury''.         Phillip Cocu, the PSV coach, said, ''It’s a very bad shot''.             6.9

 Austrian Interior Minister Johanna Mikl-Leitner told Austrian broad-   Austrian Interior Minister Johanna Mikl-Leitner told Austrian broad-     5.3
 caster ORF on Tuesday evening that no one would be sent back to        caster ORF on Tuesday evening that no one would be sent back to
 Hungary.                                                               Hungary also now.


                                                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                         Table 9: Texts generated by the NS-Watermark on WMT’14 Fr→En.
 w/o Watermark                                                              NS-Watermark                                                                  z-score
 The court blocks a ruling on the NYPD’s search and seizure policy.         The court blocks a ruling on the NYPD’s search initiative.                    25.0

 Germany and a few of its satellite economies could keep the euro,          Germany and a few of its satellite economies could keep the euro,             19.2
 but France and southern Europe would get their own currency back.          but France and southern Europe would apply their own currencies.

 The science of how a child will develop a sexual identity is not very      The science spanning how a child will develop a sexual identity is            23.5
 precise.                                                                   not very precise.

 This loss of genetic heritage would be much more problematic.              This loss of genetic Heritage would be much more problematic.                 27.7

 We would welcome a CASA review that would allow the use of elec-           We would welcome a CASA review that would apply the use of                    12.9
 tronic devices because we really believe that would improve the cus-       electronic devices as we really believe that this would improve the
 tomer experience now that we have (the in-flight entertainment sys-        customer experience now that we have (the in-flight entertainment
 tem using Wi-Fi technology) on our aircraft, a spokesperson said.          system using Wi-Fi technology) on our aircraft, a spokesperson said.

 Vettel wearing a special helmet in Abu Dhabi                               Vettel wearing a speciallara helmet in Abu Dhabi                              30.1

 Little by little, in small appearances by day or by night, a little shy,   Little by little, in small appearances by day or by night, a little shy,      13.3
 a little erased, she soon came back to my mind, evolving as she took       a little erased, she soon came back to my mind, evanescent as she
 her place in the landscape of my thought that thought itself in mourn-     took her place in the landscape of my thought that thought itself in
 ing.                                                                       mourning.

 However, given the ease with which their behavior can be recorded, it      However, given the ease with which their behavior can be recorded, it         16.4
 probably won’t take long before we understand why their tails some-        probably won’t take long before we understand why their tails either
 times move to one side and sometimes to the other.                         move to one side or the other.


                       Table 10: Texts generated by the Soft-Watermark on WMT’14 Fr→En.
 w/o Watermark                                                              Soft-Watermark                                                                z-score
 The court blocks a ruling on the NYPD’s search and seizure policy.         The court... blocks a reconsideration and inspection initiative... to-        26.6
                                                                            wards finalizing two plans for your departure... giving,

 Germany and a few of its satellite economies could keep the euro,          Germany and a few of its satellite economies could hold onto the              23.5
 but France and southern Europe would get their own currency back.          euro, but Italyand Algeria would call on peoplefathering foreign
                                                                            economies to balance debt exchange

 The science of how a child will develop a sexual identity is not very      The science of how a sexual identity develops in a child is not firmly        8.8
 precise.                                                                   current today.

 This loss of genetic heritage would be much more problematic.              This loss of genetic origin would be rather even more interesting.            11.3

 We would welcome a CASA review that would allow the use of elec-           We would welcome further review by CASA including the usage of                17.0
 tronic devices because we really believe that would improve the cus-       electronic devices as we believe it would really improve the customer
 tomer experience now that we have (the in-flight entertainment sys-        experience now that we have (scan, built-in entertainment system
 tem using Wi-Fi technology) on our aircraft, a spokesperson said.          now using Wi-Fi technology) on our aircraft,

 Vettel wearing a special helmet in Abu Dhabi                               Vettel was getting its custom workout helmet carried In Abu Dhabi             33.7
                                                                            yesterday ''Closed publicly/Oct''.

 Little by little, in small appearances by day or by night, a little shy,   Little by little, in wailings midday and night ashes only ever look at        38.5
 a little erased, she soon came back to my mind, evolving as she took       an illusive vision, did ’the heroes arrive until hours. However,
 her place in the landscape of my thought that thought itself in mourn-
 ing.

 However, given the ease with which their behavior can be recorded, it      However, knowing it is so easy to record behaviour should only ever           29.3
 probably won’t take long before we understand why their tails some-        provide a theory of reasoning within large numbers of tumbocats''.
 times move to one side and sometimes to the other.


              Table 11: Texts generated by the Adaptive Soft-Watermark on WMT’14 Fr→En.
 w/o Watermark                                                              Adaptive Soft-Watermark                                                       z-score
 The court blocks a ruling on the NYPD’s search and seizure policy.         The American president closed the metro government upon White                 169.6
                                                                            Deedat one below 20-see eyes. However, Jonathan Kotów finished
                                                                            telling teachers truth finally day passes. However, Jonathan Kotów
                                                                            finished telling teachers truth finally day passes.

 Germany and a few of its satellite economies could keep the euro,          Germany and a few of its satellite economies could keep the euro,             27.4
 but France and southern Europe would get their own currency back.          but France and southern Europe would gradually gained change right
                                                                            back into their own yen.

 The science of how a child will develop a sexual identity is not very      The science of how a sexual identity develops in a child is not very          7.3
 precise.                                                                   precise.

 This loss of genetic heritage would be much more problematic.              This loss of genetic Heritage would be much more problematic.                 8.7

 We would welcome a CASA review that would allow the use of elec-           We would welcome a CASA related novel regulation leaving elec-                227.8
 tronic devices because we really believe that would improve the cus-       tronics allodial because we really believe an modernization proce-
 tomer experience now that we have (the in-flight entertainment sys-        dure would apply presently/now that we have web network turns!lt
 tem using Wi-Fi technology) on our aircraft, a spokesperson said.          here—asa component consisting of application: [truncated...]

 Vettel wearing a special helmet in Abu Dhabi                               Vettel leading a collegiate seat till 20:00 in Emirates gala was wider        89.6
                                                                            than to modern Germany.

 Little by little, in small appearances by day or by night, a little shy,   Little by little, in small spots, day and night, a little shy, a little out   8.3
 a little erased, she soon came back to my mind, evolving as she took       of focus, she soon came back to my mind, evolving as she took her
 her place in the landscape of my thought that thought itself in mourn-     place in the landscape of my thinking that thought it was in mourn-
 ing.                                                                       ing.

 However, given the ease with which their behavior can be recorded, it      However, given the ease with which their behavior can be recorded, it         5.0
 probably won’t take long before we understand why their tails some-        probably won’t take long before we understand why their tails either
 times move to one side and sometimes to the other.                         move to one side or the other.


                                                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Table 12: Texts generated by beam search on C4. We show the z-score for γ = 0.0001.
  Prompt                                                                      w/o Watermark
  [...]of polyester, but there are so many variables (shipping, man-          umes that kids can wear for a year or two, whereas homemade cos-          -0.1
  ufacturing, etc) that I don’t think it’s really confirmable which is        tumes are more of a one-time use product.\nI do think that it’s a
  greener.\nOf course, not every child has a parent who can, or has           shame that homemade costumes are being pushed out in favor of
  time to, cut a pattern, buy fabric, cut fabric, fit, and sew a costume. I   store-bought ones, though. I think that it’s important to teach chil-
  definitely understand the appeal of just being able to buy one at Tar-      dren about the value of craftsmanship and the joy of creating some-
  get and being done. Stores also have trend-based cost                       thing with their own hands. I think that it’s also important to teach
                                                                              children about
  [...]other safety equipment, setting a record for ''most buildings          push beyond them. You can do it too!''\nRobert, 61, has been climb-       -0.1
  climbed unassisted'' according to Guinness World Records.\nOn his           ing since 1982 and has scaled some of the world\’s tallest build-
  website, Robert says, ''Climbing is my passion, my philosophy of            ings, including the Eiffel Tower, the Burj Khalifa, and the Shanghai
  life. Although I suffer from vertigo, although my accidents left me         Tower.\nHe uses his climbing feats to raise awareness about envi-
  disabled up to 66%, I have become the best solo climber.''\nHe en-          ronmental protection and to promote the importance of urban green
  courages others by saying, ''We set ourselves limits, but we are all        spaces.\nWhat an incredible man! He is truly living life
  strong enough to aim higher, to
  [...]the strategic priorities we set out in our 2016 results announce-      the near term.\n'' These measures include a further Â£125m of dis-       -0.1
  ment in March, average net borrowing has increased above the level          posals to exit non-core markets and geographies, as well as a review
  we expected, which means that we will no longer be able to meet             of the business and capital structure to optimise value for sharehold-
  our target of reducing leverage for the full year.\n''We have there-        ers.\n''We are also taking steps to address the deterioration in cash
  fore concluded that we must take immediate action to accelerate the         flows on a select number of construction contracts, including the
  reduction in average net borrowing and are announcing a compre-             recognition of a contract provision of Â£845m and the establishment
  hensive programme of measures to address that, aimed at generating          of
  significant cashflow in
  [...]made up his mind this election season by asking himself whether        ra, ''Yes We Can,'' Bodack said he wants to send a message to Wash-       -0.1
  he was better off than he was in 2008. He decided he was not.\nJeff         ington that ''We Can Do Better.''\n''I\’m not happy with the way
  Bodack, 54, a registered Democrat who has been voting for Re-               things are going,'' he said. ''I\’m not happy with the way things have
  publicans since the Ronald Reagan-era, said he wants Toomey in              been going for a long time.''\nIncumbent Democratic U.S. Sena-
  Washington because he wants ''change,'' and said his vote felt ''ur-        tor Bob Casey won re-election Tuesday night, defeating Republican
  gent.''\nHarking to Obama\’s 2008 campaign mant                             challenger Tom Smith. Democrat Mark Critz won the
  [...]of the trade regime.\nThey further stressed trade policy deci-         ministry of commerce has also been working on a new trade policy          -0.1
  sions should not be driven by short-term fiscal considerations and          to boost exports. The new policy will focus on promoting value-
  should not be made by the FBR. Instead, they proposed such de-              added exports, improving competitiveness, and reducing the cost of
  cisions be made by an independent policy board or the ministry of           doing business.\nThe policy will also aim to reduce the reliance on
  commerce and aim to reduce anti-export bias, cost of production, tar-       traditional markets and explore new markets for Pakistani exports.
  iffs on imported raw materials and intermediate goods, while elim-          The policy will also focus on improving the business environment,
  inating the distinction between industrial and commercial importers         reducing bureaucratic red tape, and increasing transparency and pre-
  and reform the SRO regime.\nThe                                             dictability in


                                     Table 13: Texts generated by the NS-Watermark on C4.
  Prompt                                                                      NS-Watermark                                                              z-score
  [...]of polyester, but there are so many variables (shipping, man-          umes that lost their appeal after Halloween, so it’s not like homemade    12.0
  ufacturing, etc) that I don’t think it’s really confirmable which is        costumes are the only option for quality.\nI’m not sure what the
  greener.\nOf course, not every child has a parent who can, or has           answer is, but I think it’s worth considering the environmental impact
  time to, cut a pattern, buy fabric, cut fabric, fit, and sew a costume. I   of our choices, even if it’s just for one day a year.\n\n\n
  definitely understand the appeal of just being able to buy one at Tar-
  get and being done. Stores also have trend-based cost
  [...]other safety equipment, setting a record for ''most buildings          push beyond our limits.''\nRobert has climbed some of the world\’s        10.0
  climbed unassisted'' according to Guinness World Records.\nOn his           most famous buildings, including the Eiffel Tower, the Burj Khalifa
  website, Robert says, ''Climbing is my passion, my philosophy of            in Dubai, and the Shanghai Tower in China.\nHe has enthralled au-
  life. Although I suffer from vertigo, although my accidents left me         diences with his death-defying feats, and has inspired many to pursue
  disabled up to 66%, I have become the best solo climber.''\nHe en-          their own dreams and passions.\nRobert\’s climbing career has not
  courages others by saying, ''We set ourselves limits, but we are all        been without danger. He has suffered several injuries,
  strong enough to aim higher, to
  [...]the strategic priorities we set out in our 2016 results announce-      the short term.\n''We are also announcing that we will undertake a        10.0
  ment in March, average net borrowing has increased above the level          comprehensive review of the business and the capital structure, with
  we expected, which means that we will no longer be able to meet             all options to optimise value for the benefit of shareholders under
  our target of reducing leverage for the full year.\n''We have there-        consideration.\n''We are assuring our stakeholders that we are taking
  fore concluded that we must take immediate action to accelerate the         all necessary steps to address the current challenges and to position
  reduction in average net borrowing and are announcing a compre-             the Group for long-term success.''\nCarillion\’s interim results for
  hensive programme of measures to address that, aimed at generating          the six months to 30 June 2
  significant cashflow in
  [...]made up his mind this election season by asking himself whether        ra, Bodack said, ''I want to hope and change, and I think Toomey          10.0
  he was better off than he was in 2008. He decided he was not.\nJeff         can bring that.''\nVoters at the polling places expressed a range of
  Bodack, 54, a registered Democrat who has been voting for Re-               opinions on the candidates and issues, but many shared a sense of
  publicans since the Ronald Reagan-era, said he wants Toomey in              disillusionment with the negative tone of the campaigns.\n''I think
  Washington because he wants ''change,'' and said his vote felt ''ur-        it\’s a shame that the campaigns have been so violent and negative,''
  gent.''\nHarking to Obama\’s 2008 campaign mant                             said Petner. ''I wish they would focus more on the issues and less on
  [...]of the trade regime.\nThey further stressed trade policy deci-         government has taken some steps to address the issue of low exports,      10.0
  sions should not be driven by short-term fiscal considerations and          including the establishment of the Trade Policy 2015-20, which aims
  should not be made by the FBR. Instead, they proposed such de-              to promote exports by reducing tariffs on raw materials and inter-
  cisions be made by an independent policy board or the ministry of           mediate goods, and the creation of the Trade and Investment Policy
  commerce and aim to reduce anti-export bias, cost of production, tar-       Framework, which aims to promote trade and investment by reduc-
  iffs on imported raw materials and intermediate goods, while elim-          ing the cost of doing business in Pakistan.\nThe government has
  inating the distinction between industrial and commercial importers         also taken steps to address the issue offrustrated exporters, including
  and reform the SRO regime.\nThe                                             the establishment


                                                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Table 14: Texts generated by the Soft-Watermark on C4.
  Prompt                                                                      Soft-Watermark                                                           z-score
  [...]of polyester, but there are so many variables (shipping, man-          umes and character onesies with little to no sewing required. So even    20.1
  ufacturing, etc) that I don’t think it’s really confirmable which is        with this recession/consumerist trend on targeted costumes, parents
  greener.\nOf course, not every child has a parent who can, or has           could choose the green option. They sell costumes and character
  time to, cut a pattern, buy fabric, cut fabric, fit, and sew a costume. I   onesies with little to no sewing required. So even with this reces-
  definitely understand the appeal of just being able to buy one at Tar-      sion/consumerist trend on targeted costumes, parents could choose
  get and being done. Stores also have trend-based cost                       the green option. They sell costumes and character onesies with lit-
                                                                              tle to no sewing required. So even with
  [...]other safety equipment, setting a record for ''most buildings          push further!''\nAlain Robert, truly the human super hero! (Photo        9.8
  climbed unassisted'' according to Guinness World Records.\nOn his           by AFP via BBC)
  website, Robert says, ''Climbing is my passion, my philosophy of
  life. Although I suffer from vertigo, although my accidents left me
  disabled up to 66%, I have become the best solo climber.''\nHe en-
  courages others by saying, ''We set ourselves limits, but we are all
  strong enough to aim higher, to
  [...]the strategic priorities we set out in our 2016 results announce-      the years ahead to 2018 and beyond.\nThese measures will enable          15.1
  ment in March, average net borrowing has increased above the level          us to make meaningful progress to lower our leverage to below 2x
  we expected, which means that we will no longer be able to meet             gearing (EBITDA), faster than we had previously guided, by the end
  our target of reducing leverage for the full year.\n''We have there-        of 2018 while maintaining our high returning core operations. They
  fore concluded that we must take immediate action to accelerate the         form a major aspect of our ongoing and thorough review and will
  reduction in average net borrowing and are announcing a compre-             enable us to create additional value for shareholders by repositioning
  hensive programme of measures to address that, aimed at generating          the business further towards
  significant cashflow in
  [...]made up his mind this election season by asking himself whether        ra about a fundament change in American politics for positive or neg-    20.8
  he was better off than he was in 2008. He decided he was not.\nJeff         ative reasons has some bearing on Tuesday night elections outcome
  Bodack, 54, a registered Democrat who has been voting for Re-               in this and next mid terms for presidency 2016. So does Obama’s
  publicans since the Ronald Reagan-era, said he wants Toomey in              policies popularity which was a major factor in last mid terms for
  Washington because he wants ''change,'' and said his vote felt ''ur-        presidency 2018. So does Obama’s policies popularity which was a
  gent.''\nHarking to Obama\’s 2008 campaign mant                             major factor in last mid terms for presidency 2018. So does Obama’s
                                                                              policies
  [...]of the trade regime.\nThey further stressed trade policy deci-         government will do well to focus less on just cutting imports via        20.5
  sions should not be driven by short-term fiscal considerations and          high import duties which, by the way, have little impact on contain-
  should not be made by the FBR. Instead, they proposed such de-              ing the widening CAD. They suggest forgoing exports led growth
  cisions be made by an independent policy board or the ministry of           through an overly optimistic forecast and policy framework cen-
  commerce and aim to reduce anti-export bias, cost of production, tar-       tered on Gwadar port that may just not come through on investment
  iffs on imported raw materials and intermediate goods, while elim-          flows is foolish economic hubris. They suggest forgoing exports led
  inating the distinction between industrial and commercial importers         growth through an overly optimistic forecast and policy framework
  and reform the SRO regime.\nThe                                             centered on Gwadar port that may


                           Table 15: Texts generated by the Adaptive Soft-Watermark on C4.
  Prompt                                                                      Adaptive Soft-Watermark                                                  z-score
  [...]of polyester, but there are so many variables (shipping, man-          umes that are more realistic than the homemade kind, which, if           6.1
  ufacturing, etc) that I don’t think it’s really confirmable which is        you’re not a crafty person, may be more appealing.\nI think the new
  greener.\nOf course, not every child has a parent who can, or has           Target commercial is well-made and funny, but it also makes me a
  time to, cut a pattern, buy fabric, cut fabric, fit, and sew a costume. I   little sad. I’m glad my mom had the time and resources to make my
  definitely understand the appeal of just being able to buy one at Tar-      costumes, and I’m sure the new ones will look super cute on the kids
  get and being done. Stores also have trend-based cost                       who buy them. But I’m also a little
  [...]other safety equipment, setting a record for ''most buildings          the short term.\n''We are immediately announcing plans to exit non-      10.1
  climbed unassisted'' according to Guinness World Records.\nOn his           core markets and geographies, raise up to a further Â£125m in the
  website, Robert says, ''Climbing is my passion, my philosophy of            next 12 months to ensure we have sufficient liquidity to meet our
  life. Although I suffer from vertigo, although my accidents left me         financial obligations and to ensure we are well funded to take ad-
  disabled up to 66%, I have become the best solo climber.''\nHe en-          vantage of the new opportunities that will arise as we reposition the
  courages others by saying, ''We set ourselves limits, but we are all        business.\n''We are also announcing plans to carry out a comprehen-
  strong enough to aim higher, to                                             sive review of the business
  [...]the strategic priorities we set out in our 2016 results announce-      ra, Bodack said, ''I want to hope and change, and I think Toomey can     11.1
  ment in March, average net borrowing has increased above the level          bring change.''\nLiz Peterson, 28, a registered independent, said her
  we expected, which means that we will no longer be able to meet             vote this year was driven by her desire to ensure that her children
  our target of reducing leverage for the full year.\n''We have there-        have a better future. She voted for Democrat Bob Casey for U.S.
  fore concluded that we must take immediate action to accelerate the         Senate and Republican Charlie Dent for U.S. Congress.\nLiz Peter-
  reduction in average net borrowing and are announcing a compre-             son said her vote this year was driven by her desire to
  hensive programme of measures to address that, aimed at generating
  significant cashflow in
  [...]made up his mind this election season by asking himself whether        push beyond ourselves.''\nNot everyone is a fan of Robert, however.      19.2
  he was better off than he was in 2008. He decided he was not.\nJeff         Some have criticized him for invading private property and putting
  Bodack, 54, a registered Democrat who has been voting for Re-               himself and others at risk.\nNot much is known about Robert, other
  publicans since the Ronald Reagan-era, said he wants Toomey in              than he hails from France and has been doing this for over two
  Washington because he wants ''change,'' and said his vote felt ''ur-        decades. He has added seven new buildings to his climbing list this
  gent.''\nHarking to Obama\’s 2008 campaign mant                             year alone.\nNot much is known about Robert, other than he hails
                                                                              from France and has been doing this for over two decades.
  [...]of the trade regime.\nThey further stressed trade policy deci-         government has introduced a series of measures to spur investment        15.2
  sions should not be driven by short-term fiscal considerations and          in the country, including the new investment policy that aims to at-
  should not be made by the FBR. Instead, they proposed such de-              tract $10 billion in foreign investment over the next five years.\nThe
  cisions be made by an independent policy board or the ministry of           government has introduced a series of measures to spur investment
  commerce and aim to reduce anti-export bias, cost of production, tar-       in the country, including the new investment policy that aims to at-
  iffs on imported raw materials and intermediate goods, while elim-          tract $10 billion in foreign investment over the next five years.\nThe
  inating the distinction between industrial and commercial importers         government has introduced a series of measures to spur investment
  and reform the SRO regime.\nThe                                             in the


                                                                                 20
