Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F UND -R ELATED G RAPH R EPRESENTATION FOR
M ARGINAL E FFECTIVENESS IN
MULTI - FACTORS Q UANTITATIVE S TRATEGY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         With increasing research attention in the quantitative trading community on multi-
         factors machine learning strategies, how to obtain higher-dimensional and effec-
         tive features from finance market has become an important research topic in both
         academia and industry area. In general, the effectiveness of new data, new fac-
         tors, and new information depends not only on the strength of their individual
         effects but also on the marginal increment they bring relative to existing factors.
         In this paper, our research focuses on how to construct new factors from the re-
         lational graph data. We construct six capital flow similarity graphs from the fre-
         quency of joint occurrences of the inflows or outflows of the net fund between
         stocks within the same period. Moreover, three composite multi-graphes from the
         six basics are built to exploit the capital flow similarities. Experiments demon-
         strate the marginal improvement contributing to these proposed graphs. Learned
         by the multi-factor XGBoost model, the new dataset integrating with represen-
         tations of the fund-related graphs exceeds the baseline multi-factor model in the
         Information Coefficient(IC), TOP group excess returns, long-short returns, and
         index-enhanced portfolio returns in A-share market.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recently, with the outstanding performance of deep learning in CV He et al. (2016),Goodfellow
et al. (2014),Song et al. (2020),Goodfellow et al. (2016) and NLP Hu et al. (2021),Vaswani et al.
(2017),Brown et al. (2020),Liu et al. (2023) area, how to apply machine learning format in the quan-
titative strategy gains increasing interests in the finance. Machine learning methods have gained
increasing attention in the field of quantitative finance. Since the advent of Alpha101, more and
more researchers have explored the leverage of technology-driven multi-factor strategies for the rep-
resentation learning and stock predicting from financial time series data. All led to the dramatic
development of a range of multi-factor representation models. Moreover, advancements in storage,
computing power, and model methodologies have provided a solid foundation for accumulating
effective factors on a large scale in quantitative strategy research. The research ranges from factor-
discovering, and representation learning, to model-building. In this paper, our work mainly focuses
on the factor-discovering area. Currently, the number of existing factors involved in machine learn-
ing quant methods ranges from hundreds to thousands, ushering in a high-dimensional era in asset
pricing and factor selection.
In the format of multi-factor quantitative stock selection, the role of factors, whether selected or
discovered through technical means, has gradually shifted from signaling Fama & French (1993) to
diverse feature representations. Consequently, the evaluation of factor effectiveness has transitioned
from single factor efficacy to marginal increments relative to a set of proven effective existing fac-
tors. Especially after the widespread application of machine learning and deep learning models in
the aspect of factor synthesis, the marginal contributions that a single factor can make under linear
dimensionality in terms of low correlation and overcoming multi-collinearity may not be substantial
in nonlinear modeling scenarios. Therefore, it is crucial to emphasize how new factors can provide
incremental improvements relative to the existing factor pool. in the current research and practice.
The initial goal of our research is consistent with this point.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As said in the Arnott et al. (2018), the capital markets reflect the actions of people, which may
be influenced by others’ actions and by the findings of past research. As a result, one of the cru-
cial challenges becomes how to extract exact data of market participants. Currently, the applica-
tion of relationship-based graph data in factor mining scenarios has attracted increasing attention
in research Saha et al. (2022). Existing academic literature has demonstrated significant lead-lag
relationships among returns based on relationship dimensions such as supply chains, analyst cov-
erage, shared news coverage, and industries. In this paper, our research focus on the frequency of
joint occurrences of the inflows or outflows of the net fund between stocks within the same period.
Momentum transmission factors have been constructed based on these types of information. In the
context of high-dimensional stock factors, where factors are used as sample features for asset pric-
ing, relationship-based data can provide incremental information for asset pricing through factor
derivation and joint training, leveraging integrated models and graph neural networks in machine
learning and deep learning. This can lead to excess returns in quantitative strategies.
Building upon previous studies on relationship-based graphs in factor modeling scenarios, this study
utilizes data related to capital flow directions within the market to construct a relationship matrix that
represents correlated features among companies. We construct six basic graphs from fund-related
data to exploit the representation of capital flow similarities, and three composite multi-graphes are
derived for better performance. In detail, we ultimately establish six matrices that represent the
similarity of capital flows among stocks through analysis and comparison. Apart from the pro-
posed graphs, feature engineering is conducted on the existing proven efficient factor library, and
the integration of various relationship graphs through factor derivation is incorporated during model
training and testing process. The results exhibit increased IC values and enhancements in portfolio
construction. On the basis of the stock factor library, the capital flow similarity matrix is used for
the enhancement of the model training process by training the traditional machine learning model
in batch derivative. The experimental results prove that the addition of capital flow similarity brings
an enhanced effect on the revenue prediction.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1   M ACHINE LEARNING IN F INANCE

As machine learning continues to evolve, an increasing number of models are being introduced for
financial quantificationGiglio et al. (2022), Jiang et al. (2020). Gu et al. (2020) explored the in-
tegration of machine learning techniques into empirical asset pricing. The study delved into how
machine learning algorithms can yield significant financial benefits for investors through their ca-
pacity to capture nonlinear interactions among predictors. In the pursuit of constructing superior
factor models, there has been a shift in recent years from traditional linear models to the adoption
of more adaptable and data-centric nonlinear machine learning models. Gu et al. (2021) represented
factor exposures as a dynamic nonlinear function of covariates using autoencoder neural networks,
a dimension reduction technique. Duan et al. (2022) treated factors as latent random variables in the
Variational Autoencoder (VAE) and inherently possessed stochasticity. The proposed model Factor-
VAE was capable of modeling noisy data and providing estimates for stock risk. Meanwhile, nu-
merous machine learning algorithms are employed to unearth additional factorsKakushadze (2016)
Zhang et al. (2020). In this paper, our research mainly focus on the features required for machine
learning models.

2.2   R ATIONAL DATA FOR THE S TOCK P REDICTING

In reality, businesses do not exist in isolation; the relationships between companies form a complex
network. Existing literature has identified various interconnections used to explain the future ex-
pected returns of assets, including industry relationships, geographical proximity, supply chain con-
nections, stocks held by the same mutual funds, technological similarity between companies, shared
analyst coverage, and common news disclosures. Moskowitz and GribblattMoskowitz & Grinblatt
(1999) were among the first to propose the presence of strong lead-lag effects in the expected re-
turns of stocks within the same industry. Parsons et al.Parsons et al. (2020) linked companies head-
quartered in the same region based on geographical proximity and, by constructing geographical
momentum portfolios, found that the lead-lag relationships between stocks of companies located in
the same city exhibit significant predictive power for their future returns. Cohen and Frazzini Co-


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hen & Frazzini (2008) established associations between different companies based on their supply
chain relationships and discovered that when the stock returns of one company exhibit volatility,
the stock returns of companies interconnected through the supply chain are also impacted, resulting
in correlated fluctuations. Menzly and Ozbas Menzly & Ozbas (2010) characterized the lead-lag
effects between company supply chains as having explanatory power and predictive capabilities for
the expected returns of a company’s stock. Anton and Polk Anton & Polk (2014) noted that stocks
held by the same mutual funds exhibit noticeable correlations in their returns. This ownership-based
relationship among stocks can lead to interdependencies in the price fluctuations of these stocks, po-
tentially even triggering contagion during periods of panic. Lee et al. Lee et al. (2019) conducted an
analysis of the mutual predictability of returns among technologically related companies. Typically,
companies engaged in patent research and development tend to influence each other, as they often
face similar economic shocks within the same technological domain. This can lead to collaborative
development efforts, the presence of supply chain connections, or the utilization of common produc-
tion inputs among these companies. Ali and Hirshleifer Ali & Hirshleifer (2020), in their study of the
U.S. market, highlighted that companies associated based on shared analyst coverage exhibit more
pronounced mutual influence on their future returns. The authors argue that the number of common
analysts can serve as an indicator of the degree of association between these companies. Chen et
al. Chen et al. (2021) and others argue that relationships defined by the joint mentions in news me-
dia events can better reflect the intrinsic and comprehensive connections between companies. This
approach allows for a more accurate characterization of the impact of momentum spillover effects
among stock assets.
The aforementioned research findings demonstrate the crucial cross-temporal predictive role of the
interrelationships between companies in explaining the future expected returns of assets and the
volatility of the securities market.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
3.1    D EFINITION OF C APITAL F LOW S IMILARITY G RAPHS

It is known to all that the capital flow similarity between stocks captures the similarity of trading
behaviors that drive stock price movements at the fund level. As a result, it reflects the common
expectations of fund participants on the confidence of the stock prices. In other words, stocks with
stronger consistency in fund inflows and outflows potentially exhibit stronger correlation.
According to the prior research on modeling approaches such as supply chain relationships, analyst
coverage, and shared news coverage, we describe the inter-stock relationships based on common
fund flow. The correlation is defined by the adjacency matrix of the involved stocks. Consequently,
six capital flow similarity graphs are constructed. The capital flow data is derived from the secondary
high-frequency market data and differentiates fund types, transaction types, and capital flows based
on information such as order volume, transaction volume, and transaction type.
As a common opinion, transaction types in financial markets can be categorized as active buying
or active selling. Based on the order submission time of the buyer and the seller, the earlier order
submission is considered the passive party, whereas the later order submission is considered the
active party. The definitions of the two categories are shown as follows:

      a. Active buying refers to the state when the buyer actively executes a transaction at the seller’s
         ask price, indicating the buyer’s willingness to purchase a security or stock at a higher
         price. This behavior reflects a positive attitude towards the market, indicating optimism.
         Therefore, active buying shows the investor’s evaluation of the market, believing that the
         security has good growth potential or the potential to generate short-term profits.
      b. Active selling refers to the state that when the seller actively executes a transaction at the
         buyer’s bid price, indicating the seller’s willingness to sell a security at a lower price. This
         may imply a lack of confidence in the future performance of the security. Active selling
         may occur when investors anticipate market or security declines or when investors want to
         realize profits.

Additionally, based on transaction types and volumes, we can determine fund inflows and fund
outflows to assess the direction and scale of capital flows in the financial market. Specifically:


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      a. Money Flow In (MFI) refers to investors investing capital into a specific financial asset
         or market, causing its price to rise. This usually indicates optimistic investor sentiment,
         suggesting that the asset or market has the potential for higher returns.
      b. Money Flow Out (MFO) refers to investors withdrawing or selling capital from a specific
         financial asset or market, leading to a decline in its price. This often indicates cautious or
         pessimistic investor sentiment, suggesting possible risks or lower returns.

Furthermore, the daily Money Flow Net (MFN) is calculated as the difference between the total
value of active buying transactions and the total value of active selling transactions, that is:
                                     M F N = M F I − M F O.                                        (1)

Here, M F I represents the total value of active buying transactions, while M F O represents the total
value of active selling transactions. Therefore, when M F N > 0, it is considered a Money Flow Net
Inflow (M F N I), and when M F N < 0, it is considered a Money Flow Net Outflow (M F N O).
Ultimately, based on the net inflows and outflows of funds between stocks on a given day, we can
calculate the consistency of capital linkage between pairs of stocks.

3.2   S IX P RIOR C APITAL F LOW S IMILARITY G RAPHS

As mentioned in the prior part, our research primarily focuses on relational data in the financial mar-
ket related to fund flows, such as customer order sizes and the order sequence. Regarding the magni-
tude of fund flows, we clearly classify customer orders into four categories based on the transaction
amounts: small orders (retail, < 40, 000 RMB), medium orders (intermediate, 40, 000 − 200, 000
RMB), large orders (institutional, 200, 000−1, 000, 000 RMB), and extra-large orders (institutional,
> 1, 000, 000 RMB). Furthermore, based on the order submission time of the buyer and seller, trans-
action types are classified as passive buying or active buying. Specifically, transactions with a price
greater than or equal to the asking price are considered active buying, while transactions with a price
less than or equal to the bid price are considered active selling.
Based on the related content of fund flows, combining the characteristics of the stock market and the
entities and operations involved in fund flows, six capital flow similarity graph data are constructed
as follows:
For companies i and j, the capital net flow on day t is represented by M F Nit and M F Njt . The
definition of the daily co-inflow association matrix is shown as follows,

                                    1, M F Nit > 0 and M F Njt > 0,
                          eiijt =                                                             (2)
                                    0,        others.
Given that there are approximately 22 trading days in a month, the monthly co-inflow association
matrix for the companies is defined as:
                                                   tX
                                                    end

                                          EIij =            eiijt                                  (3)
                                                   tstart


Here, tstart represents the first trading day of the month, and tend represents the last trading day.
EIij represents the element value of the adjacency matrix for capital co-inflow (CashCoIn). Simi-
larly, the daily and monthly co-outflow association matrix for the companies is defined as:

                                     1, M F Nit < 0 and M F Njt < 0,
                         eoijt =                                                                  (4)
                                     0,       others.

                                                    tX
                                                     end

                                         EOij =             eoijt                                  (5)
                                                   tstart

The tstart represents the first trading day of the month, and tend represents the last trading day.
EOij represents the element value of the adjacency matrix for capital co-outflow (CashCoOut).


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Furthermore, MFN is combined with our proposed four customers’ transaction amounts and divided
into categories: MFNsmall (small orders, < 40, 000 RMB), MFNmed (medium orders, 40, 000 −
200, 000 RMB), MFNlarge (large orders, 200, 000 − 1, 000, 000 RMB), and MFNexlarge (extra-
large orders, > 1, 000, 000 RMB). Therefore:
                         M F N M edSmall = M F N small + M F N med,                                 (6)
                        M F N ExN Large = M F N large + M F N exlarge.                              (7)
Here, MFI represents the total value of active buying transactions, while MFO represents the total
value of active selling transactions. MFNsmall, MFNmed, MFNlarge, and MFNexlarge represent
the differences between the active buying and selling transaction amounts for small, medium, large,
and extra-large orders, respectively.
Similarly, according to MFNMedSmall and MFNExNLarge, small and medium simultaneous capi-
tal inflow matrix (MedSmallCoInAct), small and medium single capital outflow matrix (MedSmall-
CoOutAct), large single capital inflow matrix (ExNLargeCoInAct), and large single capital outflow
matrix (ExNLargeCoOutAct) are constructed. Finally, our proposed six fund-related graph factors
are orgnized as follows:
CashCoIn, CashOut, MedSmallCoInAct, MedSmallCoOutAct, ExNLargeCoInAct, ExN-
LargeCoOutAct.
To maintain sparsity in the graph data and preserve the strongest relationships, in practice, only the
top 1% of strongest connections for each company in each row of the adjacency matrix are retained
as neighbors in the graph. The processing will preserve the strongest relationship. Taking the capital
co-inflow graph as an example, the detailed construction steps are as follows:
      (1) Count the number of trading days in which two stocks have simultaneous capital net inflows
          over the past 22 trading days.
      (2) Build an adjacency matrix for all the stocks in the market, with the assumption that there
          are correlated relationships between pairs of stocks in terms of capital net inflow. Fill in
          the element of the adjacency matrix at the corresponding positions of the two stocks with
          the number of trading days with simultaneous capital net inflows.
      (3) Repeat the above steps for all stocks. The resulting values in the adjacency matrix represent
          the number of trading days with simultaneous capital net inflows for each pair of stocks.
      (4) Keep only the top 1% of the strongest connections for each stock in each row, considering
          only the strongest edges in the network.
Based on capital flow similarity graph, the final relation matrix Mc, representing the capital co-
inflow association between stocks, can be constructed as follows:
                                       M c11 M c12 ... M c1n
                                                                  
                                     M c21 M c22 ... M c2n 
                             Mc =                                                             (8)
                                         ...     ...     ...   ... 
                                       M cn1 M cn2 ... M cnn
Where M cij represents the capital flow co-inflow similarity between the i−th and j−th stocks, rep-
resenting the number of trading days with simultaneous capital net inflows between the two stocks.
Similarly, six maps and their corresponding adjacency matrix matrices are constructed according to
different capital types, inflow and outflow conditions.

3.3    D ERIVATION OF FACTORS BASED ON C APITAL F LOW S IMILARITY

Using the capital flow similarity matrices mentioned earlier, we further process the factors by creat-
ing a weight matrix. To obtain it, each element in the similarity matrix is divided by the sum of its
respective row.
                                                F1
                                                   
                                              F 
Let’s consider a specific factor vector F =  2 , which represents the factor values correspond-
                                                ...
                                               Fn
ing to each stock. This vector is of size n1. Each element Fi , represents the factor value for the ith


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


stock. we multiply the weight matrix (M w) with the original factor vector F to calculate the derived
factor vector Fc :
                                         Fc = M w × F.                                             (9)

Among them, Fc is an n × 1 vector (referred to as the derived factor) that integrates the derived
                                             Pn For a specific stock i, if its original factor value is
factor values of stocks related to capital flow.
Fi , then the derived factor value is Fci = j=1 M wij × Fi . To be noticed, the factor value of the
derivative factor represents the result of the weighted sum of the factor value of the individual stock
related on the capital flow similarity network according to the correlation degree between them.

3.4   C OMBINATION OF M ULTIPLE D ERIVED FACTORS

In the model training process, for a given set of original  sample features X = F1T , F1T , ..., FM
                                                                                                  T

, the derived feature dimensions Xw = M w × X = M w × F1T , M w × F1T , ..., M w × FM             T

 are obtained using the factor graph derivation method. Furthermore, the original sample features
 andT derived    feature dimensions are concatenated to form  new sample features X̄ = [X, Xw] =
  F1 , F1T , ..., FMT
                      , M w × F1T , M w × F1T , ..., M w × FM
                                                            T
                                                              .
For a stock i on a given trading day, its corresponding sample Xi represents the stock’s own in-
formation as features in the sample space, while Xi∼ represents the integration of information from
stocks related to capital flow similarity in the corresponding relationship network of the factor graph.
Thus, in the model training and prediction part, the [X, Xc ] is used to sample features for the pur-
pose of leveraging the information both of the stocks and other related stocks. These factors combine
through capital flow similarity to jointly predict i stock’s returns. Here, we provide some arrange-
ments for Multi-Graphs in Table 1.
During model training, the factor graph integration scheme includes a single graph scheme and
a multi-graph scheme: (1)Single Graph: the model y = g(X) trained using original features X
serves as the baseline and the incremental improvement of the integrated model y = g(X) + f (X̄)
compared to the original model is examined. (2)Multi-Graph: The results of training multiple graphs
are integrated.

                           Multi-Graphs Scheme           Referred Graphs
                                                            CashCoIn
                                     TRI
                                                        ExNLargeCoInAct
                                                        ExNLargeCoInAct
                                     LRI
                                                       ExNLargeCoOutAct
                                                        ExNLargeCoInAct
                                                       ExNLargeCoOutAct
                                     TRU                    CashOut
                                                            CashCoIn
                                                        MedSmallCoInAct

Table 1: The Scheme of Multi-Graphs is shown in this table. Three different strategies are proposed
following the basis of former research.


4     E XPERIMENTS
This section evaluates the effectiveness of derived factors based on capital flow similarity in a multi-
factor quantitative model using a stock factor library. It compares various schemes, including the
standalone application of the factor library, the addition of capital flow similarity graph integration
for training, and evaluates the incremental effects of derived factors on the model’s performance.

4.1   S ETTINGS

Our research focuses on the A-share market within the daily data. For the machine learning models
used in this study, an XGBoost algorithm is employed, as shown in the Fig. 1. In details, rolling
training is conducted every 10 trading days, with each training updating features for the next 10


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Figure 1: The training Framework for the proposed Relational graph data in finance area.


trading days for stock selection and portfolio construction. All six capital flow similarity graphs,
derived from the most recent 22 trading days, is used for factor derivation and feature construction
in each training step. The detailed model training parameters are shown in the Table 2.
To evaluate the incremental effects of capital flow similarity graph-derived factors on existing factor
libraries, the following parallel control experiments are conducted:

       • RawModel: Each training step uses the original factors as individual stock features.
       • Integration Graph Factors: Based on the original factors, we perform matrix multiplication
         using each derived capital flow similarity relation matrix to produce a new derived factor
         in each step.

This results in each sample come from the double number of factors including features—original
factors and the derived factors. As a result, the models trained following the proposed approach
utilize both the self-characteristics of individual stocks and the information of stocks related to them
fund-related flow similarity to achieve a better prediction of the stock’s returns.

        Model                                            XGBOOST
                                           booster: gbtree; colsample bytree: 0.7
                                              learning rate: 0.1; max depth: 7
                                          min child weight: 10; n estimators: 100
 Hyper-Parameters                                      subsample: 0.6
      Label                      The rate of return calculated by vwap for the next 10 days
                                      Factors:Winsorize shrinks the left and right 5%
                                          of the cross-sectional data, normalizing
   Pre-processing
                                                Label: Take the rank quantile
                       Sample dataset: Eliminate samples with a missing value ratio greater than 20%
                                          Retrain the model every ten trading days
  Training Setting              Use samples of 300 trading days each time as the training set
                        Each time use the capital flow similarity map calculated in the last 22 trading
                                     days for factor derivation and feature construction

Table 2: The settings of our experiment is shown in the above table, including hyper-parameters,
training settings, labels, and data-processing.


4.2   C ORRELATION A NALYSIS OF R ETURNS FOR S TOCKS WITH S IMILAR C APITAL F LOWS

To assess the consistency of price volatility among stocks that exhibit similar capital flow rela-
tionships, we conducted a semi-annual analysis from 2018 to 2021. The analysis focused on the
distribution of correlation coefficients for returns among two groups: the entire sample of stocks


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in the A-share market, and a subset of stocks that demonstrated similar capital flow relationships
within the past 6 months. The results of this analysis are presented in Figure 2.


Figure 2: Statistics on the correlation coefficient of returns of stocks associated with the full sample
and capital flow similarity graph, and data deadline is December 31, 2021.


In the six correlation charts, the distribution of correlation coefficients among stocks associated
with capital outflows, large-scale capital outflows, and small-to-medium capital outflows displays
a noticeable increase compared to the overall market. The average and various quantiles of the
correlation coefficients for the three types of capital outflow samples are 1%-5% higher than those
of the entire sample.

4.3   E FFECTIVENESS A NALYSIS OF THE P ROPOSED G RAPH FACTORS

To evaluate the performance of our proposed factors, we displays the information coefficient (IC)
and ranked IC (rankIC) of the training schemes for each graph on the constituent stocks of the China
Composite Index and their future 10-day returns in Figure 3. The average IC of the factors in the
fund-related flow similarity matrix, generated by overlaying a single graph, ranges from 9.38% to
9.52%. This is 0.1% to 0.2% higher than the output of the original factor model.


Figure 3: Superimpose the model IC and rankIC obtained by the joint training scheme of each map
in the whole A share market. The data deadline is December 31, 2022.


With the exception of the small and medium-sized order common outflow graph, the fund flow
similarity extraction factor demonstrates varying increments in IC and rankIC. The average IC output
of the model with multiple graphs superimposed on the factors of the fund flow relationship matrix
ranges from 9.60% to 9.68%, about 0.3% higher than the output of the original factor model.
Moreover,we illustrate the cumulative IC increment curves of each scheme relative to the origi-
nal model in the Fig. 4. In the first sub-figure, We can see that the single graph scheme exhibits
relatively stable IC increments before 2020. However, the cumulative IC increments experience col-
lective failure and differentiation among different schemes after 2020. The CashOut and the ExN-
LargeCoOurAct consistently enhance the performance of our model throughout the entire testing
cycle. The ExNlargeCoInAct performs best before July 2022, but experiences a decline afterward
with unstable enhancements during the cycle.
However, the multi-graph factors, LRI and TRU in the second sub-figure, demonstrate a signifi-
cant continuous improvement in IC increments. Compared to single graph, the multi-graph factors
exhibit stronger and sustained stability of increments.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: The IC increment of each fund-related graph factors and derived factors which are accu-
mulated during training.



4.4   E FFECTIVENESS A NALYSIS OF THE S UPERIMPOSED F UND -R ELATED G RAPHS M ODEL
      ON C ONSTITUENT S TOCKS OF A- SHARE M ARKET

To further evlauate the effects of our proposed factors across the constituent stocks of different in-
dices in A-share market, more models are trained with superimposed fund-related graphs to check
different degrees of improvement in IC and rankIC. The results are shown in the Fig 5. We can see
that the volatility of IC and rankIC also increases accordingly. In terms of absolute increment, there
is a larger IC increment within the constituent stocks of the CSI 300 Index, while the increments
gradually weaken for the CSI 800, CSI 500, and CSI 1000 indices. The differences in the relative
strength of enhancement effects among different types of proposed graph factors may stem from
various reasons, such as the dominant drivers of fund flow similarity for stocks with larger mar-
ket capitalization, which are more deterministic. Therefore, there is a closer relationship between
stock price movements and fund flow similarity. On the other hand, stocks with smaller market
capitalization exhibit more randomness in their fund flow similarity.


Figure 5: The performance of proposed fund-related factors in four different constituent stocks of
the A-share market, including CSI1000, CSI800, CSI500, and CSI300.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, our research focus on the effects of the capital flow in the A-share market. Six fund-
related graph factors and three derived factors are proposed for analysis. Combining with some
high-efficent factors, a new representation factors are formed. Results show that the new fund-
related factors achieve better performance proving that the proposed fund-related graph factors can
obtain maginal effectiveness in quantitative strategy.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Usman Ali and David Hirshleifer. Shared analyst coverage: Unifying momentum spillover effects.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 136(3):649–675, 2020.
Miguel Anton and Christopher Polk. Connected stocks. The Journal of Finance, 69(3):1099–1127,
 2014.
Robert D Arnott, Campbell R Harvey, and Harry Markowitz. A backtesting protocol in the era of
  machine learning. Available at SSRN 3275654, 2018.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Kun Chen, Xin Li, Peng Luo, and J Leon Zhao. News-induced dynamic networks for market sig-
  naling: understanding the impact of news on firm equity value. Information Systems Research,
  32(2):356–377, 2021.
Lauren Cohen and Andrea Frazzini. Economic links and predictable returns. The Journal of Finance,
  63(4):1977–2011, 2008.
Yitong Duan, Lei Wang, Qizhong Zhang, and Jian Li. Factorvae: A probabilistic dynamic factor
  model based on variational autoencoder for predicting cross-sectional stock returns. In Proceed-
  ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 4468–4476, 2022.
Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
  Journal of financial economics, 33(1):3–56, 1993.
Stefano Giglio, Bryan Kelly, and Dacheng Xiu. Factor models, machine learning, and asset pricing.
  Annual Review of Financial Economics, 14:337–368, 2022.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling,
  C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 27. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning, volume 1.
  MIT Press, 2016.
Shihao Gu, Bryan Kelly, and Dacheng Xiu. Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. The
  Review of Financial Studies, 33(5):2223–2273, 2020.
Shihao Gu, Bryan Kelly, and Dacheng Xiu. Autoencoder asset pricing models. Journal of Econo-
  metrics, 222(1):429–450, 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Jingwen Jiang, Bryan T Kelly, and Dacheng Xiu. (re-) imag (in) ing price trends. Chicago Booth
   Research Paper, (21-01), 2020.
Zura Kakushadze. 101 formulaic alphas. Wilmott, 2016(84):72–81, 2016.
Charles MC Lee, Stephen Teng Sun, Rongfei Wang, and Ran Zhang. Technological links and
  predictable returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 132(3):76–96, 2019.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–35, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lior Menzly and Oguzhan Ozbas. Market segmentation and cross-predictability of returns. The
  Journal of Finance, 65(4):1555–1580, 2010.
Tobias J Moskowitz and Mark Grinblatt. Do industries explain momentum? The Journal of finance,
  54(4):1249–1290, 1999.
Christopher A Parsons, Riccardo Sabbatucci, and Sheridan Titman. Geographic lead-lag effects.
  The Review of Financial Studies, 33(10):4721–4770, 2020.
Suman Saha, Junbin Gao, and Richard Gerlach. A survey of the application of graph-based ap-
  proaches in stock market analysis and prediction. International Journal of Data Science and
  Analytics, 14(1):1–15, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Tianping Zhang, Yuanqi Li, Yifei Jin, and Jian Li. Autoalpha: An efficient hierarchical evolutionary
  algorithm for mining alpha factors in quantitative investment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08245,
  2020.


                                                11
