Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H YPER H UMAN : H YPER -R EALISTIC H UMAN G ENERA -
TION WITH L ATENT S TRUCTURAL D IFFUSION

    Xian Liu1,2∗ Jian Ren1† Aliaksandr Siarohin1 Ivan Skorokhodov1                     Yanyu Li1
    Dahua Lin2 Xihui Liu3 Ziwei Liu4 Sergey Tulyakov1
    1
      Snap Inc. 2 CUHK 3 HKU 4 NTU
    Project Page: https://snap-research.github.io/HyperHuman



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Despite significant advances in large-scale text-to-image models, achieving hyper-
             realistic human image generation remains a desirable yet unsolved task. Existing
             models like Stable Diffusion and DALL·E 2 tend to generate human images with
             incoherent parts or unnatural poses. To tackle these challenges, our key insight
             is that human image is inherently structural over multiple granularities, from the
             coarse-level body skeleton to the fine-grained spatial geometry. Therefore, captur-
             ing such correlations between the explicit appearance and latent structure in one
             model is essential to generate coherent and natural human images. To this end, we
             propose a unified framework, HyperHuman, that generates in-the-wild human
             images of high realism and diverse layouts. Specifically, 1) we first build a large-
             scale human-centric dataset, named HumanVerse, which consists of 340M images
             with comprehensive annotations like human pose, depth, and surface-normal. 2)
             Next, we propose a Latent Structural Diffusion Model that simultaneously de-
             noises the depth and surface-normal along with the synthesized RGB image. Our
             model enforces the joint learning of image appearance, spatial relationship, and
             geometry in a unified network, where each branch in the model complements to
             each other with both structural awareness and textural richness. 3) Finally, to
             further boost the visual quality, we propose a Structure-Guided Refiner to com-
             pose the predicted conditions for more detailed generation of higher resolution.
             Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework yields the state-of-the-art
             performance, generating hyper-realistic human images under diverse scenarios.



1       I NTRODUCTION

Generating hyper-realistic human images from user conditions, e.g., text and pose, is of great impor-
tance to various applications, such as image animation (Liu et al., 2019) and virtual try-on (Wang
et al., 2018). To this end, many efforts explore the task of controllable human image generation.
Early methods either resort to variational auto-encoders (VAEs) in a reconstruction manner (Ren
et al., 2020), or improve the realism by generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Siarohin et al.,
2019). Though some of them create high-quality images (Zhang et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2022),
the unstable training and limited model capacity confine them to small datasets of low diversity.
Recent emergence of diffusion models (DMs) (Ho et al., 2020) has set a new paradigm for realistic
synthesis and become the predominant architecture in Generative AI (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021).
Nevertheless, the exemplar text-to-image (T2I) models like Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022)
and DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) still struggle to create human images with coherent anatomy,
e.g., arms and legs, and natural poses. The main reason lies in that human is articulated with non-
rigid deformations, requiring structural information that can hardly be depicted by text prompts.
To enable structural control for image generation, recent works like ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala,
2023) and T2I-Adapter (Mou et al., 2023) introduce a learnable branch to modulate the pre-trained
DMs, e.g., Stable Diffusion, in a plug-and-play manner. However, these approaches suffer from the
    ∗
        Work done during an internship at Snap Inc. Email: alvinliu@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
    †
        Corresponding author: jren@snapchat.com.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A guy in a brown jacket standing near a sign
                                                        A man sitting down with a brown teddy bear on his shoulders.                                    Two women holding surfboards while smiling at the camera.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            holding a cellphone to his ear.


                                                                                                   A woman poses with avocado sandwich lunch                        An elderly woman looks to the side as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A picture of a man with suit, tie and wild hair.
                                                                                                           at an outdoor restaurant.                          she sits in front of a cheese pizza in a restaurant.


                                                                                                      Young man standing near a lake with                                                                                     A person standing on a snowboard with knees bent and arms
                                                                                                                                                      Little girl posing for the camera with an adult sized striped tie on.
                                                                                                        a snow capped mountain behind.                                                                                             out on the snow with trees and snowy hills behind.


      Middle-age dark-hair woman on telephone with a teddy bear beside her.                                                                               A woman sits smoking at table in a mostly blue kitchen.              A man with glasses, earrings, and a blue shirt with red tie.
                                  A pedestrian walks down the A man riding skis down the side
brown horse while wearing a hat. snowy street with an umbrella.  of a snow covered ski slope.
   A man riding on top of a


                                                                                                (a) Ours w/ Joint Denoising         (b) Ours - Full               (c) ControlNet                   (d) T2I-Adapter                   (e) HumanSD                   (f) SDXL w/ Refiner



Figure 1: Example Results and Visual Comparison. Top: The proposed HyperHuman simulta-
neously generates the coarse RGB, depth, normal, and high-resolution images conditioned on text
and skeleton. Both photo-realistic images and stylistic renderings can be created. Bottom: We com-
pare with recent T2I models, showing better realism, quality, diversity, and controllability. Note that
in each 2×2 grid (left), the upper-left is input skeleton, while the others are jointly denoised normal,
depth, and coarse RGB of 512 × 512. With full model, we synthesize images up to 1024 × 1024
(right). Please refer to Sec. A.15, A.16 for more comparison and results. Best viewed zoom in.

feature discrepancy between the main and auxiliary branches, leading to inconsistency between the
control signals (e.g., pose maps) and the generated images. To address the issue, HumanSD (Ju et al.,
2023b) proposes to directly input body skeleton into the diffusion U-Net by channel-wise concatena-
tion. However, it is confined to generating artistic style images of limited diversity. Besides, human
images are synthesized only with pose control, while other structural information like depth maps
and surface-normal maps are not considered. In a nutshell, previous studies either take a singular
control signal as input condition, or treat different control signals separately as independent guid-
ance, instead of modeling the multi-level correlations between human appearance and different types
of structural information. Realistic human generation with coherent structure remains unsolved.


                                                                                                                                                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this paper, we propose a unified framework HyperHuman to generate in-the-wild human images
of high realism and diverse layouts. The key insight is that human image is inherently structural
over multiple granularities, from the coarse-level body skeleton to fine-grained spatial geometry.
Therefore, capturing such correlations between the explicit appearance and latent structure in one
model is essential to generate coherent and natural human images. Specifically, we first establish
a large-scale human-centric dataset called HumanVerse that contains 340M in-the-wild human im-
ages of high quality and diversity. It has comprehensive annotations, such as the coarse-level body
skeletons, the fine-grained depth and surface-normal maps, and the high-level image captions and
attributes. Based on this, two modules are designed for hyper-realistic controllable human image
generation. In Latent Structural Diffusion Model, we augment the pre-trained diffusion backbone to
simultaneously denoise the RGB, depth, and normal. Appropriate network layers are chosen to be
replicated as structural expert branches, so that the model can both handle input/output of different
domains, and guarantee the spatial alignment among the denoised textures and structures. Thanks to
such dedicated design, the image appearance, spatial relationship, and geometry are jointly modeled
within a unified network, where each branch is complementary to each other with both structural
awareness and textural richness. To generate monotonous depth and surface-normal that have similar
values in local regions, we utilize an improved noise schedule to eliminate low-frequency informa-
tion leakage. The same timestep is sampled for each branch to achieve better learning and feature
fusion. With the spatially-aligned structure maps, in Structure-Guided Refiner, we compose the
predicted conditions for detailed generation of high resolution. Moreover, we design a robust con-
ditioning scheme to mitigate the effect of error accumulation in our two-stage generation pipeline.
To summarize, our main contributions are three-fold: 1) We propose a novel HyperHuman frame-
work for in-the-wild controllable human image generation of high realism. A large-scale human-
centric dataset HumanVerse is curated with comprehensive annotations like human pose, depth, and
surface normal. As one of the earliest attempts in human generation foundation model, we hope to
benefit future research. 2) We propose the Latent Structural Diffusion Model to jointly capture the
image appearance, spatial relationship, and geometry in a unified framework. The Structure-Guided
Refiner is further devised to compose the predicted conditions for generation of better visual qual-
ity and higher resolution. 3) Extensive experiments demonstrate that our HyperHuman yields the
state-of-the-art performance, generating hyper-realistic human images under diverse scenarios.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-Image Diffusion Models. Text-to-image (T2I) generation, the endeavor to synthesize high-
fidelity images from natural language descriptions, has made remarkable strides in recent years. Dis-
tinguished by the superior scalability and stable training, diffusion-based T2I models have eclipsed
conventional GANs in terms of performance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), becoming the predominant
choice in generation (Nichol et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Balaji et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023).
By formulating the generation as an iterative denoising process (Ho et al., 2020), exemplar works
like Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) and DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) demonstrate un-
precedented quality. Despite this, they mostly fail to create high-fidelity humans. One main reason
is that existing models lack inherent structural awareness for human, making them even struggle
to generate human of reasonable anatomy, e.g., correct number of arms and legs. To this end, our
proposed approach explicitly models human structures within the latent space of diffusion model.
Controllable Human Image Generation. Traditional approaches for controllable human genera-
tion can be categorized into GAN-based (Zhu et al., 2017; Siarohin et al., 2019) and VAE-based (Ren
et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021), where the reference image and conditions are taken as input. To fa-
cilitate user-friendly applications, recent studies explore text prompts as generation guidance (Roy
et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2022), yet are confined to simple pose or style descriptions. The most
relevant works that enable open-vocabulary pose-guided controllable human synthesis are Control-
Net (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023), T2I-Adapter (Mou et al., 2023), and HumanSD (Ju et al., 2023b).
However, they either suffer from inadequate pose control, or are confined to artistic styles of limited
diversity. Besides, most previous studies merely take pose as input, while ignoring the multi-level
correlations between human appearance and different types of structural information. In this work,
we propose to incorporate structural awareness from coarse-level skeleton to fine-grained depth and
surface-normal by joint denoising with expert branch, thus simultaneously capturing both the ex-
plicit appearance and latent structure in a unified framework for realistic human image synthesis.


                                                  3
                    to the selective weightReducing  update thefor     GAN-Adapter.
                                                                   amount         of trainingWe     data findcan notdirectly
                                                                                                                        all dataresult
                                                                                                                                    are indispensable
                                                                                                                                             in a reductionfor     inreliable
                                                                                                                                                                       the training time.training,
                                                                                                                                                                                               Thus, but only a small subset is necessary. We obtain this small subset in an unsupervised manner
                    training, but only we
Reducing the amount of training data
                                           a smallaim   subset
                                                   can to
                                                                   is necessary.
                                                              investigate
                                                          directly      result data
                                                                                          We obtain this
                                                                                    in a efficiency
                                                                                           reduction in     as theasmall
                                                                                                                     means   subset
                                                                                                                       training  of time.in an unsupervised
                                                                                                                                      decreasing                      manner
                                                                                                                                                Thus, the training workload in addition      with a selection of the data crowding aroundWith the embeddings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      clusteringofcenter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       face images,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              on the wholewe can     select representative data for our fine-tuning process. To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dataset.
                    with a selection oftothe    the data crowding              around     theforclustering center onWe            the whole   not dataset.                                                                               reduce the data amount while maintaining data diversity for good model generalization ability, one
we aim to investigate data efficiency              asselective
                                                       a meansweight               update
                                                                       of decreasing            theGAN-Adapter.
                                                                                                       training workload find          in addition   all data are indispensable for reliable
to the selective weight     updatethe
                    To identify            training,
                                     forsmall
                                          GAN-Adapter.
                                                    subsetbut ofonly We  a small
                                                                     essentialfind notsubset
                                                                                      data,all weis necessary.
                                                                                                data                    We obtain
                                                                                                        are indispensable
                                                                                                      conduct         unsupervised    forthis    small subset
                                                                                                                                             reliable
                                                                                                                                              learning              in an unsupervised
                                                                                                                                                             to analyze     the              To identify the small subset of essential
                                                                                                                                                                                             manner                                      datadata,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pointweis conduct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            selected unsupervised
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         for each of the    learning    to analyze
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               K clusters.             the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                We compared        two different selection methods,
training, but onlystructure
                     a small subset        with
                               of theistraining     a selection
                                           necessary. data.We         of
                                                                Weobtain
                                                                      first  theextract
                                                                                   datasmall
                                                                                 this     crowding
                                                                                                 subsetaround
                                                                                           an embedding                sthe clustering
                                                                                                            in anzunsupervised                  center
                                                                                                                                             manner    s on the whole dataset.               structure of the training data. We first extract
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         namelyanrandom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      embedding        zis for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                selection       each each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             within    imagecluster
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x̃is with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        andannearest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               extractorcenter selection. Experiments demonstrate
                                                                                                                       i for each image x̃i with an extractor
with a selection of G.the  datawe
                        Here     crowding
                                   adoptTothe    around
                                                     FaceNet the clustering           center     on the as whole        dataset.                                                             G. Here we adopt the FaceNet Schroff that     et al.nearest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (2015)center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            as G since      it has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    selection           good representation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 is a better                       of the when fine-tuning the model for ”old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                strategy. For instance,
                                                                theSchroff
                                                                      small et        al. (2015)             G since       itwehasconduct
                                                                                                                                     a good representation               of the to analyze
To identify the small subset
                    images x̃si and x̃sjG.
                                           Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                    human face. The distance
                                                 identify
                                           structuredata,
                                    of essential
                                           . Then, we
                                                          between
                                                           of thewe  training
                                                                          conduct
                                                                                   subset
                                                                         the embeddings
                                                                                     data.
                                                                                              of essential
                                                                                                     zsi and
                                                                                              We first
                                                                                         unsupervised       extract
                                                                                                                    data,
                                                                                                                  zsj directly      reflects the for
                                                                                                                         an embedding
                                                                                                                  learning      to analyzezsithe
                                                                                                                                                    unsupervised
                                                                                                                                                         faceeach
                                                                                                                                                                        learning
                                                                                                                                                               similarity
                                                                                                                                                                   image for
                                                                                                                                                                                                  the
                                                                                                                                                                                             human face. The distance between the embeddings
                                                                                                                                                                             x̃si with an extractor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         person” to that
                                                                                                                                                                                             images x̃s and x̃js . Then, we apply clustering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         selectionon the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         zi and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      canembeddings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    zj directly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              for ”young
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            reduce the FID   by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    reflects
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              person”,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  by popular
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the facetosimilarity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           compared
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.28 andK-Means
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.08 withalgorithm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            random selection      within each cluster, nearest center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                200 and 100 clusters, respectively. Thus, we opt
structure of the training data.     We firstHere  extract  weapply
                                                              anadopt
                                                                         clustering
                                                                   embedding the FaceNet   on the embeddings
                                                                                        zis forSchroff
                                                                                                   each image             sby theas
                                                                                                                et al.x̃(2015)
                                                                                                                          i with an
                                                                                                                                      popular
                                                                                                                                           G since
                                                                                                                                           extractor
                                                                                                                                                     K-Means
                                                                                                                                                          it has a algorithm
                                                                                                                                                                    good representation of the i
                    Lloyd   (1982), thus       obtaining                 Nasclusters,         denoted                                                                                        Lloyd                                       to use nearest
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (1982), thus obtaining K < N clusters,         denoted  center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               as Cselection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        = {Ck }K   as our    datawith
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        , each     selection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        centerstrategy.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                µsk . The The representative data to train for style
G. Here we adopt       the FaceNet         human
                                       Schroff       etface.   KThe
                                                         al. (2015) < distance          between
                                                                                  G since      it hasthe  a as
                                                                                                             embeddings
                                                                                                            good          {Ck }zK
                                                                                                                 C =representation  s , each
                                                                                                                                  k=1   and    z s with center µs . The
                                                                                                                                                of  directly
                                                                                                                                                     the        reflects
                                                                                                                                                                       k   the   face similarity  for                                                                             k=1
                                                                                                                                    i            j
                                                                                                                                                                                             embeddings within the same cluster have     s thus    can bedistance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a closer      representedamong as each other, indicating a higher
human face. Theembeddings          within
                     distance between           theembeddings
                                           images
                                             the      same
                                                        x̃si andcluster        have
                                                                    x̃sjz. siThen,
                                                                               and zweas closer
                                                                                             applydistance
                                                                                       j directly       reflects among
                                                                                                      clustering     theonfacetheeach      other, for
                                                                                                                                   embeddings
                                                                                                                                   similarity         indicating     a higher
                                                                                                                                                          by the popular      K-Means algorithm
images x̃si and x̃sjsimilarity
                     . Then, we ofapply
                                   the dataLloyd  points.
                                            clustering(1982), on the
                                                                   thusembeddings
                                                                              obtaining Kby<the        N popular
                                                                                                            clusters,K-Means
                                                                                                                           denoted algorithm
                                                                                                                                         as C = {Ck }K                                       similarity  of the data points.             With our data selection method using K clusters, we could further reduce the number of training
                                                                                                                                                               k=1 , each with center µk . The
                                                                                                                                                                                              s

Lloyd (1982), thus     obtaining           embeddings
                                                  clusters,      within
                                                                denoted        the
                    With embeddings of face images, we can select representative
                                   K   <     N                                  as   same
                                                                                     C   =    cluster
                                                                                              {C    } K have a closer distance
                                                                                                  k k=1      ,  each    with    center         s among each other, indicating a higher
                                                                                                                         data for our fine-tuning
                                                                                                                                            µ  k .  The          process. To                 With embeddings of face images, we can select representative dataIn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         iterations    by   N/K       times.     forcontrast    to prior process.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      our fine-tuning       methods To   involving additional computations in the
embeddings within       the same
                    reduce          cluster
                             the data      similarity
                                        amount           a of
                                                 havewhile       the data
                                                             closer     distance
                                                                 maintaining     points.among
                                                                                       data          each other,
                                                                                               diversity       for good  indicating         a higher
                                                                                                                               model generalization              ability, one                reduce the data amount while maintaining    training    process toforshrink
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              data diversity           goodthe     dataset
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               model          Yuan et al. ability,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         generalization      (2021);one Wang et al. (2022), our SC data reduction
similarity of the data points.
                          point is selected         for   each     of   the     K    clusters.       We     compared           two    different
                                           With embeddings of face images, we can select representative data for our fine-tuning process. To          selection     methods,                 data  point  is selected   for each of the Kis  tailored
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             clusters.  for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         We   expediting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                compared      the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               two training
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     different of   image
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  selection editing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               methods,tasks.  It reduces the training data volume
                    namely random selectionthe
With embeddings of face images, reduce     we can select
                                                         within     each
                                                             datarepresentative
                                                                      amount   cluster
                                                                                     whileandmaintaining
                                                                                                 nearest center     dataselection.
                                                                                             data for our fine-tuning       diversity      Experiments
                                                                                                                                            for good
                                                                                                                                     process.
                                                                                                                                                                demonstrate
                                                                                                                                                      To model generalization ability,       namely
                                                                                                                                                                                                 one random selection within each clusterdirectly andbefore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nearestthecenter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    training    processExperiments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           selection.      without incurring      any additional costs during the training.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           demonstrate
                    that nearest centerdata   selection
                                                    point     is selected
                                                             is   a better strategy.             Forthe instance,       when fine-tuning
                                                                                                                 …clusters.                            the model for ”old…                   that nearest center selection is a better strategy. For instance, when fine-tuning the model for ”old
reduce the data amount while maintaining                  data    diversity for    for each
                                                                                        good of   model K     generalization      Weability,
                                                                                                                                          compared  one two different selection            methods,
                    person” to that for ”youngrandom      person”, compared                to random         selection       within
                                                                                                                               nearesteach        cluster,    nearest   center


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Structure-Guided Refiner (Sec. 3.3)
data point is selected for each of namely   the K clusters. selection   We compared    within      eachdifferent
                                                                                                  two      cluster      and
                                                                                                                          selection         center
                                                                                                                                          methods,      selection.   Experiments             person” to that for ”young person”, compared to random selection within each cluster, nearest center
                                                                                                                                                                                       demonstrate
                    selection can reduce   thatthe     FID by       1.28selection
                                                                              and 2.08 with          200 and       100 clusters,          respectively.        Thus, we opt                  selection
                                                                                                                                                                                                ”old can reduce the FID by 1.28 and
namely random selection within each                nearest
                                                 cluster     andcenter
                                                                    nearest centerisselection.  a better       strategy.
                                                                                                               Experiments     For demonstrate
                                                                                                                                     instance,        when fine-tuning         the model for                                            E 2.08 with 200 and 100 clusters, respectively. Thus, we opt


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Latent Structural Diffusion Model (Sec. 3.2)
                    to use nearest center        selection      as for
                                                                     our data selection             strategy.      Thetorepresentative              data to train for style
that nearest center selection is a better  person”       to that
                                                    strategy.       For ”young
                                                                             instance,  person”,       compared
                                                                                            when fine-tuning              therandom         for ”old within each cluster, nearesttocenter
                                                                                                                                modelselection                                                  use nearest center selection as our E data4 selection   strategy. The representative conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E XPERIMENTS                                   data to conv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         train forconv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     style
                    s thus can be represented ascan reduce the FID by 1.28 and 2.08 with 200 and 100 clusters, respectively. Thus, we opt
person” to that for ”young person”,selection compared to random selection within each cluster, nearest center                                                                                s thus can be represented as E
selection can reduceWiththe  FID
                           our  data       to use
                                   byselection
                                       1.28     andnearest
                                                       2.08 with
                                                       method     center200selection
                                                                     using       and           as our
                                                                                       100 clusters,
                                                                                 K clusters,         … data
                                                                                                    we            selection
                                                                                                                      further strategy.
                                                                                                             respectively.
                                                                                                           could                   Thus, we
                                                                                                                                  reduce         The
                                                                                                                                               the   opt
                                                                                                                                                      number          … data to train for style
                                                                                                                                                         representative
                                                                                                                                                                  of training
                                                                                                                                                                                             With our data selection method using K clusters, we could further reduce the number of training
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          +
to use nearest center    selection
                    iterations  by as   ours thus
                                               data
                                                times.can    be contrast
                                                       selection  represented
                                                                       strategy.       as representative
                                                                                       The                             data toadditional
                                                                                                                                  train for style
s thus can be represented      as
                    training process
                                    N/K
                                           xTshrink
                                         toWith
                                                          nIn
                                                 , dT , the          xT −1Yuan
                                                             T dataset           ,to
                                                                                   dTprior
                                                                                       −1   , nmethods
                                                                                                   −1
                                                                                       et al. T(2021);
                                                                                                                involving
                                                                                                                  xt , dett , al.
                                                                                                               Wang
                                                                                                                              nt (2022),   xt−1 ,computations
                                                                                                                                                      dSCt−1 ,data
                                                                                                                                                                         in the
                                                                                                                                                               nt−1reduction    x1 , d1 , n1 iterationsx0by  0 , n0 times. In contrast Image
                                                                                                                                                                                                          , dN/K                          to priorCaption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      methods  c Pose    Skeleton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   involving          p Timecomputations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 additional      Step t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pre-trained   SDXLin the
                                                     our data       selection         method       using K         clusters, we         couldour    further    reduce the number of training training process to shrink the dataset Yuan et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2022), our SC data reduction
                    is tailored for expediting
                                           iterations     the
                                                            bytraining          of image        editing tasks.           It methods
                                                                                                                             reduces the           trainingadditional
                                                                                                                                                                data volume                                                              Image         Depth d,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    x,editing       Normal      n Predicted     Image x̂,    Depth    d̂, Normal n̂
With our data selection method using               K clusters,    N/K   we times.         In contrast
                                                                                could further         reduce   to the
                                                                                                                    priornumber of training  involving                      computationsisintailored
                                                                                                                                                                                                  the     for expediting the training of    image                tasks.    It reduces     the training    data   volume
                    directly before thetraining
                                              trainingprocess
                                                            processtowithout  shrink    incurring
                                                                                        the dataset      any
                                                                                                           Yuan additional       costs
                                                                                                                     etcomputations
                                                                                                                         al.   (2021);     during
                                                                                                                                            Wang        the  training.
                                                                                                                                                        et al. (2022),Joint
                                                                                                                                                                          our SC     data reduction
iterations by N/K times. In contrast to prior methods                               involving        additional
                                                                                                   Joint    Denoise        with    Expert       in   the
                                                                                                                                                Branch                            Denoise   with Expert
                                                                                                                                                                                             directly    Branch
                                                                                                                                                                                                       before   the training process without incurring any additional costs during the training.
training process to shrink the dataset     is tailored
                                                 Yuan etfor    al. expediting
                                                                    (2021); Wang        the ettraining
                                                                                                 al. (2022), of imageour SC   editing      tasks. It reduces the training data volume
                                                                                                                                 data reduction
is tailored for expediting the training    directly      beforeediting
                                                   of image         the training  tasks.process
                                                                                             It reduces without the incurring
                                                                                                                      training data   any volume
                                                                                                                                             additional costs during the training.                                                                                                                           5
directly before the training process without incurring any additional costs during the training.                                                                                                                         nˆ0            D
                    4 E XPERIMENTS                                                                                                                                …                                                                 D
                                                                      E                                                                                                                      4 E XPERIMENTS dˆ0 D                                                                             High-Quality x̂high−res
                                           4 E XPERIMENTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Skip Connection
4 E XPERIMENTS      Image Caption c Pose Skeleton p Time Step t                                                                                                                                                          xˆ
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0                                                                                                             Normal Expert Branch
                                                                                                                                                                    Image Caption c Pose Skeleton p Time Step t
               Image x, Depth d, Normal n Predicted Image
                                                      Concatx̂, Depth d̂, Normal n̂                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Depth Expert Branch
                                Image Caption c Pose Skeleton p Time Step t                          …                                                                                                                                                                                                                RGB Expert Branch
Image Caption c Pose Skeleton p Time Step t                        Cross-Attn. & Time Embed.                                                                     Image
                                                                                                                                                     Cross-Attn. & Time x, Depth d, Normal n Predicted Image x̂, Depth d̂, Normal n̂
                                                                                                                                                                        Embed.
                                Image x, Depth d, Normal n Predicted   Image x̂, Depth d̂, Normal n̂                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Shared UNet Blocks
                                                               5
Image x, Depth d, Normal n Predicted Image x̂, Depth d̂, Normal n̂
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                            5
                                           Figure 2:
                                                   5
                                                     Overview of HyperHuman Framework. In Latent Structural Diffusion Model (purple),
                                           the image x, depth d, and surface-normal n are jointly denoised conditioning on caption c and pose
                                           skeleton p. For the notation simplicity, we denote pixel-/latent-space targets with the same variable.
                                           In Structure-Guided Refiner (blue), we compose the predicted conditions for higher-resolution gen-
                                           eration. Note that the grey images refer to randomly dropout conditions for more robust training.


                                           Datasets for Human Image Generation. Large datasets are crucial for image generation. Existing
                                           human-centric collections are mainly confronted with following drawbacks: 1) Low-resolution of
                                           poor quality. For example, Market-1501 (Zheng et al., 2015) contains noisy pedestrian images of
                                           resolution 128 × 64, and VITON (Han et al., 2018) has human-clothing pairs of 256 × 192, which
                                           are inadequate for training high-definition models. 2) Limited diversity of certain domain. For
                                           example, SHHQ (Fu et al., 2022) is mostly composed of full-body humans with clean background,
                                           and DeepFashion (Liu et al., 2016) focuses on fashion images of little pose variations. 3) Insufficient
                                           dataset scale, where LIP (Gong et al., 2017) and Human-Art (Ju et al., 2023a) only contain 50K
                                           samples. Furthermore, none of the existing datasets contain rich annotations, which typically label a
                                           singular aspect of images. In this work, we take a step further by curating in-the-wild HumanVerse
                                           dataset with comprehensive annotations like human pose, depth map, and surface-normal map.

                                           3            O UR A PPROACH
                                           We present HyperHuman that generates in-the-wild human images of high realism and diverse
                                           layouts. The overall framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. To make the content self-contained and
                                           narration clearer, we first introduce some pre-requisites of diffusion models and the problem setting
                                           in Sec. 3.1. Then, we present the Latent Structural Diffusion Model which simultaneously denoises
                                           the depth, surface-normal along with the RGB image. The explicit appearance and latent structure
                                           are thus jointly learned in a unified model (Sec. 3.2). Finally, we elaborate the Structure-Guided
                                           Refiner to compose the predicted conditions for detailed generation of higher resolution in Sec. 3.3.

                                           3.1             P RELIMINARIES AND P ROBLEM S ETTING

                                           Diffusion Probabilistic Models define a forward diffusion process to gradually convert the sample x
                                           from a real data distribution pdata (x) into a noisy version, and learn the reverse generation process in
                                           an iterative denoising manner (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song et al., 2020b). During the sampling
                                           stage, the model can transform Gaussian noise of normal distribution to real samples step-by-step.
                                           The denoising network ϵ̂θ (·) estimates the additive Gaussian noise, which is typically structured as a
                                           UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) to minimize the ensemble of mean-squared error (Ho et al., 2020):
                                                                        min Ex,c,ϵ,t wt ||ϵ̂θ (αt x + σt ϵ; c) − ϵ||22 ,                         (1)

                                                                                                                        θ

                                           where x, c ∼ pdata are the sample-condition pairs from the training distribution; ϵ ∼ N (0, I) is the
                                           ground-truth noise; t ∼ U[1, T ] is the time-step and T is the training step number; αt , σt , and wt
                                           are the terms that control the noise schedule and sample quality decided by the diffusion sampler.
                                           Latent Diffusion Model & Stable Diffusion. The widely-used latent diffusion model (LDM), with
                                           its improved version Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), performs the denoising process in a
                                           separate latent space to reduce the computational cost. Specifically, a pre-trained VAE (Esser et al.,
                                           2021) first encodes the image x to latent embedding z = E(x) for DM training. At the inference


                                                                                                                                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


stage, we can reconstruct the generated image through the decoder x̂ = D(ẑ). Such design enables
the SD to scale up to broader datasets and larger model size, advancing from the SD 1.x & 2.x series
to SDXL of heavier backbone on higher resolution (Podell et al., 2023). In this work, we extend
SD 2.0 to Latent Structural Diffusion Model for efficient capturing of explicit appearance and latent
structure, while the Structure-Guided Refiner is built on SDXL 1.0 for more pleasing visual quality.
Problem Setting for Controllable Human Generation. Given a collection of N human images
x with their captions c, we annotate the depth d, surface-normal n, and pose skeleton p for each
sample (details elaborated in Sec. 4). The training dataset can be denoted as {xi , ci , di , ni , pi }N
                                                                                                       i=1 .
In the first-stage Latent Structural Diffusion Model G1 , we estimate the RGB image x̂, depth d̂,
and surface-normal n̂ conditioned on the caption c and skeleton p. In the second-stage Structure-
Guided Refiner G2 , the predicted structures of d̂ and n̂ further serve as guidance for the generation
of higher-resolution results x̂high-res . The training setting for our pipeline can be formulated as:
                              x̂, d̂, n̂ = G1 (c, p),        x̂high-res = G2 (c, p, d̂, n̂).                             (2)
During inference, only the text prompt and body skeleton are needed to synthesize well-aligned
RGB image, depth, and surface-normal. Note that the users are free to substitute their own depth and
surface-normal conditions to G2 if applicable, enabling more flexible and controllable generation.

3.2    L ATENT S TRUCTURAL D IFFUSION M ODEL

To incorporate the body skeletons for pose control, the simplest way is by feature residual (Mou
et al., 2023) or input concatenation (Ju et al., 2023b). However, three problems remain: 1) The sparse
keypoints only depict the coarse human structure, while the fine-grained geometry and foreground-
background relationship are ignored. Besides, the naive DM training is merely supervised by RGB
signals, which fails to capture the inherent structural information. 2) The image RGB and structure
representations are spatially aligned but substantially different in latent space. How to jointly model
them remains challenging. 3) In contrast to the colorful RGB images, the structure maps are mostly
monotonous with similar values in local regions, which are hard to learn by DMs (Lin et al., 2023).
Unified Model for Simultaneous Denoising. Our solution to the first problem is to simultaneously
denoise the depth and surface-normal along with the synthesized RGB image. We choose them as
additional learning targets due to two reasons: 1) Depth and normal can be easily annotated for
large-scale dataset, which are also used in recent controllable T2I generation (Zhang & Agrawala,
2023). 2) As two commonly-used structural guidance, they complement the spatial relationship and
geometry information, where the depth (Deng et al., 2022), normal (Wang et al., 2022), or both (Yu
et al., 2022b) are proven beneficial in recent 3D studies. To this end, a naive method is to train three
separate networks to denoise the RGB, depth, and normal individually. But the spatial alignment
between them is hard to preserve. Therefore, we propose to capture the joint distribution in a unified
model by simultaneous denoising, which can be trained with simplified objective (Ho et al., 2020):
 Lϵ-pred = Ex,d,n,c,p,ϵ,t [ ||ϵ̂θ (xtx ; c, p) − ϵx ||22 + ||ϵ̂θ (dtd ; c, p) − ϵd ||22 + ||ϵ̂θ (ntn ; c, p) − ϵn ||22 ], (3)
                            |            {z            } |              {z            } |              {z            }
                                     denoise image x               denoise depth d              denoise normal n

where ϵx , ϵd , and ϵn ∼ N (0, I) are three independently sampled Gaussian noise (shortened as ϵ
in expectation for conciseness) for the RGB, depth, and normal, respectively; xtx = αtx x + σtx ϵx ,
dtd = αtd d + σtd ϵd , and ntn = αtn n + σtn ϵn are the noised feature maps of three learning targets;
tx , td , and tn ∼ U[1, T ] are the sampled time-steps that control the scale of added Gaussian noise.
Structural Expert Branches with Shared Backbone. The diffusion UNet contains down-sample,
middle, and up-sample blocks, which are interleaved with convolution and self-/cross-attention lay-
ers. In particular, the DownBlocks compress input noisy latent to the hidden states of lower resolu-
tion, while the UpBlocks conversely upscale intermediate features to the predicted noise. Therefore,
the most intuitive manner is to replicate the first several DownBlocks and the last several UpBlocks
for each expert branch, which are the most neighboring layers to the input and output. In this way,
each expert branch gradually maps input noisy latent of different domains (i.e., xtx , dtd , and ntn )
to similar distribution for feature fusion. Then, after a series of shared modules, the same feature is
distributed to each expert branch to output noises (i.e., ϵx , ϵd , and ϵn ) for spatially-aligned results.
Furthermore, we find that the number of shared modules can trade-off between the spatial alignment
and distribution learning: On the one hand, more shared layers guarantee the more similar features


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of final output, leading to the paired texture and structure corresponding to the same image. On the
other hand, the RGB, depth, and normal can be treated as different views of the same image, where
predicting them from the same feature resembles an image-to-image translation task in essence.
Empirically, we find the optimal design to replicate the conv in, first DownBlock, last UpBlock, and
conv out for each expert branch, where each branch’s skip-connections are maintained separately
(as depicted in Fig. 2). This yields both the spatial alignment and joint capture of image texture and
structure. Note that such design is not limited to three targets, but can generalize to arbitrary number
of paired distributions by simply involving more branches with little computation overhead.
Noise Schedule for Joint Learning. A problem arises when we inspect the distribution of depth
and surface-normal: After annotated by off-the-shelf estimators, they are regularized to certain data
range with similar values in local regions, e.g., [0, 1] for depth and unit vector for surface-normal.
Such monotonous images may leak low-frequency signals like the mean of each channel during
training. Besides, their latent distributions are divergent from that of RGB space, making them hard
to exploit common noise schedules (Lin et al., 2023) and diffusion prior. Motivated by this, we first
normalize the depth and normal latent features to the similar distribution of RGB latent, so that the
pre-trained denoising knowledge can be adaptively used. The zero terminal SNR (αT = 0, σT = 1)
is further enforced to eliminate structure map’s low-frequency information. Another question is how
to sample time-step t for each branch. An alternative is to perturb the data of different modalities
with different levels (Bao et al., 2023), which samples different t for each target as in Eq. 3. However,
as we aim to jointly model RGB, depth, and normal, such strategy only gives 10−9 probability to
sample each perturbation situation (given total steps T = 1000), which is too sparse to obtain good
results. In contrast, we propose to densely sample with the same time-step t for all the targets, so that
the sampling sparsity and learning difficulty will not increase even when we learn more modalities.
With the same noise level for each structural expert branch, intermediate features follow the similar
distribution when they fuse in the shared backbone, which could better complement to each others.
Finally, we utilize the v-prediction (Salimans & Ho, 2022) learning target as network objective:

 Lv-pred = Ex,d,n,c,p,v,t ||v̂θ (xt ; c, p) − vxt ||22 + ||v̂θ (dt ; c, p) − vd
                          h                                                                                     i
                                                                                  2                        n 2
                                                                              t ||2 + ||v̂θ (nt ; c, p) − vt ||2 , (4)


where vxt = αt ϵx − σt x, vd  t = αt ϵd − σt d, and vt = αt ϵn − σt n are the v-prediction learning
                                                     n

targets at time-step t for the RGB, depth, and normal, respectively. Overall, the unified simultane-
ous denoising network v̂θ with the structural expert branches, accompanied by the improved noise
schedule and time-step sampling strategy give the first-stage Latent Structural Diffusion Model G1 .

3.3   S TRUCTURE -G UIDED R EFINER

Compose Structures for Controllable Generation. With the unified latent structural diffusion
model, spatially-aligned conditions of depth and surface-normal can be predicted. We then learn a
refiner network to render high-quality image x̂high-res by composing multi-conditions of caption c,
pose skeleton p, the predicted depth d̂, and the predicted surface-normal n̂. In contrast to Zhang
& Agrawala (2023) and Mou et al. (2023) that can only handle a singular condition per run, we
propose to unify multiple control signals at the training phase. Specifically, we first project each
condition from input image size (e.g., 1024 × 1024) to feature space vector that matches the size
of SDXL (e.g., 128 × 128). Each condition is encoded via a light-weight embedder of four stacked
convolutional layers with 4 × 4 kernels, 2 × 2 strides, and ReLU activation. Next, the embeddings
from each branch are summed up coordinate-wise and further feed into the trainable copy of SDXL
Encoder Blocks. Since involving more conditions only incurs negligible computational overhead of a
tiny encoder network, our method can be trivially extended to new structural conditions. Although a
recent work also incorporates multiple conditions in one model (Huang et al., 2023), they have to re-
train the whole backbone, making the training cost unaffordable when scaling up to high resolution.
Random Dropout for Robust Conditioning. Since the predicted depth and surface-normal condi-
tions from G1 may contain artifacts, a potential issue for such two-stage pipeline is the error accu-
mulation, which typically leads to the train-test performance gap. To solve this problem, we propose
to dropout structural maps for robust conditioning. In particular, we randomly mask out any of the
control signals, such as replace text prompt with empty string, or substitute the structural maps with
zero-value images. In this way, the model will not solely rely on a single guidance for synthesis,
thus balancing the impact of each condition robustly. To sum up, the structure-composing refiner
network with robust conditioning scheme constitute the second-stage Structure-Guided Refiner G2 .


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4   H UMAN V ERSE DATASET
Large-scale datasets with high quality samples, rich annotations, and diverse distribution are crucial
for image generation tasks (Schuhmann et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2023), especially in the human
domain (Liu et al., 2016; Fu et al., 2022). To facilitate controllable human generation of high-fidelity,
we establish a comprehensive human dataset with extensive annotations named HumanVerse. Please
kindly refer to Appendix A.17 for more details about the dataset and annotation resources we use.
Dataset Preprocessing. We curate from two principled datasets: LAION-2B-en (Schuhmann et al.,
2022) and COYO-700M (Byeon et al., 2022). To isolate human images, we employ YOLOS (Fang
et al., 2021) for human detection. Specifically, only those images containing 1 to 3 human bounding
boxes are retained, where people should be visible with an area ratio exceeding 15%. We further rule
out samples of poor aesthetics (< 4.5) or low resolution (< 200 × 200). This yields a high-quality
subset by eliminating blurry and over-small humans. Unlike existing models that mostly train on
full-body humans of simple context (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023), our dataset encompasses a wider
spectrum, including various backgrounds and partial human regions such as clothing and limbs.
2D Human Poses. 2D human poses (skeleton of joints), which serve as one of the most flexible and
easiest obtainable coarse-level condition signals, are widely used in controllable human generation
studies (Ju et al., 2023b; Zhu et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; 2022a;b;c). To achieve
accurate keypoint annotations, we resort to MMPose (Contributors, 2020) as inference interface and
choose ViTPose-H (Xu et al., 2022) as backbone that performs best over several pose estimation
benchmarks. In particular, the per-instance bounding box, keypoint coordinates and confidence are
labeled, including whole-body skeleton, body skeleton, hand, and facial landmarks.
Depth and Surface-Normal Maps are fine-grained structures that reflect the spatial geometry of
images (Wu et al., 2022), which are commonly used in conditional generation (Mou et al., 2023).
We apply Omnidata (Eftekhar et al., 2021) for monocular depth and normal. The MiDaS (Ranftl
et al., 2022) is further annotated following recent depth-to-image pipelines (Rombach et al., 2022).
Outpaint for Accurate Annotations. Diffusion models have shown promising results on image in-
painting and outpainting, where the appearance and structure of unseen regions can be hallucinated
based on the visible parts. Motivated by this, we propose to outpaint each image for a more holistic
view given that most off-the-shelf structure estimators are trained on the “complete” image views.
Although the outpainted region may be imperfect with artifacts, it can complement a more compre-
hensive human structure. To this end, we utilize the powerful SD-Inpaint to outpaint the surrounding
areas of the original canvas. These images are further processed by off-the-shelf estimators, where
we only use the labeling within the original image region for more accurate annotations.
Overall Statistics. In summary, COYO subset contains 90, 948, 474 (91M) images and LAION-2B
subset contains 248, 396, 109 (248M) images, which is 18.12% and 20.77% of fullset, respectively.
The whole annotation process takes 640 16/32G NVIDIA V100 GPUs for two weeks in parallel.

5   E XPERIMENTS
Experimental Settings. For the comprehensive evaluation, we divide our comparisons into two
settings: 1) Quantitative analysis. All the methods are tested on the same benchmark, using the
same prompt with DDIM Scheduler (Song et al., 2020a) for 50 denoising steps to generate the same
resolution images of 512 × 512. 2) Qualitative analysis. We generate high-resolution 1024 × 1024
results for each model with the officially provided best configurations, such as the prompt engineer-
ing, noise scheduler, and classifier-free guidance (CFG) scale. Note that we use the RGB output
of the first-stage Latent Structural Diffusion Model for numerical comparison, while the improved
results from the second-stage Structure-Guided Refiner are merely utilized for visual comparison.
Datasets. We follow common practices in T2I generation (Yu et al., 2022a) and filter out a human
subset from MS-COCO 2014 validation (Lin et al., 2014) for zero-shot evaluation. In particular, off-
the-shelf human detector and pose estimator are used to obtain 8, 236 images with clearly-visible
humans for evaluation. All the ground truth images are resized and center-cropped to 512 × 512. To
guarantee fair comparisons, we train first-stage Latent Structural Diffusion on HumanVerse, which
is a subset of public LAION-2B and COYO, to report quantitative metrics. In addition, an internal
dataset is adopted to train second-stage Structure-Guided Refiner only for visually pleasing results.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 1: Zero-Shot Evaluation on MS-COCO 2014 Validation Human. We compare our model
with recent SOTA general T2I models (Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2023; DeepFloyd, 2023)
and controllable methods (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023; Mou et al., 2023; Ju et al., 2023b). Note that
†
  SDXL generates artistic style in 512, and ‡ IF only creates fixed-size images, we first generate
1024 × 1024 results, then resize back to 512 × 512 for these two methods. We bold the best and
underline the second results for clarity. Our improvements over the second method are shown in red.

                              Image Quality               Alignment             Pose Accuracy
 Methods            FID ↓       KID×1k ↓      FIDCLIP ↓    CLIP ↑     AP ↑    AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑
 SD 1.5              24.26         8.69        12.93        31.72       -       -        -         -
 SD 2.0              22.98         9.45        11.41        32.13       -       -        -         -
 SD 2.1              24.63         9.52        15.01        32.11       -       -        -         -
 SDXL†               29.08        12.16        19.00        32.90       -       -        -         -
 DeepFloyd-IF‡       29.72        15.27        17.01        32.11       -       -        -         -
 ControlNet          27.16        10.29        15.59        31.60     20.46 30.23     25.92      38.67
 T2I-Adapter         23.54         7.98        11.95        32.16     27.54 36.62     34.86      46.53
 HumanSD             52.49        33.96        21.11        29.48     26.71 36.85     32.84      45.87
 HyperHuman      17.18 25.2%↓ 4.11 48.5%↓ 7.82 31.5%↓       32.17     30.38 37.84     38.84      48.70


Comparison Methods. We compare with two categories of open-source SOTA works: 1) General
T2I models, including SD (Rombach et al., 2022) (SD 1.x & 2.x), SDXL (Podell et al., 2023), and
IF (DeepFloyd, 2023). 2) Controllable methods with pose condition. Notably, ControlNet (Zhang
& Agrawala, 2023) and T2I-Adapter (Mou et al., 2023) can handle multiple structural signals like
canny, depth, and normal, where we take their skeleton-conditioned variant for comparison. Hu-
manSD (Ju et al., 2023b) is the most recent work that specializes in pose-guided human generation.
Implementation Details. We resize and random-crop the RGB, depth, and normal to the target
resolution of each stage. To enforce the model with size and location awareness, the original image
height/width and crop coordinates are embedded in a similar way to time embedding (Podell et al.,
2023). Our code is developed based on diffusers (von Platen et al., 2022). 1) For the Latent Struc-
tural Diffusion, we fine-tune the whole UNet from the pretrained SD-2.0-base to v-prediction (Sal-
imans & Ho, 2022) in 512 × 512 resolution. The DDIMScheduler with improved noise schedule is
used for both training and sampling. We train on 128 80G NVIDIA A100 GPUs in a batch size of
2, 048 for one week. 2) For the Structure-Guided Refiner, we choose SDXL-1.0-base as the frozen
backbone and fine-tune to ϵ-prediction for high-resolution synthesis of 1024×1024. We train on 256
80G NVIDIA A100 GPUs in a batch size of 2, 048 for one week. The whole two-stage inference
process takes 12 seconds on a single 40G NVIDIA A100 GPU. The overall framework is optimized
with AdamW (Kingma & Ba, 2015) in 1e − 5 learning rate, and 0.01 weight decay.

5.1   M AIN R ESULTS

Evaluation Metrics. We adopt commonly-used metrics to make comprehensive comparisons from
three perspectives: 1) Image Quality. FID, KID, and FIDCLIP are used to reflect quality and diversity.
2) Text-Image Alignment, where the CLIP similarity between text and image embeddings is reported.
3) Pose Accuracy. We use the state-of-the-art pose estimator to extract poses from synthetic images
and compare with the input (GT) pose conditions. The Average Precision (AP) and Average Recall
(AR) are adopted to evaluate the pose alignment. Note that due to the noisy pose estimation of in-
the-wild COCO, we also use APclean and ARclean to only evaluate on the three most salient persons.
Quantitative Analysis. We report zero-shot evaluation results in Tab. 1. For all methods, we use
the default CFG scale of 7.5, which well balances the quality and diversity with appealing results.
Thanks to the structural awareness from expert branches, our proposed HyperHuman outperforms
previous works by a clear margin, achieving the best results on image quality and pose accuracy
metrics and ranks second on CLIP score. Note that SDXL (Podell et al., 2023) uses two text encoders
with 3× larger UNet of more cross-attention layers, leading to superior text-image alignment. In
spite of this, we still obtain an on-par CLIP score and surpass all the other baselines that have similar
text encoder parameters. We also show the FID-CLIP and FIDCLIP -CLIP curves over multiple CFG
scales in Fig. 3, where our model balances well between image quality and text-alignment, especially
for the commonly-used CFG scales (bottom right). Please see Sec. A.1 for more quantitative results.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                Table 2: Ablation Results. We explore design
       32.5          SD v1.5
                     SD v2.0                                                 18
                                                                                      SD v1.5
                                                                                      SD v2.0
                                                                                                                                choices for simultaneous denoising targets, num-
       30.0          SD v2.1
                     SDXL                                                    16
                                                                                      SD v2.1
                                                                                      SDXL
                                                                                                                                ber of expert branch layers, and noise schedules.
       27.5
                     DeepFloyd-IF                                                     DeepFloyd-IF                              The image quality and alignment are evaluated.


                                                                   FIDCLIP
                                                                             14


 FID
       25.0          ControlNet                                                       ControlNet
                     T2I-Adapter                                                      T2I-Adapter
       22.5                                                                  12
                     Ours                                                             Ours
       20.0                                                                  10                                                  Ablation Settings            FID ↓   FIDCLIP ↓   Ld2 ↓   Ln2 ↓

       17.5                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                 Denoise RGB                  21.68     10.27       -       -
                                                                                                                                 Denoise RGB + Depth          19.89      9.30     544.2     -
          0.300    0.305   0.310     0.315 0.320
                                   CLIP score
                                                   0.325   0.330              0.305   0.310   0.315    0.320
                                                                                                CLIP score
                                                                                                                0.325   0.330    Denoise RGB + Normal         19.24      9.15       -     130.6
                                                                                                                                 Half DownBlocks & UpBlocks   22.85     11.38     508.3   124.3
Figure 3: Evaluation Curves on COCO-Val Human.                                                                                   Two DownBlocks & UpBlocks
                                                                                                                                 Default SNR with ϵ-pred
                                                                                                                                                              17.94
                                                                                                                                                              17.70
                                                                                                                                                                         8.85
                                                                                                                                                                        8.41
                                                                                                                                                                                  677.4
                                                                                                                                                                                  867.0
                                                                                                                                                                                          145.9
                                                                                                                                                                                          180.2
We show FID-CLIP (left) and FIDCLIP -CLIP (right) curves                                                                         Different Timesteps t        29.36     18.29     854.8   176.1
with CFG scale ranging from 4.0 to 20.0 for all methods.                                                                         HyperHuman (Ours)            17.18      7.82     502.1   121.6


Table 3: User Preference Comparisons. We report the ratio of users prefer our model to baselines.
          Methods                                     SD 2.1                           SDXL                       IF            ControlNet        T2I-Adapter            HumanSD
          HyperHuman                                 89.24%                           60.45%                   82.45%            92.33%               98.06%               99.08%

Qualitative Analysis. Fig. 1 shows results (top) and comparisons with baselines (bottom). We
can generate both photo-realistic images and stylistic rendering, showing better realism, quality,
diversity, and controllability. A comprehensive user study is further conducted as shown in Tab. 3,
where the users prefer HyperHuman to the general and controllable T2I models. Please refer to
Appendix A.4, A.15, and A.16 for more user study details, comparisons, and qualitative results.

5.2               A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we present the key ablation studies. Except for the image quality metrics, we also
use the depth/normal prediction error as a proxy for spatial alignment between the synthesized RGB
and structural maps. Specifically, we extract the depth and surface-normal by off-the-shelf estimator
as pseudo ground truth. The Ld 2 and L2 denote the L2 -error of depth and normal, respectively.
                                       n

Simultaneous Denoise with Expert Branch. We explore whether latent structural diffusion model
helps, and how many layers to replicate in the structural expert branches: 1) Denoise RGB, that only
learns to denoise an image. 2) Denoise RGB + Depth, which also predicts depth. 3) Denoise RGB +
Normal, which also predicts surface-normal map. 4) Half DownBlock & UpBlock. We replicate
half of the first DownBlock and the last UpBlock, which contains one down/up-sample ResBlock
and one AttnBlock. 5) Two DownBlocks & UpBlocks, where we copy the first two DownBlocks and
the last two UpBlocks. The results are shown in Tab. 2 (top), which prove that the joint learning of
image appearance, spatial relationship, and geometry is beneficial. We also find that while fewer
replicate layers give more spatially aligned results, the per-branch parameters are insufficient to
capture distributions of each modality. In contrast, excessive replicate layers lead to less feature
fusion across different targets, which fails to complement to each other branches.
Noise Schedules. The ablation is conducted on two settings: 1) Default SNR with ϵ-pred, where
we use the original noise sampler schedules with ϵ-prediction. 2) Different Timesteps t. We sample
different noise levels (tx , td , and tn ) for each modality. We can see from Tab. 2 (bottom) that zero-
terminal SNR is important for learning of monotonous structural maps. Besides, different timesteps
harm the performance with more sparse perturbation sampling and harder information sharing.


6             D ISCUSSION

Conclusion. In this paper, we propose a novel framework HyperHuman to generate in-the-wild hu-
man images of high quality. To enforce the joint learning of image appearance, spatial relationship,
and geometry in a unified network, we propose Latent Structural Diffusion Model that simultane-
ously denoises the depth and normal along with RGB. Then we devise Structure-Guided Refiner to
compose the predicted conditions for detailed generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our framework yields superior performance, generating realistic humans under diverse scenarios.
Limitation and Future Work. As an early attempt in human generation foundation model, our
approach creates controllable human of high realism. However, due to the limited performance of
existing pose/depth/normal estimators for in-the-wild humans, we find it sometimes fails to generate
subtle details like finger and eyes. Besides, the current pipeline still requires body skeleton as input,
where deep priors like LLMs can be explored to achieve text-to-pose generation in future work.


                                                                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This study is supported by the Ministry of Education, Singapore, under its MOE AcRF Tier 2 (MOE-
T2EP20221- 0012) and NTU NAP.

R EFERENCES
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika
  Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, et al. ediffi: Text-to-image diffusion models
  with an ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324, 2022. 3
Fan Bao, Shen Nie, Kaiwen Xue, Chongxuan Li, Shi Pu, Yaole Wang, Gang Yue, Yue Cao, Hang
  Su, and Jun Zhu. One transformer fits all distributions in multi-modal diffusion at scale. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.06555, 2023. 6
Mikołaj Bińkowski, Danica J Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. Demystifying mmd
 gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01401, 2018. 15
Minwoo Byeon, Beomhee Park, Haecheon Kim, Sungjun Lee, Woonhyuk Baek, and Saehoon
 Kim. Coyo-700m: Image-text pair dataset. https://github.com/kakaobrain/
 coyo-dataset, 2022. 7, 34
MMPose Contributors. Openmmlab pose estimation toolbox and benchmark.               https://github.
 com/open-mmlab/mmpose, 2020. 7, 34
DeepFloyd. Deepfloyd if.        Github Repository, 2023.       URL https://github.com/
  deep-floyd/IF. 8, 24
Kangle Deng, Andrew Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Deva Ramanan. Depth-supervised nerf: Fewer views
  and faster training for free. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 12882–12891, 2022. 5
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021. 1, 3
Ainaz Eftekhar, Alexander Sax, Jitendra Malik, and Amir Zamir. Omnidata: A scalable pipeline
  for making multi-task mid-level vision datasets from 3d scans. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10786–10796, 2021. 7, 34
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
  tion, pp. 12873–12883, 2021. 4
Yuxin Fang, Bencheng Liao, Xinggang Wang, Jiemin Fang, Jiyang Qi, Rui Wu, Jianwei Niu, and
  Wenyu Liu. You only look at one sequence: Rethinking transformer in vision through object
  detection. CoRR, abs/2106.00666, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.00666.
  7, 34
Jianglin Fu, Shikai Li, Yuming Jiang, Kwan-Yee Lin, Chen Qian, Chen Change Loy, Wayne Wu,
   and Ziwei Liu. Stylegan-human: A data-centric odyssey of human generation. In European
   Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1–19. Springer, 2022. 4, 7
Ke Gong, Xiaodan Liang, Dongyu Zhang, Xiaohui Shen, and Liang Lin. Look into person: Self-
  supervised structure-sensitive learning and a new benchmark for human parsing. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 932–940, 2017. 4
Jiaxian Guo, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Tiong, Boyang Li, Dacheng Tao, and Steven HOI.
   From images to textual prompts: Zero-shot VQA with frozen large language models, 2023. URL
   https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ck1UtnVukP8. 34
Xintong Han, Zuxuan Wu, Zhe Wu, Ruichi Yu, and Larry S Davis. Viton: An image-based virtual
  try-on network. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
  tion, pp. 7543–7552, 2018. 4


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017. 15
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020. 1, 3, 4, 5
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019. 20
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021. 20
Lianghua Huang, Di Chen, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. Composer: Creative
  and controllable image synthesis with composable conditions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09778,
  2023. 6
Yuming Jiang, Shuai Yang, Haonan Qiu, Wayne Wu, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu.
  Text2human: Text-driven controllable human image generation. ACM Transactions on Graphics
  (TOG), 41(4):1–11, 2022. 1, 3
Xuan Ju, Ailing Zeng, Jianan Wang, Qiang Xu, and Lei Zhang. Human-art: A versatile human-
  centric dataset bridging natural and artificial scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 618–629, 2023a. 4, 19
Xuan Ju, Ailing Zeng, Chenchen Zhao, Jianan Wang, Lei Zhang, and Qiang Xu. Humansd: A native
  skeleton-guided diffusion model for human image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04269,
  2023b. 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 15, 16, 22, 24
Bo-Kyeong Kim, Hyoung-Kyu Song, Thibault Castells, and Shinkook Choi. On architectural com-
  pression of text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15798, 2023. 20
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980. 8
Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Shahbuland Matiana, Joe Penna, and Omer Levy.
  Pick-a-pic: An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.01569, 2023. 15
Yanyu Li, Huan Wang, Qing Jin, Ju Hu, Pavlo Chemerys, Yun Fu, Yanzhi Wang, Sergey Tulyakov,
  and Jian Ren. Snapfusion: Text-to-image diffusion model on mobile devices within two seconds.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00980, 2023. 3
Shanchuan Lin, Bingchen Liu, Jiashi Li, and Xiao Yang. Common diffusion noise schedules and
  sample steps are flawed. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08891, 2023. 5, 6, 21
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014. 7, 34
Wen Liu, Zhixin Piao, Jie Min, Wenhan Luo, Lin Ma, and Shenghua Gao. Liquid warping gan:
 A unified framework for human motion imitation, appearance transfer and novel view synthesis.
 In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5904–5913,
 2019. 1
Xian Liu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Yuanqi Du, Wayne Wu, Dahua Lin, and Ziwei Liu. Audio-driven
  co-speech gesture video generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  21386–21399, 2022a. 7


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xian Liu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Yinghao Xu, Rui Qian, Xinyi Lin, Xiaowei Zhou, Wayne Wu,
  Bo Dai, and Bolei Zhou. Learning hierarchical cross-modal association for co-speech gesture
  generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 10462–10472, 2022b. 7
Xian Liu, Yinghao Xu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Wayne Wu, and Bolei Zhou. Semantic-aware
  implicit neural audio-driven video portrait generation. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 106–125. Springer, 2022c. 7
Xian Liu, Xiaohang Zhan, Jiaxiang Tang, Ying Shan, Gang Zeng, Dahua Lin, Xihui Liu, and Ziwei
  Liu. Humangaussian: Text-driven 3d human generation with gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.17061, 2023. 7
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Shi Qiu, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deepfashion: Powering robust
  clothes recognition and retrieval with rich annotations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1096–1104, 2016. 4, 7
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie.
  T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08453, 2023. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 16, 22, 24
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021. 3, 15
Gaurav Parmar, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. On aliased resizing and surprising subtleties in
  gan evaluation. In CVPR, 2022. 34
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023. 5, 7, 8, 18, 24, 34
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 15, 18, 34
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022. 1,
  3
René Ranftl, Katrin Lasinger, David Hafner, Konrad Schindler, and Vladlen Koltun. Towards robust
  monocular depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset transfer. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(3), 2022. 7, 34
Yurui Ren, Xiaoming Yu, Junming Chen, Thomas H Li, and Ge Li. Deep image spatial transfor-
  mation for person image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7690–7699, 2020. 1, 3
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, June 2022. 1, 3,
  4, 7, 8, 15, 18, 24, 34
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015. 4
Prasun Roy, Subhankar Ghosh, Saumik Bhattacharya, Umapada Pal, and Michael Blumenstein.
  Tips: Text-induced pose synthesis. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 161–178.
  Springer, 2022. 3


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022. 3, 15

Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.00512, 2022. 6, 8

Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022. 7, 34

Aliaksandr Siarohin, Stéphane Lathuilière, Enver Sangineto, and Nicu Sebe. Appearance and pose-
  conditioned human image generation using deformable gans. IEEE transactions on pattern anal-
  ysis and machine intelligence, 43(4):1156–1171, 2019. 1, 3

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2256–2265, Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/sohl-dickstein15.html. 4

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a. 7

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b. 4

Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil, Anton Lozhkov, Pedro Cuenca, Nathan Lambert, Kashif Rasul,
  Mishig Davaadorj, and Thomas Wolf. Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models. https:
  //github.com/huggingface/diffusers, 2022. 8, 34

Bochao Wang, Huabin Zheng, Xiaodan Liang, Yimin Chen, Liang Lin, and Meng Yang. Toward
  characteristic-preserving image-based virtual try-on network. In Proceedings of the European
  conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 589–604, 2018. 1

Jiepeng Wang, Peng Wang, Xiaoxiao Long, Christian Theobalt, Taku Komura, Lingjie Liu, and
   Wenping Wang. Neuris: Neural reconstruction of indoor scenes using normal priors. In European
   Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 139–155. Springer, 2022. 5

Qianyi Wu, Xian Liu, Yuedong Chen, Kejie Li, Chuanxia Zheng, Jianfei Cai, and Jianmin Zheng.
  Object-compositional neural implicit surfaces. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  197–213. Springer, 2022. 7

Xiaoshi Wu, Yiming Hao, Keqiang Sun, Yixiong Chen, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li.
  Human preference score v2: A solid benchmark for evaluating human preferences of text-to-
  image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09341, 2023. 15

Yufei Xu, Jing Zhang, Qiming Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. Vitpose: Simple vision transformer base-
  lines for human pose estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38571–
  38584, 2022. 7, 34

Lingbo Yang, Pan Wang, Chang Liu, Zhanning Gao, Peiran Ren, Xinfeng Zhang, Shanshe Wang,
  Siwei Ma, Xiansheng Hua, and Wen Gao. Towards fine-grained human pose transfer with detail
  replenishing network. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 30:2422–2435, 2021. 3

Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2(3):5, 2022a. 7


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zehao Yu, Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Torsten Sattler, and Andreas Geiger. Monosdf: Ex-
  ploring monocular geometric cues for neural implicit surface reconstruction. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 35:25018–25032, 2022b. 5
Zhengming Yu, Wei Cheng, Xian Liu, Wayne Wu, and Kwan-Yee Lin. Monohuman: Animatable
  human neural field from monocular video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16943–16953, 2023. 7
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 16, 22, 24
Pengze Zhang, Lingxiao Yang, Jian-Huang Lai, and Xiaohua Xie. Exploring dual-task correla-
  tion for pose guided person image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7713–7722, 2022. 1
Liang Zheng, Liyue Shen, Lu Tian, Shengjin Wang, Jingdong Wang, and Qi Tian. Scalable person
  re-identification: A benchmark. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
  vision, pp. 1116–1124, 2015. 4
Lingting Zhu, Xian Liu, Xuanyu Liu, Rui Qian, Ziwei Liu, and Lequan Yu. Taming diffusion models
  for audio-driven co-speech gesture generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10544–10553, 2023. 7
Shizhan Zhu, Raquel Urtasun, Sanja Fidler, Dahua Lin, and Chen Change Loy. Be your own prada:
  Fashion synthesis with structural coherence. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 1680–1688, 2017. 3


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A        A PPENDIX

In this supplemental document, we provide more details of the following contents: 1) Additional
quantitative results (Sec. A.1). 2) More implementation details like network architecture, hyper-
parameters, and training setups, etc (Sec. A.2). 3) More ablation study results (Sec. A.3). 4) More
user study details (Sec. A.4). 5) The impact of random seed to our model to show the robustness
of our method (Sec. A.5). 6) Boarder impact and the ethical consideration of this work (Sec. A.6).
7) Model’s robustness on the unseen and challenging pose (Sec. A.7). 8) Potential optimization
for the annotation and training pipeline (Sec. A.8). textbf9) Model’s performance on unconditional
generation without input poses (Sec. A.9). 10) Model’s performance on the jittered poses and image
animation results (Sec. A.10). textbf11) More first-stage generation results (Sec. A.11). 12) The
detailed intuition of updated noise schedule (Sec. A.12). 13) More details on pose processing and
encoding (Sec. A.13). 14) Reconstruction performance of RGB VAE on other modality-specific in-
puts (Sec. A.14). 15) More visual comparison results with recent T2I models (Sec. A.15). 16) More
qualitative results of our model (Sec. A.16). 17) The asset licenses we use in this work (Sec. A.17).

A.1          A DDITIONAL Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

FID-CLIP Curves. Due to the page limit, we only show tiny-size FID-CLIP and FIDCLIP -CLIP
curves in the main paper and omit the curves of HumanSD (Ju et al., 2023b) due to its too large
FID and FIDCLIP results for reasonable axis scale. Here, we show a clearer version of FID-CLIP
and FIDCLIP -CLIP curves in Fig. 4. As broadly proven in recent text-to-image studies (Rombach
et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022), the classifier-free guidance (CFG) plays an
important role in trading-off image quality and diversity, where the CFG scales around 7.0 − 8.0
(corresponding to the bottom-right part of the curve) are the commonly-used choices in practice.
We can see from Fig. 4 that our model can achieve a competitive CLIP Score while maintaining
superior image quality results, showing the efficacy of our proposed HyperHuman framework.
Human Preference-Related Metrics. As shown in recent text-to-image generation evaluation stud-
ies, conventional image quality metrics like FID (Heusel et al., 2017), KID (Bińkowski et al., 2018)
and text-image alignment CLIP Score (Radford et al., 2021) diverge a lot from the human pref-
erence (Kirstain et al., 2023). To this end, we adopt two very recent human preference-related
metrics: 1) PickScore (Kirstain et al., 2023), which is trained on the side-by-side comparisons of
two T2I models. 2) HPS (Human Preference Score) V2 (Wu et al., 2023), which takes the user
like/dislike statistics for scoring model training. The evaluation results are reported in Tab. 4, which
show that our framework performs better than the baselines. Although the improvement seems to be
marginal, we find current human preference-related metrics to be highly biased: The scoring models
are mostly trained on the synthetic data with highest resolution of 1024 × 1024, which makes them
favor unrealistic images of 1024 resolution, as they rarely see real images of higher resolution in
score model training. In spite of this, we still achieve superior quantitative and qualitative results on
these two metrics and a comprehensive user study, outperforming all the baseline methods.

        55
                                                                  22.5
        50
                   SD v1.5                                        20.0      SD v1.5
        45
                   SD v2.0                                                  SD v2.0
        40                                                        17.5      SD v2.1
                                                        FIDCLIP


                   SD v2.1
  FID


                   SDXL                                                     SDXL
        35                                                        15.0
                   DeepFloyd-IF                                             DeepFloyd-IF
        30         ControlNet                                     12.5      ControlNet
                   T2I-Adapter                                              T2I-Adapter
        25
                   HumanSD                                        10.0      HumanSD
        20         Ours                                                     Ours
                                                                   7.5
         0.29       0.30        0.31      0.32   0.33                0.29    0.30        0.31      0.32   0.33
                             CLIP score                                               CLIP score


Figure 4: Clear Evaluation Curves on MS-COCO2014 Validation Human. We show FID-CLIP (left) and
FIDCLIP -CLIP (right) curves with CFG scale ranging from 4.0 to 20.0 for all methods.



                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Quantitative Results on Human Preference-Related Metrics. We report on two recent
metrics PickScore and HPS V2. The first row denotes the ratio of preferring ours to others, where
larger than 50% means the superior one. The second row is the human preference score, where the
higher the better. It can be seen that our proposed HyperHuman achieves the best performance.

       Methods       Ours    SD 2.1     SDXL          IF   ControlNet    Adapter   HumanSD
       PickScore       -     66.87%    52.11%    63.37%      74.47%      83.25%     87.18%
       HPS V2       0.2905   0.2772    0.2832    0.2849      0.2783      0.2732     0.2656



Pose Accuracy Results on Different CFG Scales. We additionally report the pose accuracy results
over different CFG scales. Specifically, we evaluate the conditional human generation methods
of ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023), T2I-Adapter (Mou et al., 2023), HumanSD (Ju et al.,
2023b), and ours on four metrics Average Precision (AP), Average Recall (AR), clean AP (APclean ),
and clean AR (ARclean ) as mentioned in Sec. 5.1. We report on CFG scales ranging from 4.0 to 13.0
in Tab. 5, where our method is constantly better in terms of pose accuracy and controllability.


A.2   M ORE I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We report implementation details like training hyper-parameters, and model architecture in Tab. 6.


A.3   M ORE A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS

We implement additional ablation study experiments on the second stage Structure-Guided Refiner.
Note that due to the training resource limit and the resolution discrepancy between MS-COCO real
images (512 × 512) and high-quality renderings (1024 × 1024), we conduct several toy ablation
experiments in the lightweight 512 × 512 variant of our model: 1) w/o random dropout, where
the all the input conditions are not dropout or masked out during the conditional training stage. 2)
Only Text, where not any structural prediction is input to the model and we only use the text prompt
as condition. 3) Condition on p, where we only use human pose skeleton p as input condition to
the refiner network. 4) Condition on d that uses depth map d as input condition. 5) Condition
on n that uses surface-normal n as input condition. And their combinations of 6) Condition on
p, d; 7) Condition on p, n; 8) Condition on d, n, to verify the impact of each condition and the
necessity of using such multi-level hierarchical structural guidance for fine-grained generation. The
results are reported in Tab. 7. We can see that the random dropout conditioning scheme is crucial
for more robust training with better image quality, especially in the two-stage generation pipeline.
Besides, the structural map/guidance contains geometry and spatial relationship information, which
are beneficial to image generation of higher quality. Another interesting phenomenon is that only
conditioned on surface-normal n is better than conditioned on both the pose skeleton p and depth
map d, which aligns with our intuition that surface-normal conveys rich structural information that
mostly cover coarse-level skeleton and depth map, except for the keypoint location and foreground-
background relationship. Overall, we can conclude from ablation results that: 1) Each condition
(i.e., pose skeleton, depth map, and surface-normal) is important for higher-quality and more aligned
generation, which validates the necessity of our first-stage Latent Structural Diffusion Model to
jointly capture them. 2) The random dropout scheme for robust conditioning can essentially bridge
the train-test error accumulation in two-stage pipeline, leading to better image results.


A.4   M ORE U SER S TUDY D ETAILS

The study involves 25 participants and annotates for a total of 8236 images in the zero-shot MS-
COCO 2014 validation human subset. They take 2-3 days to complete all the user study task, with
a final review to examine the validity of human preference. Specifically, we conduct side-by-side
comparisons between our generated results and each baseline model’s results. The asking question
is “Considering both the image aesthetics and text-image alignment, which image is better?
Prompt: <prompt>.” The labelers are unaware of which image corresponds to which baseline,
i.e., the place of two compared images are shuffled to achieve fair comparison without bias.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Additional Pose Accuracy Results for Different CFG Scales. We evaluate on four pose
alignment metrics AP, AR, APclean , and ARclean for the CFG scales ranging from 4.0 to 13.0.

                                    CFG 4.0                          CFG 5.0
       Methods        AP ↑   AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑ AP ↑   AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑
       ControlNet     20.37 29.54     25.98    37.96   20.42 29.94     26.09   38.31
       T2I-Adapter    28.18 36.71     35.68    46.77   27.90 36.76     35.31   46.78
       HumanSD        26.05 35.89     32.27    44.90   26.51 36.44     32.84   45.48
       HyperHuman 30.45 37.87         38.88    48.75   30.57 37.96     39.01   48.84

                                    CFG 6.0                          CFG 7.0
       Methods        AP ↑   AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑ AP ↑   AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑
       ControlNet     20.54 30.16     26.09    38.64   20.44 30.29     26.01   38.79
       T2I-Adapter    27.90 36.77     35.37    46.80   27.66 36.62     35.00   46.55
       HumanSD        26.79 36.79     33.10    45.91   26.73 36.84     32.94   45.80
       HyperHuman 30.44 37.92         38.91    48.77   30.49 37.90     38.82   48.72

                                    CFG 8.0                          CFG 9.0
       Methods        AP ↑   AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑ AP ↑   AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑
       ControlNet     20.54 30.28     26.06    38.74   20.35 30.11     25.80   38.43
       T2I-Adapter    27.46 36.50     34.80    46.39   27.10 36.32     34.14   46.04
       HumanSD        26.76 36.86     32.96    45.88   26.67 36.91     32.74   45.93
       HyperHuman 30.23 37.80         38.72    48.59   29.93 37.67     38.30   48.45

                                 CFG 10.0                        CFG 11.0
       Methods        AP ↑   AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑ AP ↑   AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑
       ControlNet     20.10 30.08     25.50    38.29   19.81 29.93     25.23   38.23
       T2I-Adapter    26.89 36.19     33.83    45.83   26.65 36.10     33.51   45.67
       HumanSD        26.67 36.86     32.80    46.00   26.53 36.74     32.63   45.85
       HyperHuman 29.75 37.60         38.20    48.38   29.58 37.31     37.88   48.07

                                 CFG 12.0                        CFG 13.0
       Methods        AP ↑   AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑ AP ↑   AR ↑ APclean ↑ ARclean ↑
       ControlNet     19.57 29.84     25.02    38.15   19.52 29.74     24.93   38.08
       T2I-Adapter    26.49 35.95     33.39    45.52   26.41 35.90     33.22   45.44
       HumanSD        26.46 36.71     32.53    45.82   26.26 36.65     32.39   45.70
       HyperHuman 29.40 37.18         37.75    47.90   29.29 37.11     37.64   47.87


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Table 6: Training Hyper-parameters and Network Architecture in HyperHuman.

                                        Latent Structural Diffusion                          Structure-Guided Refiner
 Activation Function                                SiLU                                              SiLU
 Additional Embed Type                              Time                                          Text + Time
 # of Heads in Additional Embed                       64                                                64
 Additional Time Embed Dimension                     256                                               256
 Attention Head Dimension                     [5, 10, 20, 20]                                      [5, 10, 20]
 Block Out Channels                       [320, 640, 1280, 1280]                                [320, 640, 1280]
 Cross-Attention Dimension                          1024                                              2048
 Down Block Types                    [“CrossAttn”×3,“ResBlock”×1]                        [“ResBlock”×1,“CrossAttn”×2]
 Input Channel                                        8                                                  4
 # of Input Head                                      3                                                  3
 Condition Embedder Channels                           -                                        [16, 32, 96, 256]
 Transformer Layers per Block                    [1, 1, 1, 1]                                       [1, 2, 10]
 Layers per Block                                [2, 2, 2, 2]                                        [2, 2, 2]
 Input Class Embedding Dimension                      −                                               2816
 Sampler Training Step T                            1000                                              1000
 Learning Rate                                     1e − 5                                            1e − 5
 Weight Decay                                       0.01                                               0.01
 Warmup Steps                                         0                                                  0
 AdamW Betas                                   (0.9, 0.999)                                       (0.9, 0.999)
 Batch Size                                         2048                                              2048
 Condition Dropout                                  15%                                                50%
 Text Encoder                      OpenCLIP ViT-H (Radford et al., 2021)      CLIP ViT-L & OpenCLIP ViT-bigG (Radford et al., 2021)
 Pretrained Model                   SD-2.0-base (Rombach et al., 2022)                  SDXL-1.0-base (Podell et al., 2023)


Table 7: Additional Ablation Results for Structure-Guided Refiner. Due to the resource limit
and resolution discrepancy, we experiment on 512×512 resolution to illustrate our design’s efficacy.

                    Ablation Settings              FID ↓        KID×1k ↓           FIDCLIP ↓        CLIP ↑
                    w/o random dropout             25.69              11.84           13.48          31.83
                    Only Text                      23.99              10.42           13.22          32.23
                    Condition on p                 20.97              7.51            12.86          31.95
                    Condition on d                 14.97              3.75             9.88          31.74
                    Condition on n                 12.67              2.61             7.09          31.59
                    Condition on p, d              14.98              3.78             9.47          31.74
                    Condition on p, n              12.65              2.66             6.93          31.63
                    Condition on d, n              12.42              2.59             6.89          31.57
                    Ours w/ Refiner                12.38              2.55            6.76           32.23


We note that all the labelers are well-trained for such text-to-image generation comparison tasks,
who have passed the examination on a test set and have experience in this kind of comparisons for
over 50 times. Below, we include the user study rating details for our method vs. baseline models.
Each labeler can click on four options: a) The left image is better, in this case the corresponding
model will get +1 grade. b) The right image is better. c) NSFW, which means the prompt/image
contain NSFW contents, in this case both models will get 0 grade. d) Hard Case, where the labelers
find it hard to tell which one’s image quality is better, in this case both models will get +0.5 grade.
The detailed comparison statistics are shown in Table 8, where we report the grades of HyperHu-
man vs. baseline methods. It can be clearly seen that our proposed framework is superior than all
the existing models, with better image quality, realism, aesthetics, and text-image alignment.

Table 8: Detailed Comparison Statistics in User Study. We conduct a comprehensive user study
on zero-shot MS-COCO 2014 validation human subset with well-trained participants.

                Methods                    SD 2.1                      SDXL                           IF
                HyperHuman             7350 vs. 886          4978.5 vs. 3257.5             6787.5 vs. 1444.5

                Methods                 ControlNet               T2I-Adapter                    HumanSD
                HyperHuman             7604 vs. 632             8076 vs. 160                   8160 vs. 76



                                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   I MPACT OF R ANDOM S EED AND M ODEL ROBUSTNESS

To further validate our model’s robustness to the impact of random seed, we inference with the same
input conditions (i.e., text prompt and pose skeleton) and use different random seeds for generation.
The results are shown in Fig. 5, which suggest that our proposed framework is robust to generate
high-quality and text-aligned human images over multiple arbitrary random seeds.

                        A bearded, bald man wears a multicolored tie.


                 A smiling man in a skiing outfit holds his skis and poles


          A handsome man holds a glass of white wine and looks at the camera.


Figure 5: Impact of Random Seed and Model Robustness. We use the same input text prompt
and pose skeleton with different random seeds to generate multiple results. The results suggest that
our proposed framework is robust to generate high-quality and text-aligned human images.


A.6   B OARDER I MPACT AND E THICAL C ONSIDERATION

Generating realistic humans conditioned on text benefits a wide range of applications. It enriches
creative domains such as art, design, and entertainment by enabling the creation of highly realis-
tic and emotionally resonant visuals. Besides, it streamlines design processes, reducing time and
resources needed for tasks like content production. However, it could be misused for malicious
purposes like deepfake or forgery generation. We believe that the proper use of this technique will
enhance the machine learning research and digital entertainment. We also advocate all the generated
images should be labeled as “synthetic” to avoid negative social impacts.

A.7   M ODEL ROBUSTNESS ON U NSEEN AND C HALLENGING P OSE

In this section, we show the robustness of HyperHuman to generalize to unseen or challenging
poses. Specifically, we choose an acrobatic-related image from the Human-Art dataset (Ju et al.,
2023a), which is a highly challenging and rare pose unseen from the common human-centric images.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The results are shown in Fig. 6. In the visualized results, (a) is the ground-truth image from the
Human-Art dataset; (b) is the associated pose skeleton, which is challenging and unseen; (c), (d), (e),
and (f) are four generated images from our proposed framework. It can be seen that HyperHuman
is robust to unseen poses, even for the rare acrobatic case.
                                 Acrobatics of a woman doing a handstand on a wooden floor.


        (a) Ground Truth Image                       (b) Challenging Pose                     (c) Our Results - 1


          (d) Our Results - 2                         (e) Our Results - 3                     (f) Our Results - 4


Figure 6: Model Robustness on Unseen and Challenging Pose. We show multiple high-quality
generation results on the unseen acrobatic pose, which shows the robustness of our method.


A.8   P OTENTIAL O PTIMIZATION FOR A NNOTATION AND T RAINING

From the perspective of optimizing training: 1) We can change our models into a smaller diffusion
backbone to save the training and memory cost, e.g., Small SD and Tiny SD (Kim et al., 2023),
which achieve on-par performance with Stable Diffusion, but lighter and faster in training and in-
ference. 2) We can leverage some efficient parameter finetuning techniques like LoRA (Hu et al.,
2021) and Adapter (Houlsby et al., 2019) to finetune the shared backbone with fewer parameters.
3) We can adopt some common engineering tricks to reduce memory consumption, e.g., gradient
checkpointing, gradient accumulation with smaller batch size, deepspeed model parallelism, lower
floating point precision like fp16, efficient xformers, etc.
From the perspective of optimizing annotation: 1) Our efficient architecture design (only add
lightweight branches) can actually produce reasonable results with smaller dataset scale and fewer
training iterations, capturing the joint distribution of RGB, depth, and surface-normal. Before the
large-scale training, we first verify method effectiveness on a small-scale 1M subset, which is less
than 3% of the HumanVerse fullset scale. In spite of this, we can still obtain good results with only
8 40GB A100 within one day, generating spatially aligned results for each modality. A generation
sample is shown in Fig. 7, where (a) is the conditioning pose skeleton; (b), (c), and (d) are the si-
multaneously denoised depth map, surface-normal map, and RGB images. Note that since this is an
early-stage experiment, the pose conditioning and visualization are little bit different from the final
version we have used. In spite of this, we manage to achieve simultaneous denoising of multiple
modalities with a much smaller dataset scale. 2) The annotation overhead mostly comes from the
diffusion-based image outpainting process (Sec. 4), while the cost for depth and normal estimation is


                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


relatively low. Though facilitating more accurate pose annotations, it is not a mandatory step. More-
over, in the final evaluation process, we use the raw human pose without the help of outpainting, but
can still achieve superior performance.

                             Two beautiful women walking on the street.


        (a) Pose Skeleton        (b) Denoised Depth        (c) Denoised Surface-Normal   (d) Denoised RGB



Figure 7: An Early-Stage Generation Sample on Small-Scale Dataset. We show a generation
sample on a small-scale 1M subset, which is less than 3% of the HumanVerse fullset scale. Note
that since this is an early-stage experiment, the pose conditioning and visualization are little bit
different from the final version we have used.


A.9    M ODEL P ERFORMANCE WITHOUT I NPUT P OSE

In this section, we show the unconditional generation results of our model, where no pose input is
taken. The generated images are shown in Fig. 8. All the text prompts are from the zero-shot MS-
COCO 2014 Human Validation dataset, which is unseen during the model training process. Thanks
to our framework design of robust conditioning scheme, the model is trained to predict reasonable
denoising results, even when the conditions are dropout or masked. Therefore, we manage to create
realistic human images with superior performance even without the pose skeleton as input.

A.10    M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ON J ITTERED P OSE AND I MAGE A NIMATION

We show additional results on the jittered human poses in Fig. 9. Specifically, we first condition on
the original pose skeleton (a) and obtain the generated image (b) based on text prompt “A woman
standing near a lake with a snow capped mountain behind”. Then we gradually add Gaussian noise
to all the joints, from the sigma scale of 2.5 to 12.5. It can be seen that HyperHuman could produce
pleasant results under Gaussian noises to all joints, creating highly pose-aligned images.
To further verify if we can animate a certain image by gradually changing the input pose, we fix the
random seed, the initial starting noise xT , and text prompt. The sequential generation results are
shown in Fig. 10. Note that we fix the text prompt of “A woman standing near a lake with a snow
capped mountain behind”. The input skeleton are shifted towards the right side, each step by 10
pixels. Even though we maintain other conditions fixed, we can still see background and appearance
changes. We regard this as a promising research problem and will explore it in future work.

A.11    M ORE F IRST-S TAGE G ENERATION R ESULTS

We show more first-stage Latent Structural Diffusion Model generation results in Fig. 11, where the
spatially aligned RGB images, depth maps, and surface-normal maps are simultaneously denoised
and generated. Though not as high-quality as the final output from the second-stage pipeline, it can
still generate plausible humans with coherent structures.

A.12    D ETAILED I NTUITION OF U PDATED N OISE S CHEDULE

First, it is hard to finetune the Stable Diffusion to generate pure-color images. As shown in the
paper (Lin et al., 2023), we can not even overfit to a single solid-black image with the text prompt
of ”Solid black background”. The main reason is that common diffusion noise schedules are flawed,
which corrupts image incompletely when sampling t = T at the training phase: xT = αT ·x0 +σT ·ϵ,


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     A man sitting down with a brown   Two women holding surfboards while         A guy in a brown jacket standing near a
       teddy bear on his shoulders.          smiling at the camera.                  sign holding a cellphone to his ear.


        A woman poses with avocado     An elderly woman looks to the side as           A picture of a man with suit,
       sandwich lunch at an outdoor    she sits in front of a cheese pizza in a              tie and wild hair.
               restaurant.                           restaurant.


Figure 8: Unconditional Generation Results without Input Pose. All the text prompts are from
the zero-shot MS-COCO 2014 Human Validation dataset.



but αT ̸= 0, σT ̸= 1. Due to this reason, a small amount of signal is still included, which leaks the
lowest frequency information such as the overall mean of each channel. In contrast, at the inference
stage, the sampling starts from a pure Gaussian noise, which has a zero mean. Such train-test gap
hinders SD from generating pure-color images.
Second, similar to pure color images, the depth and surface-normal maps are visualized based on
certain scheme, where its color and patterns are highly constrained. For example, the depth map is
grey-scale image without colorful textures, and current estimators tend to infer similar depth values
for each local patch. Therefore, the low frequency information of per-channel mean and standard
deviation could be misused by network as shortcut for denoising, which harms the joint learning of
multiple modalities (RGB, depth, and surface-normal). Motivated by this, we propose to enforce the
zero-terminal SNR (xT = 0.0·x0 +1.0·ϵ, that is, αT = 0, σT = 1) to fully eliminate low-frequency
information at the training stage, so that we manage generate both RGB images and structural maps
of high quality at the inference stage.



A.13    M ORE D ETAILS ON P OSE P ROCESSING AND E NCODING

The encoder used for pose is the pretrained VAE encoder of Stable Diffusion, which is the same as
the encoder used for RGB, depth, and surface-normal maps. Before pose encoding, we visualize
the body keypoints on a black canvas to form a skeleton map, similar to previous controllable meth-
ods (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023; Mou et al., 2023; Ju et al., 2023b) with pose condition. Specifically,
we use exactly the same pose drawing method as HumanSD (Ju et al., 2023b) and T2I-Adapter (Mou
et al., 2023) to ensure fairness.


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                A woman standing near a lake with a snow capped mountain behind.


            (a) Original Pose                    (b) Original Generation                  (c) Noisy Pose, sigma=2.5            (d) Generation, sigma=2.5


        (e) Noisy Pose, sigma=5.0                (f) Generation, sigma=5.0                (g) Noisy Pose, sigma=7.5            (h) Generation, sigma=7.5


        (i) Noisy Pose, sigma=10.0              (j) Generation, sigma=10.0               (k) Noisy Pose, sigma=12.5            (l) Generation, sigma=12.5



Figure 9: Generation Results under the Jittered Poses. We use the text prompt “A woman stand-
ing near a lake with a snow capped mountain behind” and gradually add Gaussian noise to all the
joints, from the sigma scale of 2.5 to 12.5.


A.14       VAE R ECONSTRUCTION P ERFORMANCE ON M ODALITY-S PECIFIC I NPUT

We use an improved auto-encoder of the pretrained Stable Diffusion “sd-vae-ft-mse”1 as VAE to
encode inputs from all the modalities, including RGB, depth, surface-normal, and body skeleton
maps. To further validate that RGB VAE can be directly used for other structural maps, we exten-
sively evaluate the reconstruction metrics of all the involved structural maps on 100k samples. The
results are reported in Tab. 9, which show that the pre-trained RGB VAE is robust enough to handle
different modality images, including the structural maps we use in this work. Besides, we addition-
ally show some visualized reconstruction samples in Fig. 12, where in each group, the first row is the
input structural maps, and the second row is the reconstructed structural maps from the pretrained
RGB VAE. Therefore, both the quantitative metrics and visual results show that the pretrained RGB
VAE is robust enough to faithfully reconstruct structural maps.

Table 9: RGB VAE Reconstruction Performance. We evaluate the reconstruction performance of
the pretrained RGB VAE on the depth and surface-normal maps.

                                     Modality                    rFID ↓       PSNR ↑              SSIM ↑              PSIM ↓
                                     Body Skeleton                 0.49          39.24                0.96            0.188
                                     MiDaS Depth                   0.19          47.08                0.99            0.004
                                     Surface-Normal                0.24          40.11                0.97            0.010


   1
       https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/sd-vae-ft-mse


                                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           A woman standing near a lake with a snow capped mountain behind.


 Figure 10: Animation Results. We gradually shift skeleton to right side, each step by 10 pixels.


A.15     M ORE C OMPARISON R ESULTS

We additionally compare our proposed HyperHuman with recent open-source general text-to-
image models and controllable human generation baselines, including ControlNet (Zhang &
Agrawala, 2023), T2I-Adapter (Mou et al., 2023), HumanSD (Ju et al., 2023b), SD v2.1 (Rombach
et al., 2022), DeepFloyd-IF (DeepFloyd, 2023), SDXL 1.0 w/ refiner (Podell et al., 2023). Besides,
we also compare with the concurrently released T2I-Adapter+SDXL2 . We use the officially-released
models to generate high-resolution images of 1024 × 1024 for all methods. The results are shown
in Fig. 13, 14, 15, and 16, which demonstrates that we can generate humans of high realism.

A.16     A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

We further inference on the challenging zero-shot MS-COCO 2014 validation human subset prompts
and show additional qualitative results in Fig. 17, 18, and 19. All the images are in high resolution
of 1024 × 1024. It can be seen that our proposed HyperHuman framework manages to synthesize
realistic human images of various layouts under diverse scenarios, e.g., different age groups of baby,
child, young people, middle-aged people, and old persons; different contexts of canteen, in-the-wild
roads, snowy mountains, and streetview, etc. Please kindly zoom in for the best viewing.


   2
       https://huggingface.co/Adapter/t2iadapter


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  A man standing on a busy sidewalk                 A man with glasses and his eyes closed    A person is sitting in front of a camera   Two men standing next to each other
    while talking on his cellphone.                 dressed in a black shirt and a necktie.           and ready for a game.                       holding hands.


  A woman wearing a wedding gown holding            Two small young girls hold hands as         A younger man and an older man            A young man is in the middle of
flowers is in a car with a man in a suit and tie.        they look into a bedroom.                    skiing in the forest.                cutting his hair while posing.


A man with a button up shirt, sport coat    An individual wearing a comical                                                    A smiling man in a skiing outfit holds
                                                                                    The two young girls are petting the goats.
and necktie with a knit cap on his head. mustache with a serious facial expression.                                                      his skis and poles.


   Figure 11: First-Stage Results. We show the jointly denoised RGB, depth, and normal maps.


                                                                                          25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) GT Pose
(b) Recon. Pose
(c) GT Depth
(d) Recon. Depth
(e) GT Normal
(f) Recon. Normal


Figure 12: RGB VAE Reconstruction Results. We show the visualized reconstruction results on
depth and surface-normal maps.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     A man kiteboarding on the ocean on top of a wave.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)            (b) ControlNet       (c) T2I-Adapter           (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1                (f) DeepFloyd-IF         (g) SDXL           (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL
                           Group of snowboarders in transportation vehicle near ski area.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)            (b) ControlNet       (c) T2I-Adapter           (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1                (f) DeepFloyd-IF         (g) SDXL           (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL
         A man on a motorcycle that is on a road that has grass fields on both sides and a stop sign.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)            (b) ControlNet       (c) T2I-Adapter           (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1                (f) DeepFloyd-IF         (g) SDXL           (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL


                                Figure 13: Additional Comparison Results.


                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                           A girl is standing by a storefront while talking on her phone.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)          (b) ControlNet       (c) T2I-Adapter           (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1              (f) DeepFloyd-IF         (g) SDXL         (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL
                                Small silver cell phone being held up any person's hand.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)          (b) ControlNet       (c) T2I-Adapter           (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1              (f) DeepFloyd-IF         (g) SDXL         (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL
                                     A man holding various kites next to cabinet.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)          (b) ControlNet       (c) T2I-Adapter           (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1              (f) DeepFloyd-IF         (g) SDXL         (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL
                                Figure 14: Additional Comparison Results.


                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                            Mastering the art of skateboarding is profoundly beneficial.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)          (b) ControlNet       (c) T2I-Adapter         (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1              (f) DeepFloyd-IF         (g) SDXL        (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL
                                 A woman in an equestrian outfit riding a white horse.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)          (b) ControlNet       (c) T2I-Adapter         (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1              (f) DeepFloyd-IF         (g) SDXL        (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL
               A group of men who are standing behind a banner that has various flags on it.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)          (b) ControlNet       (c) T2I-Adapter         (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1              (f) DeepFloyd-IF         (g) SDXL        (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL

                                Figure 15: Additional Comparison Results.


                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        A person is typing on a lap top and there is a person up on screen.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)         (b) ControlNet      (c) T2I-Adapter         (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1             (f) DeepFloyd-IF        (g) SDXL         (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL
                      A black and white photo of a girl's face with teddy bears behind her.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)         (b) ControlNet      (c) T2I-Adapter         (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1             (f) DeepFloyd-IF        (g) SDXL         (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL
        Several People walking in a city street, one woman wears a head scarf, others have umbrellas.


             (a) HyperHuman (Ours)         (b) ControlNet      (c) T2I-Adapter         (d) HumanSD


                  (e) SD v2.1             (f) DeepFloyd-IF        (g) SDXL         (h) T2I-Adapter+SDXL


                                Figure 16: Additional Comparison Results.


                                                        30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  A baby girl with beautiful blue eyes                A little girl with wavy hair
  standing next to a brown teddy bear.              and smile holding a teddy bear.


         A man and woman seated                     A cow laying on the grass behind
         at a table in a restaurant.                 a man holding a cup of coffee.


  A young kid stands before a birthday                 A man who is sitting in a bus
  cake decorated with captain America.                looking away from the window.

       Figure 17: Additional Qualitative Results on Zero-Shot MS-COCO Validation.

                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      A man in a red shirt is holding          Two men who are sitting next to each other
      a skate board up over his head.            with a large pizza in front of them.


     Two children carry an enormous             The upper half of a man posing for a photograph wearing a
           stuffed teddy bear.                       suit with a blue tie and matching pocket corner.


  An older man is wearing a funny hat                      Young man on top of a
           in his dining room.                        snowboard wearing maroon jacket.

       Figure 18: Additional Qualitative Results on Zero-Shot MS-COCO Validation.

                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Man sitting on brick covered ground,              A man wearing a purple neck tie and
      appearing dirty and tired.                       glasses while sitting in a car.


           A man standing on                              A girl with blue hair is
         grassy area next to trees.                       taking a self portrait.


    A man wearing a helmet is sitting                A person dressed up taking a picture
        on his blue motorcycle.                           at a street with his fist up.

       Figure 19: Additional Qualitative Results on Zero-Shot MS-COCO Validation.

                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.17    L ICENSES

Image Datasets:

       • LAION-5B3 (Schuhmann et al., 2022): Creative Common CC-BY 4.0 license.
       • COYO-700M4 (Byeon et al., 2022): Creative Common CC-BY 4.0 license.
       • MS-COCO5 (Lin et al., 2014): Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.

Pretrained Models and Off-the-Shelf Annotation Tools:

       • diffusers6 (von Platen et al., 2022): Apache 2.0 License.
       • CLIP7 (Radford et al., 2021): MIT License.
       • Stable Diffusion8 (Rombach et al., 2022): CreativeML Open RAIL++-M License.
       • YOLOS-Tiny9 (Fang et al., 2021): Apache 2.0 License.
       • BLIP210 (Guo et al., 2023): MIT License.
       • MMPose11 (Contributors, 2020): Apache 2.0 License.
       • ViTPose12 (Xu et al., 2022): Apache 2.0 License.
       • Omnidata13 (Eftekhar et al., 2021): OMNIDATA STARTER DATASET License.
       • MiDaS14 (Ranftl et al., 2022): MIT License.
       • clean-fid15 (Parmar et al., 2022): MIT License.
       • SDv2-inpainting16 (Rombach et al., 2022): CreativeML Open RAIL++-M License.
       • SDXL-base-v1.017 (Podell et al., 2023): CreativeML Open RAIL++-M License.
       • Improved Aesthetic Predictor18 : Apache 2.0 License.


   3
     https://laion.ai/blog/laion-5b/
   4
     https://github.com/kakaobrain/coyo-dataset
   5
     https://cocodataset.org/#home
   6
     https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers
   7
     https://github.com/openai/CLIP
   8
     https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-base
   9
     https://huggingface.co/hustvl/yolos-tiny
  10
     https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/blip2-opt-2.7b
  11
     https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmpose
  12
     https://github.com/ViTAE-Transformer/ViTPose
  13
     https://github.com/EPFL-VILAB/omnidata
  14
     https://github.com/isl-org/MiDaS
  15
     https://github.com/GaParmar/clean-fid
  16
     https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-inpainting
  17
     https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0
  18
     https://github.com/christophschuhmann/improved-aesthetic-predictor


                                                 34
