Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ESS IS M ORE : T OWARD Z ERO -S HOT L OCAL S CENE
G RAPH G ENERATION VIA F OUNDATION M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Humans inherently recognize objects via selective visual perception, transform
         specific regions from the visual field into structured symbolic knowledge, and
         reason their relationships among regions based on the allocation of limited atten-
         tion resources in line with humans’ goals (Folk et al., 1992). While it is intu-
         itive for humans, contemporary perception systems falter in extracting structural
         information due to the intricate cognitive abilities and commonsense knowledge
         required. To fill this gap, we present a new task called Local Scene Graph
         Generation. Distinct from the conventional scene graph generation task, which
         encompasses generating all objects and relationships in an image, our proposed
         task aims to abstract pertinent structural information with partial objects and their
         relationships for boosting downstream tasks that demand advanced comprehen-
         sion and reasoning capabilities. Correspondingly, we introduce zEro-shot
         Local scEne GrAph geNeraTion (ELEGANT), a framework harnessing
         foundation models renowned for their powerful perception and commonsense rea-
         soning, where collaboration and information communication among foundation
         models yield superior outcomes and realize zero-shot local scene graph gener-
         ation without requiring labeled supervision. Furthermore, we propose a novel
         open-ended evaluation metric, Entity-level CLIPScorE (ECLIPSE), sur-
         passing previous closed-set evaluation metrics by transcending their limited label
         space, offering a broader assessment. Experiment results show that our approach
         markedly outperforms baselines in the open-ended evaluation setting, and it also
         achieves a significant performance boost of up to 24.58% over prior methods in the
         close-set setting, demonstrating the effectiveness and powerful reasoning ability
         of our proposed framework.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Human visual perception is adeptly synchronized with ongoing activity, highlighting salient ob-
jects and swiftly deducing their relationships in novel contexts. Such cognitive proficiency under-
pins our intuitive structural information extraction. For instance, when hungry, by identifying a
pizza on a plate or inside a microwave, we can easily obtain the structural information (pizza,
on, plate) or (pizza, in, microwave) to facilitate subsequent decisions, e.g., getting
the pizza from the plate or opening the microwave. The perceptual competence also holds promise
for enhancing AI systems’ comprehension and reasoning capabilities, as evidenced by advancements
in visual question answering (Han et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2020) and image captioning (Yang et al.,
2022b; Zhang et al., 2021).
In this paper, we delve into scene graphs - a structured representation of visual scenes wherein enti-
ties are graph nodes connected by labeled edges denoting their relationships. Such representations
bridge the chasm between raw pixels and semantic comprehension, offering valuable information
for diverse computer vision tasks. Despite recent strides in scene graph generation (Zhang et al.,
2023b; Jung et al., 2023; Kundu & Aakur, 2023; Zheng et al., 2023a), translating these advance-
ments into effective scene graph generation tools still presents challenges in novel environments due
to the noisy supervision, constrained label space, and long-tailed relationship distribution, hindering
the direct applicability of these approaches in downstream tasks (Li et al., 2022a; Yao et al., 2021).
Consequently, ground truth scene graphs are often leveraged in downstream tasks (Puig et al., 2021),
narrowing their versatility.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Local vs. Global Scene Graphs. While global scene graph methods detect all entities (rep-
resented by green dashed boxes) and their relationships, we argue that for instructions like “obtain
the white cup,” a local scene graph, exemplified by (cup, mounted on, shelf) (high-
lighted by red solid boxes), is more consistent with the human recognition process and adequate for
guiding subsequent actions, such as unmounting the white cup from the shelf.


In light of these challenges, we propose emphasizing select entities and relationships aligned with
specific tasks - echoing human cognition. It inspires the introduction of the “local scene graph,” a
departure from the conventional “global scene graph,” as illustrated in Figure 1. Local scene graphs
encapsulate task-pertinent entities and relationships. For instance, when performing an instruction
such as “obtain the white cup,” global scene graph generation approaches recognize all
entities and relationships, inevitably introducing cumulative errors detrimental to downstream tasks
from individual inaccurate relationship estimation. In contrast, a local scene graph succinctly illu-
minates the cup’s position on a shelf, ignoring entities and relationships unrelated to the current task
and streamlining the subsequent task, i.e., unmounting the white cup from the shelf, which aligns
with the human cognition process (Folk et al., 1992).
Therefore, we introduce a new task named local scene graph generation, which
generates a local scene graph according to given entities. Correspondingly, considering the
scarcity of annotated scene graph data, we propose a zEro-shot Local scEne GrAph
geNeraTion (ELEGANT) framework harnessing foundation models enriched with perceptual and
commonsense reasoning. It emphasizes model synergy, producing superior outcomes and realizing
zero-shot local scene graph generation without labeled supervision. Specifically, given a subject
selected by humans, an observer model outputs objects associated with the subject. A thinker model
then identifies possible relationships, delegating them to a verifier model to validate their correct-
ness. However, simply combining models leads to subpar results due to individual model limitations.
Therefore, we advocate a Co-Calibration (CoCa) strategy, calibrating model-specific knowl-
edge through cross-model knowledge exchange to enhance model collaboration. Furthermore, we
introduce a novel open-ended evaluation metric, Entity-level CLIPScorE (ECLIPSE), sur-
passing previous closed-set evaluation metrics by transcending their limited label space, offering a
broader assessment.
We summarize the main contributions as follows:

       • We propose a new task, local scene graph generation, to abstract pertinent structural in-
         formation with partial objects and relationships, which aligns with human cognition and
         improves downstream tasks demanding intricate comprehension and reasoning.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • We devise a new framework, zero-shot local scene graph generation, to abstract local scene
         graphs without labeled supervision, exploiting foundation models renowned for their pow-
         erful perception and commonsense reasoning. Moreover, we propose a co-calibration strat-
         egy, fostering knowledge exchange to amplify model cooperation.
       • We introduce a new open-ended evaluation metric, entity-level CLIPScore, to evaluate our
         proposed method in an open-ended setting.

2     R ELATED W ORK

Supervised Scene Graph Generation has attracted substantial attention within the domain of com-
puter vision due to its pivotal role in bridging the chasm between fundamental low-level visual
features and the elevated semantic comprehension of visual scenes, offering a valuable substrate for
diverse computer vision tasks (Han et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022b; Zhang et al.,
2021). The panorama of existing scene graph generation models encompasses both single-stage
and two-stage methodologies. Drawing inspiration from the single-stage object detection model
DETR (Carion et al., 2020), single-stage scene graph generation models (Liu et al., 2021; Shit
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022b; Cong et al., 2023; Teng & Wang, 2022) directly prognosticate pair
proposals and effectuate scene graph synthesis through learnable queries. In contrast, two-stage
methods (Kundu & Aakur, 2023; Wang et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2019) employ
pre-trained object detectors to identify image regions, which serve as nodes in the scene graph. Sub-
sequently, relationships between entities are delineated through relationship classification for edge
labeling. To bolster the fidelity of entity representations with contextual insights, models incorpo-
rate diverse modules to facilitate the fusion of information across graph nodes and image contexts,
including transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017; Li et al., 2022b; Kundu & Aakur, 2023) and graph neu-
ral network (Li et al., 2021; Khademi & Schulte, 2020). However, existing scene graph generation
models generate global scene graphs and cannot directly generate local scene graphs given a subject.
Zero-Shot Scene Graph Generation marks an innovative direction, abstracting scene graphs with-
out labeled supervision. (Yao et al., 2021) extracts possible (subject, relationship,
object) triplets from a knowledge base, Conceptual Captions (Sharma et al., 2018), and exploit a
CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021) for verifying the correctness of relationship candidates. (Li et al.,
2023b), on the other hand, leverages large language models to furnish detailed descriptions of visual
cues for relationships, subsequently deploying prompts to a CLIP model for relationship prediction.
However, knowledge-base-driven triplets only capture partial relationships, and the scalability of
description generation-based methods falter with the advent of new entities or relationships. More-
over, the constrained label space limits a broader assessment. In this paper, we propose a zero-shot
local scene graph generation framework harnessing foundation models to extract and evaluate open-
vocabulary local scene graphs.
Foundation Model Collaboration has recently received significant attention. The success of large
language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023) leads to employing LLMs as con-
trollers to integrate various foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021) for multi-modal reasoning.
(Zhang et al., 2023a) build a cooperative embodied agent to collaborate with other agents and hu-
mans to decompose tasks with LLMs. (Wang et al., 2023) mimic the cognitive synergy in human
intelligence using a single LLM but acting in different roles to collaborate by prompting. In this
paper, we leverage foundation models, renowned for their powerful perception and commonsense
reasoning, to obtain local scene graphs.

3     L OCAL S CENE G RAPH G ENERATION

3.1   P ROBLEM D EFINITION

Given an image and a subject s in this image, the local scene graph generation task needs models
to abstract a local scene graph G = {E, R}, where nodes E contain subject s and the objects
O = {o1 , o2 , · · · } associated with s; edges R include relationships between s and oi . Compared
with the global scene graph generation task, which generates all the entities and relationships in an
image, our proposed local scene graph generation task fixes the subject as s and only extracts objects
and relationships associated with s.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Interaction                              Reasoning                           Verification
                                             Please output triplet candidates   Please verify triplet candidates

                                            (person, watching, elephant)        (person, watching, elephant)
                                            (person, swimming, river)           (person, swimming, river)
                                            (person, riding, elephant)          (person, riding, elephant)
                                            (person, under, tree)
                                                                                (person, under, tree)


                                                  Perception                       Co-Calibration
                                                                                Why do you think (person,
                                             Please give objects associated     riding, elephant) is wrong?
      Please select an entity                        with the entity
                                             person (319, 174, 336, 214)        The triplet should be (person,
                                             river (0, 176, 490, 331)           standing on, elephant) in my opinion
       Please construct a local
       scene graph regarding                 elephant (307, 206, 346, 255)
                                             tree (0, 131, 499, 175)            Can we infer it provided by
                                                                                in your opinion?

 Legend                                                                         Yes. (person, riding, elephant)
            System              User   Observer      Thinker         Verifier



Figure 2: Pipeline of the ELEGANT Framework. For a given image and a user-specified entity
as the subject, the observer identifies associated entities as objects. The thinker, equipped with
robust reasoning and rich commonsense knowledge, proposes relationship candidates. Subsequent
validation by the verifier ensures their relevance. The CoCa strategy then refines these results,
enhancing prediction quality.


3.2   Z ERO -S HOT L OCAL S CENE G RAPH G ENERATION

We present a zEro-shot Local scEne GrAph geNeraTion (ELEGANT) framework
harnessing foundation models renowned for their powerful perception and commonsense reason-
ing, where collaboration and information communication among foundation models yield superior
outcomes and realize zero-shot local scene graph generation without requiring labeled supervision.
It comprises three procedures: (1) Perception: Detect open-vocabulary objects related to the
specified subject. (2) Reasoning: Deduce open-vocabulary relationships between the subject and
detected objects. (3) Verification: Ascertain the validity of the triplets candidates. Figure 2
shows the pipeline. The subject is determined by various control signals provided by humans, in-
cluding points, boxes, sentences, etc. It is worth noting that ELEGANT’s modular nature allows the
swapping of any internal model for its more potent counterparts to enhance performance.
Perception. We employ an observer model designed to discern open-vocabulary objects within
the image. Although any suitable detection or segmentation model fits into the framework, we lean
on the Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023), an open-vocabulary segmentation
model with impressive zero-shot transferability, benefiting from promptable pre-training on a large
dataset. However, SAM is a class-agnostic model, and it lacks the capability to produce symbolic
semantic labels for the following reasoning stage. Recent endeavors have sought to infuse SAM with
semantic information, and we utilize the GroundedSAM (Liu et al., 2023) as the observer model in
this paper.
Reasoning. After obtaining the subject and objects, potential relationships are inferred, leveraging
commonsense knowledge. GPT-like LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Anil et al., 2023)
recently emerged as powerful reasoners showcasing profound reasoning and commonsense knowl-
edge when prompted suitably (You et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023). Therefore, We use an LLM as
a thinker model and prompt it as a commonsense reasoner, subsequently yielding relationship
triplet candidates. We detail the specific prompts in Appendix A.1.
Verification. Although LLMs have powerful commonsense knowledge, they cannot directly re-
ceive visual information, leading to inevitable bias. We introduce a verifier model, bridging
the visual and linguistic realms, to check if these triplet candidates are correct. Direct verifying
triplets, however, is fraught with challenges. For instance, posing the query, “Does the image
contain ({subject}, {relationship}, {object})?” to the verifier yields unsatis-
factory results due to its inherent model limitations. To circumvent this, we devise a structured query,


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


“Question: is the {subject} {relationship} the {object}?” and ask the
verifier to answer a yes/no question, which is consistent with the pre-training tasks of the veri-
fier and yields enhanced results. Still, the semantic divergence between models (Enser & Sandom,
2003) might result in the verifier misconstruing the thinker’s commonsense knowledge, as illus-
trated in Figure 2. The verifier gives a wrong answer about the triplet “(person, riding,
elephant).” To ground the knowledge in the verifier with the powerful reasoner, we introduce
a Co-Calibration (CoCa) strategy, where the reasoner, mimicking a teacher, enables the ver-
ifier as a student to self-diagnose errors. Specifically, we ask the verifier to provide its rationale
when negating a relationship. Then, we would like to know if the rationale given by the verifier
can be grounded with the commonsense knowledge provided by the reasoner: “Can we infer
{A} from {B}?” where {A} and {B} are structured triplets obtained by the reasoner and verifier,
respectively. Because LLMs cannot access visual information directly, it may lead to bias. If the
answer is still no, the triplet is probably wrong, and we discard the triplet. If the answer is yes, the
knowledge is calibrated, and we keep the triplet. The detailed prompts are listed in Appendix A.1.

3.3   O PEN -E NDED E VALUATION M ETRIC

Our proposed framework has the ability to predict open-vocabulary objects and relationships. How-
ever, vanilla scene graph evaluation metrics, confined to a fixed label space, tend to overlook or
exclude entities and relationships outside the prescribed vocabulary, hampering a comprehensive
scene graph evaluation. Recently, CLIPScore (Hessel et al., 2021) emerged as a promising open-
ended evaluation technique, harnessing the CLIP model to offer a robust automatic evaluation for
image captioning tasks. CLIPScore encodes both image and text features and calculates a similarity
score between two modalities to represent their relevance:
                           CLIPScore(I, C) = max(100 ∗ cos(EI , EC ), 0),                           (1)
where I is the image; C is the caption; EI is the image feature extracted from the vision encoder of
the CLIP model; EC is the text feature extracted from the text encoder of the CLIP model; cos(·) is
the cosine similarity.
To tailor this evaluation metric for local scene graph generation, for each triplet Ci = (s, ri , oi ),
where ri ∈ R and oi ∈ O within a local scene graph G, we obscure the background to de-
rive a masked image Ii based on bounding boxes of s and oi . Meanwhile, we rewrite the triplet
as “The {s} is {ri } the {oi }.” Subsequently, the CLIPScore for the triplet is computed as
CLIPScore(Ii , Ci ). By calculating and averaging the CLIPScores of all triplets in G, we derive the
cumulative CLIPScore for G:
                                                    |G|
                                           1 X
                           CLIPScore(G) =         CLIPScore(Ii , Ci ),                              (2)
                                          |G| i=1

where |G| is the number of triplets in G.
While CLIPScore offers evaluation in the open-ended setting, its original design caters to image-
level evaluations, ignoring the importance of prediction length in our task. For instance, model A
gives a prediction with the highest confidence and might achieve a superior score over model B,
which offers three predictions. Additionally, cases where a model produces synonymous relation-
ships for a relationship inside, such as in and inner, might attain high CLIPScores but fail to
offer novel semantic insight (Li et al., 2022a).
In light of this, we craft a penalty function, which targets predictions that are either overly brief
or elongated, with a heightened penalty for the former, advocating the generation of richer triplets.
While numerous function forms are plausible, we initiate our exploration with the log barrier func-
tion (Murray & Wright, 1994):
                                       y = x − µ log(x − 1),                                      (3)
where µ > 0 is a scalar.
Because the log barrier function is a convex function, the minimum value is y ∗ = µ − µ log(µ) + 1
at x = µ + 1. Then, we adjust equation 3 places this minimal value at 0:
                                              ′
                                             y = y − y∗ .                                           (4)


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       ′
Given the range of y is [0, +∞], we modify the range to [0, 1] by integrating exp(−x) and an α
parameter to control the penalty strength for enhancing the flexibility of the evaluation metric:
                                              ′′               ′
                                             y = exp(−αy ).                                           (5)

Nevertheless, there is still a challenge: the variability in penalty scores across diverse prediction
lengths makes it difficult to evaluate models fairly (Papineni et al., 2002). Therefore, we compute
the average prediction length m∗ across the dataset and set µ = m∗ − 1. The penalty function is:
                                                              m∗ − 1

                     P(x) = exp −α x + (m∗ − 1) log                    − m∗     ,                 (6)
                                                              x−1
where x is the length of prediction. The image of the function is shown in Appendix A.2.
Finally, we present our novel open-ended evaluation metric called Entity-level
CLIPScorE (ECLIPSE):
                                                         |G|
                                                     1 X
                           ECLIPSE(G) = P (|G|)             CLIPScore(Ii , Ci ),                      (7)
                                                    |G| i=1

        dP                 dP
where − d|G|           > − d|G|            . Therefore, shorter predictions receive a larger penalty than
               |G|→1              |G|→+∞
longer predictions.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Datasets. To evaluate our method, we utilize 1) Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017), which
contains 26, 443 images for testing, and each image is manually annotated with entities and rela-
tionships. 2) GQA (Hudson & Manning, 2019) containing 8, 208 images for testing, whose split
provided by (Li et al., 2023b). To ensure consistent benchmarking against prior zero-shot scene
graph generation works (Yao et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b), we also conduct experiments within a
closed-set paradigm on the Visual Genome dataset, where (Yao et al., 2021) removes hyperyms and
redundant synonyms in the most frequent 50 relation categories, resulting in 20 well-defined relation
categories, and (Li et al., 2023b) adopts the 24 semantic relationship classes.
Evaluation Metrics. We iteratively select one from all entities in an image as the subject and gen-
erate a local scene graph to construct a global scene graph for evaluation. We conduct experiments
on both open-ended and closed-set settings. For the open-ended setting, our proposed ECLIPSE is
reported. For the closed-set setting, we report Recall@K (R@K), which indicates the proportion of
ground truths that appear among the top-K confident predictions, and Mean Recall@K (mR@K),
which averages R@K for each category.
Implementation Details. Our observer model is the GroundedSAM (Liu et al., 2023), an open-
vocabulary segmentation model with semantic information. The thinker model is based on the
GPT-3.5-turbo (OpenAI, 2023), a large language model with impressive reasoning skills and com-
monsense knowledge. For the verifier model, we deploy the BLIP2 (Li et al., 2023a), a pre-trained
vision-language model.

4.2   O PEN -E NDED L OCAL S CENE G RAPH G ENERATION E VALUATION

We introduce diverse baselines to evaluate the efficiency of our proposed framework. Table 1 il-
lustrates the results on the Visual Genome dataset. The results on the GQA dataset are shown in
Appendix A.3.
Observer. We employ open-vocabulary (GroundedSAM (Liu et al., 2023)) and closed-set detec-
tors (FasterRCNN (Ren et al., 2015), which were widely utilized in previous approaches) to demon-
strate the effectiveness of perception performance. GroundedSAM markedly outperforms Faster-
RCNN, attributed to its open-vocabulary perception capabilities, whereas FasterRCNN can only
recognize objects defined in a fixed label space. A comparative analysis reveals that our method


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Open-ended evaluation results on the test set of the Visual Genome dataset. The parameter
α is set as 0.01.
                                                                                          Model
                                                                                                                                                          ECLIPSE
                                         Observer                                  Thinker                              Verifier
                              Faster RCNN                 GPT-3.5-Turbo                                       BLIP2 OPT 6.7B                                         19.31
                              GroundedSAM                 OPT 2.7B                                            BLIP2 OPT 6.7B                                          0.09
                              GroundedSAM                 OPT 6.7B                                            BLIP2 OPT 6.7B                                          0.16
                              GroundedSAM                 LLaMA2 7B                                           BLIP2 OPT 6.7B                                         19.01
                              GroundedSAM                 Vicuna 7B                                           BLIP2 OPT 6.7B                                         20.41
                              GroundedSAM                 GPT-3.5-Turbo                                       BLIP2 FlanT5 XL                                        20.97
                              GroundedSAM                 GPT-3.5-Turbo                                       BLIP2 FlanT5 XXL                                       21.20
                              GroundedSAM                 GPT-3.5-Turbo                                       BLIP2 OPT 2.7B                                         21.50
                              GroundedSAM                 GPT-3.5-Turbo                                       BLIP2 OPT 6.7B                                         21.54


                                                   591
                                                                                   3000
                        600                                                                                                                                             16973

                                                                                   2500                                                           15000
                        500
                                                           Relationship Category
      Object Category


                                                                                                                               Triplet Category
                                                                                   2000
                        400                                                                                      1813
                                                                                                                                                  10000
                        300                                                        1500


                        200                                                        1000
                                150        150                                                                                                     5000
                        100                                                         500                                                                    2522

                                                                                              20           24
                          0                                                           0                                                               0
                              VisualDS    RECODE   Ours                                     VisualDS   RECODE    Ours                                     VisualDS      Ours


                                           (a)                                                          (b)                                                       (c)



Figure 3: Assessing Prediction Diversity. (a) Number of entity categories. (b) Number of relation-
ship categories. (c) Number of predicted triplets.


identifies approximately 4x more object categories than previous closed-set methods, as illustrated
in Figure 3 (a).
Thinker. The results show that the OPT models Zhang et al. (2022) do not perform well due to
limited reasoning ability. In comparison, LLaMA2 (Touvron et al., 2023) and Vicuna (Zheng et al.,
2023b) show comparative performance due to Instruction Tuning (Longpre et al., 2023). GPT-
3.5-Turbo (OpenAI, 2023) exhibits superior performance, attributable to its enhanced reasoning
capabilities. Compared with closed-set methods, our method produces about 25x more relationship
categories, as shown in Figure 3 (b).
Verifier. As the verifier to verify relationship candidates, we explore various variants of BLIP2, a
visual question answering model trained on large datasets. BLIP2 OPT is based on the unsupervised-
trained OPT model family (Zhang et al., 2022) for decoder-based LLMs, and BLIP2 FlanT5 is
based on the instruction-trained FlanT5 model family (Zhang et al., 2022) for encoder-decoder-based
LLMs. The results show that BLIP2 OPT achieves higher performance than BLIP2 FlanT5. From
Figure 3 (c), compared with VisualDS, our approach achieves around 7x more triplet categories.

4.3                C OMPARISION WITH C LOSED -S ET Z ERO -S HOT S CENE G RAPH G ENERATION M ETHODS

To assess the commonsense reasoning capability of our proposed method, we benchmark it against
two zero-shot scene graph generation approaches: VisualDS (Yao et al., 2021) and RECODE (Li
et al., 2023b). VisualDS crafts scene graphs by mining relationship candidates from knowledge
bases, subsequently validated via the CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021). Furthermore, they employ
the predicted scene graphs as pseudo labels for the supervised scene graph generation model training.
Our comparison focuses on the first phase of VisualDS, and it’s worth noting that the scene graphs
we generate can similarly be harnessed for supervised training. For a fair comparison, we adopt


                                                                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Closed-set evaluation results on the test set of the Visual Genome dataset. Note the dif-
ferences in the experimental setup between VisualDS and RECODE concerning the number of rela-
tionship categories (#Rel).
 Method                          #Rel    R@10      R@20         R@50     mR@10     mR@20       mR@50
 VisualDS Yao et al. (2021)               27.72     33.22       38.21     16.32       20.49       24.94
                                  20
 Ours                                     30.27     36.80       41.04     21.21       26.11       29.78
 RECODE Li et al. (2023b)                     -     10.60       18.30         -       10.70       18.70
                                  24
 Ours                                     28.14     35.18       38.87     39.51       16.54       21.39



Table 3: The effectiveness of CoCa strategy on the test set of the Visual Genome dataset. E@∗
denotes ECLIPSE when the parameter α is set as ∗.
Method              R@10      R@20      mR@10     mR@20         E@0.1    E@0.01    E@0.001      #Triplets
Ours                 30.27    36.80       21.21         26.11    17.63     20.39       20.78       12120
- Co-Calibration     23.64    31.96       18.78         25.89    14.86     16.51       16.73        7108


the ground truth object detections, control the generation of relationship candidates by prompts, and
filter out relationships that do not exist in relationship label space. As our approach is a local scene
graph generation framework, we iteratively run our method on all objects to obtain a global scene
graph. The results are shown in Table 2.
From Table 2, our approach significantly improves performance up to 24.58 in Recall. In contrast
to VisualDS, which sources relationship candidates from a static knowledge base, our method lever-
ages the vast commonsense reasoning of large language models (LLMs) pretrained on expansive
datasets. Furthermore, the in-context learning ability (Wei et al., 2022) provides a powerful and ef-
fective way to receive context about the world. Prompts encompassing entities like “cup, oven,
stove, refrigerator” hint at a kitchen scene, and LLMs might consequently produce scene-
specific relationships. Meanwhile, RECODE employs LLMs to generate detailed descriptions for
relationship triplets. However, it still needs to pre-define a relationship label space and generate a
description for each triplet, which is time-consuming and cannot easily scale up for new entities and
relationships. Our approach utilizes LLMs to generate relationship candidates, which is efficient
and can effortlessly deal with new environments.

4.4   E FFECTIVENESS OF C O C A S TRATEGY

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed CoCa strategy, we compare our approach with a
variant devoid of the CoCa strategy. The results are shown in Table 3. In the absence of the CoCa
strategy, there’s a marked decline in performance, coupled with a significant reduction in predicted
triplet counts, indicating that 5012 triplets are initially recognized as negative samples by the verifier
and rectified by the CoCa strategy.

4.5   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

Figure 4 shows the qualitative results. The red dashed box is the subject, and the green solid boxes
denote objects. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. The first example
is evaluated in the open-vocabulary setting, and other images are evaluated in the closed-set setting.
The open-vocabulary detector can generate various multi-grained entities, e.g., hat, pant, shoe, and
the closed-set detector can only give coarse-grained entities, e.g., child. Consequently, given more
diverse entities, our method can produce a more significant number of triplets.

4.6   L OCAL S CENE G RAPHS FOR D OWNSTREAM TASKS

To assess the utility of local scene graphs, we incorporate them into the Visual Question Answering
task. We evaluate our approach on the GQA testdev set (Hudson & Manning, 2019), selecting a


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           child

                                                             table

                                                                     pizza

                                  person
                                           hat


                                    pant
                                            chair                                                                                   cup
                                  shoe



                                                                                                                         table


                  person, wearing, hat                                 child, eating, pizza                      cup, standing on, table
                  person, wearing, pant                                child, sitting on, table
                  person, wearing, shoe
                  person, sitting on, chair


Figure 4: Visualization of Local Scene Graphs Generation. Subjects are depicted with red text
and dashed boxes, while objects are highlighted with green text and solid boxes. Relationships are
denoted in black texts.


                               Table 4: Effectiveness of local scene graphs in VQA tasks.
                                             Method                          Thinker                  Scene Graph        ACC
                                           Baseline                                 -                      -               50.4
                                                                                                        global             51.9
                                                                             Vicuna
                                                                                                         local             55.4
                                                    Ours
                                                                                                        global             54.2
                                                                     GPT-3.5-Turbo
                                                                                                         local             58.3



random subset of 1, 000 samples. To derive local scene graphs pertinent to a given query, spaCy1
is employed to extract nouns from the question, and the nouns then serve as subjects for creat-
ing local scene graphs via ELEGANT. Our experiments leverage the BLIP2 FlanT5 XL model (Li
et al., 2023a). For a given local scene graph G, we utilize the template “Context: {G}.
Question: {Q}, Short Answer:” as the prompt, where Q is the question; G consists of
triplets denoted as “A {s} is {ri } a {oi }.” For comparison, global scene graphs are also pro-
duced. Notably, scene graphs are integrated directly into the BLIP2 model via prompting. So, we do
not train or fine-tune the BLIP2 model. We report the accuracy and the results are shown in Table 4.
From Table 4, both local and global scene graphs enhance the VQA task’s performance, underscor-
ing the value of scene graphs for downstream tasks that demand intricate reasoning and common-
sense knowledge. The results also suggest that local scene graphs, crafted in a task-specific manner,
can offer richer commonsense knowledge insights. Moreover, the results demonstrate that models
with superior reasoning capabilities yield improved results.


5       C ONCLUSION

We introduce a novel task, Local Scene Graph Generation, to effectively abstract relevant structural
information from partial objects. This task narrows the gap between human cognitive processes
and AI perception systems. To address this, we present a scalable framework, termed ELEGANT,
which leverages collaboration among foundational models to realize zero-shot local scene graph
generation. Additionally, We propose a new open-ended evaluation metric, ECLIPSE, surpassing
the limitations of previously closed-set metrics with limited label space. Experiment results show
that our approach outperforms baselines in the open-ended evaluation setting and performs signif-
icantly over prior methods in the close-set setting. Moreover, the predicted local scene graphs can
significantly improve intricate comprehension and reasoning in downstream tasks.
    1
        https://spacy.io/


                                                                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernández Ábrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan A. Botha, James
  Bradbury, Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry,
  Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa
  Dehghani, Sunipa Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Dı́az, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vladimir Feinberg, Fangx-
  iaoyu Feng, Vlad Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez,
  and et al. Palm 2 technical report. CoRR, abs/2305.10403, 2023.

Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ B. Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri S. Chatterji, Annie S. Chen, Kathleen
  Creel, Jared Quincy Davis, Dorottya Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Dur-
  mus, Stefano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor
  Gale, Lauren Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah D. Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori
  Hashimoto, Peter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang,
  Thomas Icard, Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keel-
  ing, Fereshte Khani, Omar Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark S. Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Ku-
  ditipudi, and et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. CoRR, abs/2108.07258,
  2021.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Annual Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and
  Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision, volume 12346 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 213–229. Springer,
  2020.

Long Chen, Hanwang Zhang, Jun Xiao, Xiangnan He, Shiliang Pu, and Shih-Fu Chang. Coun-
  terfactual critic multi-agent training for scene graph generation. In International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 4612–4622. IEEE, 2019.

Yuren Cong, Michael Ying Yang, and Bodo Rosenhahn. Reltr: Relation transformer for scene graph
  generation. IEEE Trans on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(9):11169–11183, 2023.

Peter G. B. Enser and Christine J. Sandom. Towards a comprehensive survey of the semantic gap in
  visual image retrieval. In CIVR, volume 2728 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 291–299.
  Springer, 2003.

Charles L Folk, Roger W Remington, and James C Johnston. Involuntary covert orienting is contin-
  gent on attentional control settings. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human perception and
  performance, 18(4):1030, 1992.

Xinzhe Han, Shuhui Wang, Chi Su, Qingming Huang, and Qi Tian. Greedy gradient ensemble for
  robust visual question answering. In International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1564–
  1573. IEEE, 2021.

Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. In Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 7514–7528. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Drew A. Hudson and Christopher D. Manning. GQA: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
  and compositional question answering. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 6700–6709. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019.
Huaizu Jiang, Ishan Misra, Marcus Rohrbach, Erik G. Learned-Miller, and Xinlei Chen. In defense
  of grid features for visual question answering. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 10264–10273. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2020.
Deunsol Jung, Sanghyun Kim, Won Hwa Kim, and Minsu Cho. Devil’s on the edges: Selective
  quad attention for scene graph generation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18664–18674, June 2023.
Mahmoud Khademi and Oliver Schulte. Deep generative probabilistic graph neural networks for
 scene graph generation. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 11237–11245. AAAI
 Press, 2020.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloé Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross B. Girshick.
  Segment anything. CoRR, abs/2304.02643, 2023.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A. Shamma, Michael S. Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei.
  Visual genome: Connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations.
  International Journal of Computer Vision, 123(1):32–73, 2017.
Sanjoy Kundu and Sathyanarayanan N. Aakur. Is-ggt: Iterative scene graph generation with gener-
  ative transformers. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6292–
  6301, June 2023.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven C. H. Hoi. BLIP-2: bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  19730–19742. PMLR, 2023a.
Lin Li, Long Chen, Yifeng Huang, Zhimeng Zhang, Songyang Zhang, and Jun Xiao. The devil is
  in the labels: Noisy label correction for robust scene graph generation. In IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18847–18856. IEEE, 2022a.
Lin Li, Jun Xiao, Guikun Chen, Jian Shao, Yueting Zhuang, and Long Chen. Zero-shot visual
  relation detection via composite visual cues from large language models. In Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b.
Rongjie Li, Songyang Zhang, Bo Wan, and Xuming He. Bipartite graph network with adaptive
  message passing for unbiased scene graph generation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11109–11119. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2021.
Rongjie Li, Songyang Zhang, and Xuming He. SGTR: end-to-end scene graph generation with
  transformer. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19464–19474.
  IEEE, 2022b.
Hengyue Liu, Ning Yan, Masood S. Mortazavi, and Bir Bhanu. Fully convolutional scene graph
  generation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11546–11556.
  Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2021.
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, and Lei Zhang. Grounding DINO: marrying DINO with grounded
  pre-training for open-set object detection. CoRR, abs/2303.05499, 2023.
Shayne Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V.
  Le, Barret Zoph, Jason Wei, and Adam Roberts. The flan collection: Designing data and methods
  for effective instruction tuning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 22631–22648. PMLR, 2023.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Walter Murray and Margaret H. Wright. Line search procedures for the logarithmic barrier function.
 SIAM J. Optim., 4(2):229–246, 1994.

OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. CoRR, abs/2303.08774, 2023.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
  Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser
  Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan
  Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
  In Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics, pp. 311–318. ACL, 2002.

Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Shuang Li, Zilin Wang, Yuan-Hong Liao, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Sanja
  Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Watch-and-help: A challenge for social perception and human-ai
  collaboration. In International Conference on Learning Representations. OpenReview.net, 2021.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross B. Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-CNN: towards real-time
  object detection with region proposal networks. In Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 91–99, 2015.

Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual captions: A cleaned,
  hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2556–2565. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics, 2018.

Jing Shi, Yiwu Zhong, Ning Xu, Yin Li, and Chenliang Xu. A simple baseline for weakly-supervised
   scene graph generation. In International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 16373–16382.
   IEEE, 2021.

Suprosanna Shit, Rajat Koner, Bastian Wittmann, Johannes C. Paetzold, Ivan Ezhov, Hongwei Li,
  Jiazhen Pan, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Georgios Kaissis, Volker Tresp, and Bjoern H. Menze. Re-
  lationformer: A unified framework for image-to-graph generation. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision, volume 13697 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 422–439. Springer,
  2022.

Yao Teng and Limin Wang. Structured sparse R-CNN for direct scene graph generation. In IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19415–19424. IEEE, 2022.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton-Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurélien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
  CoRR, abs/2307.09288, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Wenbin Wang, Ruiping Wang, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin Chen. Exploring context and visual pattern
 of relationship for scene graph generation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 8188–8197. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019.
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing
  cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-
  collaboration. CoRR, abs/2307.05300, 2023.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol
  Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022, 2022.
Jingkang Yang, Yi Zhe Ang, Zujin Guo, Kaiyang Zhou, Wayne Zhang, and Ziwei Liu. Panoptic
   scene graph generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, volume 13687 of Lecture
   Notes in Computer Science, pp. 178–196. Springer, 2022a.
Xuewen Yang, Yingru Liu, and Xin Wang. Reformer: The relational transformer for image caption-
  ing. In ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 5398–5406. ACM, 2022b.
Yuan Yao, Ao Zhang, Xu Han, Mengdi Li, Cornelius Weber, Zhiyuan Liu, Stefan Wermter, and
  Maosong Sun. Visual distant supervision for scene graph generation. In International Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 15796–15806. IEEE, 2021.
Haoxuan You, Rui Sun, Zhecan Wang, Long Chen, Gengyu Wang, Hammad A. Ayyubi, Kai-Wei
  Chang, and Shih-Fu Chang. Idealgpt: Iteratively decomposing vision and language reasoning via
  large language models. CoRR, abs/2305.14985, 2023.
Hongxin Zhang, Weihua Du, Jiaming Shan, Qinhong Zhou, Yilun Du, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Tian-
  min Shu, and Chuang Gan. Building cooperative embodied agents modularly with large language
  models. CoRR, abs/2307.02485, 2023a.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona T. Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer,
  Kurt Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettle-
  moyer. OPT: open pre-trained transformer language models. CoRR, abs/2205.01068, 2022.
Wenqiao Zhang, Haochen Shi, Siliang Tang, Jun Xiao, Qiang Yu, and Yueting Zhuang. Consensus
 graph representation learning for better grounded image captioning. In AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, pp. 3394–3402. AAAI Press, 2021.
Yong Zhang, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Rui Huang, Tao Mei, and Chang-Wen Chen. Learning to
  generate language-supervised and open-vocabulary scene graph using pre-trained visual-semantic
  space. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2915–2924, June
  2023b.
Chaofan Zheng, Xinyu Lyu, Lianli Gao, Bo Dai, and Jingkuan Song. Prototype-based embedding
  network for scene graph generation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 22783–22792, June 2023a.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023b.
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Kilichbek Haydarov, Xiaoqian Shen, Wenxuan Zhang, and Mohamed Elho-
  seiny. Chatgpt asks, BLIP-2 answers: Automatic questioning towards enriched visual descrip-
  tions. CoRR, abs/2303.06594, 2023.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   P ROMPTS

In this section, we present prompts utilized in this paper.
Open-Vocabulary Thinker Prompt
To prompt an LLM as a commonsense reasoner, we provide the following prompt:

You are an AI assistant with rich visual commonsense knowledge
and strong reasoning abilities.
You will be provided with:
1. A subject.
2. A list of entities.

To effectively analyze the image, you should give all possible
triplets formulated as (subject, predicate, object), where the
object is selected from entities. The predicate connecting the
subject and object should be reasonable and commonsense. A
valid triplet should be satisfied: if we rewrite (subject,
predicate, object) to "subject is predicate object," the
sentence must be reasonable. For example, (man, sitting on,
chair) is rewritten to "man is sitting on chair," and it is
reasonable. But (man, parked on, chair) is invalid because
"man is parked on chair" is unreasonable.

Subject: man
Entities: man, woman, balloon, tree
Triplets: (man, watching, woman), (man, carrying, balloon), (man,
talking to, man)

Closed-Set Thinker Prompt
For comparison with VisualDS, we provide the 20 relationship candidates:

You are an AI assistant with rich visual commonsense knowledge and
strong reasoning abilities.
You will be provided with:
1. A subject.
2. A list of entities.
3. A list of relationship candidates: carrying, covered in,
covering, eating, flying in, growing on, hanging from, lying on,
mounted on, painted on, parked on, playing, riding, says,
sitting on, standing on, using, walking in, walking on, watching.

To effectively analyze the image, you should give all possible
triplets formulated as (subject, predicate, object), where the
object is selected from entities and the predicate is selected
from relationship candidates. The predicate connecting the subject
and object should be reasonable and commonsense. For example,
(man, sitting on, chair) is reasonable, but (man, parked on,
chair) is unreasonable.

Subject: man
Entities: woman, balloon, balloon, tree, tree
Triplets: (man, watching, woman), (man, carrying, balloon)

To compare with RECODE, we provide the 24 relationship candidates:

You are an AI assistant with rich visual commonsense knowledge and


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             1

                                            0.9

                                            0.8

                                            0.7


                         Penalty Strength
                                            0.6

                                            0.5

                                            0.4

                                            0.3

                                            0.2

                                            0.1

                                             0
                                                  0   5     10     15      20
                                                          Length



                  Figure 5: The image of the penalty function P(x) in equation 6.



strong reasoning abilities.
You will be provided with:
1. A subject.
2. A list of entities.
3. A list of relationship candidates: carrying, covered in,
covering, eating, flying in, growing on, hanging from, holding,
laying on, looking at, lying on, mounted on, painted on,
parked on, playing, riding, says, sitting on, standing on, to,
using, walking in, walking on, watching.

To effectively analyze the image, you should give all possible
triplets formulated as (subject, predicate, object), where the
object is selected from entities and the predicate is selected
from relationship candidates. The predicate connecting the subject
and object should be reasonable and commonsense. For example,
(man, sitting on, chair) is reasonable, but (man, parked on,
chair) is unreasonable.

Subject: man
Entities: woman, balloon, balloon, tree, tree
Triplets: (man, watching, woman), (man, carrying, balloon)

Verifier Prompt
To verify the correctness of a triplet candidate, we use the following prompt template:

Question: is the {subject} {relationship} the {object}? Short
answer:

We present the prompt to obtain the rationale of the verifier if the answer is no:

Question: What is the relationship between {subject} and
{object}. Short Answer:

The following prompt is utilized to calibrate the knowledge in the verifier:

Context: {rationale}. Question: Can we infer "{subject} is
{relationship} {object}" from the Context? Short Answer:


                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Open-ended evaluation results on the test set of the GQA dataset. The parameter α is set as
0.01.
                                           Model
                                                                              ECLIPSE
                   Observer            Thinker               Verifier
             GroundedSAM          GPT-3.5-Turbo         BLIP2 OPT 2.7B              20.68
             GroundedSAM          GPT-3.5-Turbo         BLIP2 OPT 6.7B              20.82
             GroundedSAM          GPT-3.5-Turbo         BLIP2 FlanT5 XL             21.19
             GroundedSAM          GPT-3.5-Turbo         BLIP2 FlanT5 XXL            21.32



A.2      T HE I MAGE OF THE P ENALTY F UNCTION
                                                                                dP
Figure 5 illustrates the image of the penalty function in equation 6. Because − d|G|                 >
                                                                                             |G|→1
  dP
− d|G|            , shorter predictions receive a larger penalty than longer predictions. Therefore, we
         |G|→+∞
penalize predictions that are either overly brief or elongated, with a heightened penalty for the for-
mer, advocating the generation of richer triplets.

A.3      R ESULTS ON THE GQA DATASET

Table 5 illustrates the results of the GQA dataset. Benefiting from the powerful reasoning ability of
large language models, the generated triplets also achieve good performance. We will explore the
impact of more available foundation models in the future.

A.4      L IMITATIONS

Although we have witnessed the strong performance of our proposed method, we still have some
limitations. First, our proposed framework relies on foundation models, which are time-consuming.
BHowever, we can employ the framework as a pseudo-label generator to improve the performance
of supervised scene graph generation methods. Second, we only deduce a relationship between a
subject and an object when their IoU is larger than 0, considering the time cost, following previous
work (Yao et al., 2021). Third, the GroundedSAM can generate segmentation masks, but we only
utilize the bounding boxes in this work. In the future, we can extend our framework to a zero-shot
panoptic scene graph generation framework (Yang et al., 2022a).


                                                   16
