Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P RIVATE OVERPARAMETERIZED L INEAR R EGRESSION
WITHOUT S UFFERING IN H IGH D IMENSIONS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         This study focuses on differentially private linear regression in the over-
         parameterized regime. We propose a new variant of the differentially private
         Follow-The-Regularized-Leader (DP-FTRL) algorithm that uses a random noise
         with a general covariance matrix for differential privacy. This leads to improved
         privacy and utility (excess risk) trade-offs. Firstly, even when reduced to an ex-
         isting DP-FTRL algorithm that uses an isotropic noise, our excess risk bound
         is sharper as a function of the eigenspectrum of the data covariance matrix and
         the ground truth model parameter. Furthermore, when unlabeled public data is
         available, we can design a better noise covariance matrix structure to improve
         the utility. For example, when the ground truth has a bounded в„“2 -norm, and
         the eigenspectrum decays polynomially (i.e., О»i = iвҲ’r for r > 1), our method
                           r                 r    2r
                    e вҲ’ 1+2r
         achieves O(N               e вҲ’ 3+r
                              ) and O(N        вҲ§ 1+3r
                                                      ) excess error for identity and specially
         designed covariance matrices, respectively. Notably, our method with a specially
         designed covariance matrix outperforms the one with an identity matrix when the
         eigenspectrum decays at least quadratically fast, i.e., r вүҘ 2. Our proposed method
         significantly improves upon existing differentially private methods for linear re-
         gression, which tend to scale with the problem dimension, leading to a vacuous
         guarantee in the over-parameterized regime.

1   I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, machine learning has witnessed remarkable achievements across various domains,
such as finance and health care. The rapid advancements in large language models (e.g., ChatGPT
(Brown et al., 2020)) have further accelerated the use of machine learning techniques in our daily
lives. While these techniques offer numerous benefits, there is an increasing concern regarding the
privacy of sensitive personal information in the datasets used for training machine learning models
(Fredrikson et al., 2015; Shokri et al., 2017). For instance, over-parameterized neural networks
can memorize sensitive training data, posing significant privacy risks when deployed (Carlini et al.,
2019; 2021). Extensive research has been conducted on privacy-preserving machine learning to
mitigate these privacy concerns, primarily focusing on achieving differential privacy (DP) (Dwork
et al., 2006). DP is a rigorous definition of privacy that protects each individualвҖҷs privacy from
adversaries who can access the models and potentially the rest of the data.
Although numerous differentially private machine learning methods have been established in the
past decades (e.g., (Bassily et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2017; Bassily et al., 2019; Feldman et al.,
2020)), it is common wisdom that these methods tend to perform worse as the model sizes in-
crease. For instance, one commonly used approach for achieving differential privacy in empirical
risk minimization (ERM) is DP-SGD (Bassily et al., 2014; Abadi et al., 2016), a private variant of
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) that perturbs the gradient updates by adding isotropic Gaussian
noise. However, the utility guarantee (e.g., empirical risk) of DP-SGD scales with the number of
model parameters (Bassily et al., 2014) in the worst-case scenario due to the isotropic noise, leading
to a vacuous learning guarantee when the number of model parameters is significantly larger than
the number of training examples, which is often the case in modern machine learning tasks.
In recent years, there have been several efforts (Li et al., 2022b; Yu et al., 2022; De et al., 2022;
Mehta et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a; Zhou et al., 2021; Song et al., 2021; Kairouz et al., 2020) to
address the challenges of applying differentially private machine learning methods to large models.
For example, recent studies (Li et al., 2022b; Yu et al., 2022; De et al., 2022; Mehta et al., 2022)


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


demonstrate that leveraging DP-SGD for fine-tuning pre-trained large models can yield promising
performance on downstream language and vision tasks while maintaining reasonable privacy guar-
antees. Nevertheless, there is still a lack of theoretical understanding regarding scenarios in which
differentially private machine learning methods can effectively handle large models. To better under-
stand this problem, we propose to study the seemingly simple yet highly challenging linear models
in the over-parameterized regime.
More specifically, we consider the following private linear regression problem. Given a dataset
                  вҲ’1
S = {(xi , yi )}N
                i=0 , where each data point is drawn i.i.d. from some distribution D, we want to
find a model parameter wb that can ensure differential privacy while achieving a small (population)
                b вҲ’ L(wвҲ— ), where
excess risk: L(w)
                      L(w) := E(x,y)вҲјD в„“(w; x, y) := 1/2 В· (wвҠӨ x вҲ’ y)2 ,

                                                                                              (1.1)
x вҲҲ Rd is the feature, y вҲҲ R is the response, D is an unknown distribution over x and y, w вҲҲ Rd
is the model parameter, and wвҲ— is the minimizer of L(w). While differentially private linear regres-
sion has been extensively studied over the past decade (Vu & Slavkovic, 2009; Dwork et al., 2010;
Dimitrakakis et al., 2014; Foulds et al., 2016; Minami et al., 2016; Wang, 2018; Sheffet, 2019; Cai
et al., 2021; Varshney et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023), most existing research focuses on the classical
setting (i.e., d < N ). These methodsвҖҷ utility (e.g., excess risk) increases with the problem dimension
d, resulting in vacuous guarantees in the over-parameterized regime. For instance, state-of-the-art
methods (Varshney et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
                                           2023) for differentially private linear regression provide
an excess risk of O e d/N + d2 /(Пө2 N 2 ) , where Пө is the privacy parameter, assuming the condition
number of the data covariance matrix is a constant. Recently, a line of research (Kifer et al., 2012;
Talwar et al., 2015; Wang & Gu, 2019; Cai et al., 2021; Asi et al., 2021) has studied private high-
dimensional linear regression that achieves dimension-independent empirical risk. However, these
methods often assume sparse model parameters and restricted strongly convex/smooth objective loss
(Negahban et al., 2009; Loh & Wainwright, 2013). Therefore, a natural question we want to address
in this paper is that
Can one achieve a sharp, or even dimension independent, excess risk for differentially private
     linear regression in the over-parameterized regime under standard assumptions?
Recently, another series of works (Dieuleveut & Bach, 2015; Berthier et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2020a; Zou et al., 2021b) have shown that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for linear regression in
the over-parameterized regime can achieve sharp excess risk that depends on the eigenspectrum of
the data covariance matrix, rather than the problem dimension. Motivated by these findings, we aim
to develop a private variant of SGD for linear regression that can yield similar sharp excess risk in
the over-parameterized regime. However, several key challenges must be addressed to design such
an algorithm and obtain strong theoretical guarantees. Firstly, ensuring differential privacy requires
adding random noise to the training algorithm (Bassily et al., 2014). However, characterizing the
effect of this random noise on the algorithmвҖҷs convergence becomes significantly more challeng-
ing in the over-parameterized regime. Secondly, to achieve strong privacy and utility trade-offs,
existing methods (Varshney et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023) rely on large batch (or even full) gradi-
ents or privacy amplification techniques, which assume uniform sampling/random shuffling of the
training data and impose stringent conditions on privacy parameters (Feldman et al., 2022; Mironov
et al., 2019). Lastly, previous works typically propose adding isotropic noise to achieve differential
privacy. However, in the over-parameterized regime, isotropic noise may further compromise the
trade-off between privacy and utility.
Contributions. We develop a new private algorithm and establish corresponding analytical tools
to tackle the challenges mentioned earlier and achieve a sharp excess risk for private over-
parameterized linear regression. The main contributions of our work are summarized as follows.

вҖў We propose a novel variant of the DP-FTRL algorithm (Kairouz et al., 2021) for the problem of
  private linear regression (see Section 3.1). The key innovation of our proposed method lies in
  using random noise with a general covariance matrix for differential privacy. By moving beyond
  the conventional use of isotropic noise, our approach enables us to achieve improved privacy and
  utility trade-offs in the over-parameterized regime.
вҖў We develop new analytical tools to characterize the effect of the additive random noise (with a
  general covariance matrix ОЈ) on the convergence of our algorithm, which can be of independent


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  interest. Equipped with these new tools, we prove that our method can achieve a sharp excess risk
  as a function of the eigenspectrum of the data covariance matrix and ОЈ (see Section 4). Our results
  can significantly outperform the state-of-the-art excess risk of O e d/N + d2 /(Пө2 N 2 ) (Varshney
  et al., 2022), where Пө is the privacy budget, for private linear regression when the dimension d is
  much larger than the number of examples N . We further show that by adding random noise with
  a carefully designed covariance matrix ОЈ (see Section 3.2), our method can achieve improved
  privacy and utility trade-offs compared to using isotropic noise (i.e., ОЈ = I).

вҖў We illustrate our results by considering specific eigenspectrum decays (see Section 4 and Table
                                                                                                r
  1). For the polynomial decay (i.e., О»i = iвҲ’r for r > 1), our method achieves O(N     e вҲ’ 1+2r    ) and
            r     2r
         вҲ’ 3+r вҲ§ 1+3r
  O(N
   e                  ) excess risk for identity and designed noise covariance matrices under the con-
  stant privacy budget (Пө = O(1)). Additionally, if we are willing to pay for a large privacy budget,
                     r                    1    rвҲ’1
  i.e., Пө = O N 2+2r and Пө = O N 1+r вҲЁ 2+2r for identity and designed noise covariance matrices,

                                                                                     r
  our method recovers the non-private excess risk (Zou et al., 2021b) of O(N e вҲ’ 1+r    ). For the expo-
                                                                               1
                                                вҲ’i                            вҲ’2
  nential eigenspectrum decay (i.e., О»i = e ), our method achieves O(N ) and O(N
                                                                         e              e вҲ’ 23 ) excess
  risk for identity and designed noise covariance matrices under     the constant privacy budget. If we
                                                                 1
  are willing to pay for a large privacy budget, i.e., Пө = O N for both noise covariance matrices,
                                                                 2


  our method recovers the non-private excess risk (Zou et al., 2021b) of O(N    e вҲ’1 ). Notably, our
  method with the designed noise covariance matrix achieves better privacy and utility trade-offs
  when the eigenspectrum decays at least quadratically fast, i.e., r вүҘ 2.

Notation. For x вҲҲ Rd , we use вҲҘxвҲҘ2 to denote its в„“2 norm. For a positive semidefinite matrix A, we
define вҲҘxвҲҘA = xвҠӨ Ax. For two quantities a and b, we use a вүІ b if a вүӨ C В· polylog(N ) В· b; we use
a вүӮ b if c/polylog(N ) В· b вүӨ a вүӨ C В· polylog(N ) В· b, where C and c are absolute positive constants.
O(В·) hides some constant parameters and PO(В·)
                                          e further hides poly-logarithnmic terms. For any PSD
matrix A with eigen-decomposition A = i Вөi vi viвҠӨ , where О»i вҖҷs and vi вҖҷs Pare the eigenvalues of A
in non-increasing order and the corresponding eigenvectors, let Ak1 :k2 := k1 <kвүӨk2 Вөi vi viвҠӨ .
1.1   A DDITIONAL RELATED WORK
Differentially private empirical risk (DP-ERM) minimization has been widely studied in the litera-
ture (e.g., (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Song et al., 2013; Bassily et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2017; Bassily
et al., 2019; Feldman et al., 2020; Asi et al., 2021)), where the goal is to solve the ERM problem
while achieving the differential privacy for the minimizer. It has  been shown that DP-(S)GD and
its variants can achieve an excess risk of Oe 1/N 1/2 + d1/2 /(N Пө) under (Пө, Оҙ)-DP (see Section 2)
when the per example objective loss is convex and Lipschitz (Bassily et al., 2014). However, it is im-
portant to note that this result becomes vacuous for private over-parameterized linear regression, as
d often substantially exceeds N , and the objective loss is not Lipschitz unless the model parameters
lie within a bounded domain.
In recent years, several attempts (Jain & Thakurta, 2014; Song et al., 2021; Kairouz et al., 2020;
Zhou et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a) have been made to achieve a tight excess risk in
the over-parameterized regime for DP-ERM. For instance, Song et al. (2021) studied the private gen-
eralized linear models (GLMs). вҲҡ They proved   that DP-GD could achieve a dimension independent
                        1/2
excess risk of O 1/N
                 e          + rank/(ПөN ) under (Пө, Оҙ)-DP, where rank is the rank of the feature
matrix and can be as large as N . However, their result requires the per-example objective loss to be
convex and Lipschitz everywhere, limiting its applicability to the linear regression problem. Further-
more, DP-GD incurs significant computational complexity as it must compute the full gradient at
each of the n2 iterations. Subsequent works (Kairouz et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021) tried to extend
this result to general convex/non-convex objective losses but relied on the assumption that gradients
lie in a lower dimensional space. Ma et al. (2022) later showed  that DP-SGD with a growing batch
size could achieve an excess risk of Oe 1/N 1/2 + trace/(ПөN ) under (Пө, Оҙ)-DP, where trace is the
trace of the Hessian of the population loss. However, their result also assumes the per-example ob-
jective loss to be convex and Lipschitz everywhere. Li et al. (2022a) considered the case of a general
convex objective with an в„“2 norm regularizer. While they showed that DP-SGD with O(n2 ) itera-
tions can achieve a dimension independent excess risk, their result requires not only the objective
loss to be Lipschitz but also imposes a stringent restricted Lipschitz continuity assumption.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   P ROBLEM SETTING AND PRELIMINARIES
We focus on the linear regression problem, where the population risk is defined in (1.1). We consider
y = вҹЁwвҲ— , xвҹ© + О¶, where wвҲ— is the ground truth model parameter and О¶ is the label noise that is
independent of x. Our goal is to learn a privacy-preserving (see Definition 2.4) model parameter w  b
                                                                 N вҲ’1
that minimize the population risk given a dataset S = (xi , yi ) i=0 , where each data point (xi , yi )
is drawn i.i.d. from D. In this paper, we focus on the more challenging over-parameterized setting,
i.e., d > N . We next introduce our assumptions on the data distribution and label noise.
                                          1
Assumption 2.1. Suppose x = H 2 z, where z is a zero mean Пғz -sub-Gaussian ran-
dom
   vector with an identity      covariance matrix, i.e., for all vector v, the following holds
E exp вҹЁv, zвҹ©2 /(Пғz2 E[вҹЁv, zвҹ©2 ]) вүӨ 2.

The sub-Gaussianity of the data has been considered in many previous works (Tsigler & Bartlett,
2020; Varshney et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023) for (private) linear regression, which can imply
the fourth-order momentum condition made in (Zou et al., 2021b; Velikanov et al., 2022), i.e.,
Ex [xxвҠӨ AxxвҠӨ ] вүӨ 16Пғz2 В· tr(HA)A for any PSD matrix A. In practice, most data follow the
sub-Gaussian distribution, such as the data with a bounded norm. We will show in our later analysis
that by imposing the following stronger assumption on the data distribution, we can design a specific
noise covariance matrix to achieve improved privacy and utility trade-offs.
                                     1
Assumption 2.2. Suppose x = H 2 z, where z is a zero mean random vector with independent
sub-Gaussian coordinates with sub-Gaussian norm Пғz .

Assumption 2.3 further assumes that the coordinates of z are independent. This additional condition
is beneficial in sharply characterizing the eigenspectrum of the gram matrix composed by a set of
data points, which has been made in many prior works (Bartlett et al., 2020; Zou et al., 2021a; 2022).
Regarding the label noise, we make the following assumption.
Assumption 2.3. We assume the noise О¶ is zero mean with variance ПғО¶2 . We further assume О¶ is
sub-Gaussian with sub-Gaussian norm KПғО¶ for some K > 0.

We next introduce the notions of differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) and ReМҒnyi Differential
Privacy (RDP) (Mironov, 2017). In our privacy analysis, we use RDP and we state our results in
terms of (Пө, Оҙ)-DP by converting the RDP guarantee to (Пө, Оҙ)-DP.
Definition 2.4 ((Пө, Оҙ)-DP). A randomized mechanism M satisfies (Пө, Оҙ)-differential privacy if for
adjacent datasets S, S вҖІ differing by one element, and any output subset O, it holds that P[M(S) вҲҲ
O] вүӨ eПө В· P[M(S вҖІ ) вҲҲ O] + Оҙ.
Definition 2.5 (RDP). A randomized mechanism M satisfies (Оұ, ПҒ)-ReМҒnyi differential privacy
with Оұ > 1 and  ПҒ > 0  if for adjacent  datasets  S, S вҖІ вҲҲ S differing by one element,
                 вҖІ                     вҖІ Оұ

DОұ M(S)||M(S ) := log E M(S)/M(S )           вүӨ ПҒ.

For a given function q, one can use the Gaussian mechanism M(S) = q(S)+z, where z is a random
Gaussian vector, to achieve differential privacy.pFor example, by adding centered isotropic Gaussian
noise, i.e., z вҲј N (0, Пғ 2 I), one can achieve ( 1.25вҲҶ(q) log(2/Оҙ)/Пғ, Оҙ)-DP (Dwork et al., 2014)
and (Оұ, ОұвҲҶ(q)2 /(2Пғ 2 ))-RDP (Mironov, 2017), where Пғ 2 represents the noise magnitude. вҲҶ(q) is
the в„“2 -sensitivity of q, defined as вҲҶ(q) = supS,S вҖІ вҲҘq(S) вҲ’ q(S вҖІ )вҲҘ2 , where S, S вҖІ are two adjacent
datasets differing by one element. In this work, we propose adding non-isotropic noise, i.e., z вҲј
N (0, Пғ 2 ОЈ), to improve privacy and utility trade-offs in the over-parameterized linear regression. To
this end, we derive the following result for the Gaussian mechanism with non-isotropic noise.
Lemma 2.6. Given a function q, the Gaussian mechanism M = q(S) + z, where z вҲј N (0, Пғ 2 ОЈ)
                                           ВҜ 2 /(2Пғ 2 ))-RDP, where вҲҶ(q)
and ОЈ is positive definite, satisfies (Оұ, ОұвҲҶ(q)                      ВҜ 2 = supS,S вҖІ вҲҘq(S) вҲ’
   вҖІ               вҖІ
q(S )вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 and S, S are two adjacent datasets differing by one element.

According to Lemma 2.6, when ОЈ = I, the above result recovers the Gaussian mechanism for RDP
using isotropic noise (Mironov, 2017).
Tree aggregation protocol. We aim to achieve strong privacy and utility trade-offs without relying
on large batch gradients or privacy amplification techniques. To this end, we propose to use the
tree aggregation protocol (Dwork et al., 2010; Chan et al., 2011), which was originally designed for


                                                  4
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Algorithm 1: DP-FTRL with Gaussian Noise N (0, ОЈ) (DP-FTRL-ОЈ)
                                     вҲ’1
1 Input: Training data {(xi , yi )}N
                                   i=0 , Estimating data {(e      xi , yei )}m
                                                                             i=1 , Covariance matrix ОЈ,
   Noise multiplier П„ , Clipping list ОЁ = {}, Parameters О·, C, e         Пө, Оҙ
                                                                            e
2 Initialize w0 = 0
3 for t вҲҲ {0, . . . , N вҲ’ 1} do

4      Obtain lt = R ESIDUAL E ST({(e xi , yei )}m
                                                 i=1 , wt , e
                                                            Пө, Оҙ)
                                                               e (Algorithm 2)
5      Set ПҲt = Clt , and add ПҲt to ОЁ                                                          n              o
                                                                                             ПҲ
6         Compute gt = CLIP(xt xвҠӨ
                                t wt вҲ’ xt yt , ПҲt , ОЈ), where CLIP (ОҪ, ПҲ, ОЈ) = ОҪ В· min 1, вҲҘОҪвҲҘ вҲ’1          ОЈ
7    Set the noise magnitude Пғ 2 = П„ 2 ПҲ 2 , where ПҲ = max ОЁ
 8   Send (gt , Пғ 2 ОЈ) to the private tree aggregation protocol (Algorithm 3), and receive the
      private previous sum g  eвүӨt
                                                   1
 9   Update wt+1 = argminwвҲҲRd вҹЁe       gвүӨt , wвҹ© + 2О· вҲҘwвҲҘ22
                  1
                     PN вҲ’1
10 Ouput:wN =
                  N     t=0 wt


                                                                                                      Pt
    the partial sum problem. Consider the problem of privately releasing the partial sum i=1 vi for
    t вҲҲ [N ] given a stream of vectors v1 , . . . , vN . In this protocol, a complete binary tree is constructed
    with leaf nodes as v1 , . . . , vN . EachP
                                             internal node in the tree stores the sum of     all leaf  nodes in its
                                                t
    subtree. Therefore, each partial sum i=1 vi can            be  computed
                                                                             using at most   log 2 t   nodes in the
    tree. Since each vi only affects at most kМ„ = log2 N + 1 nodes, i.e., the nodes along the path
    from vi to the root of the tree, the complete tree will be (Пө, Оҙ)-DP if we add random Gaussian noise
    z вҲј N (0, Пғ 2 I) to each node, where Пғ 2 = O(ПҲ         2
                                                             kМ„ log(1/Оҙ)/Пө2
                                                                            ) and ПҲ is the в„“2 -norm upper bound
                                                                                                        Pt
    of all vi вҖҷs. As a result, we will add at most log2 t Gaussian noises to the partial sum i=1 vi to
    obtain its differentially private estimate. See more detailed discussions in Appendix A.

    3     P RIVATE OVER - PARAMETERIZED LINEAR REGRESSION
    In this section, we present our proposed algorithm, which only takes one pass over the training
    dataset and is able to achieve strong privacy and utility guarantees.
    3.1     D IFFERENTIALLY PRIVATE ALGORITHM
    Our proposed algorithm, i.e., DP-FTRL-ОЈ, is illustrated in Algorithm 1, which is a variant of the
    DP-FTRL algorithm (Kairouz et al., 2021) with the key innovation of adding random noise with a
    general covariance matrix for differential privacy.
    Update rule. The main idea of DP-FTRL-ОЈ is to use the follow-the-perturbed-leader (FTRL) with
    linearized losses (Hazan et al., 2016), where we seek to find the minimizer
                                                                        Pt      of the following regular-
    ized cumulative past losses at t-th iteration: wt+1 = argminwвҲҲRd вҹЁ j=0 gi , wвҹ© + вҲҘwвҲҘ22 /(2О·) with
    Pt
       j=0 gi as the sum of previous stochastic gradients (see line 9). Note that wt+1 shares the same
    update form with SGD when w0 = 0.
    Privacy mechanism. To ensure the differential privacy of the learned model parameter, we propose
    to use the tree aggregation protocol (Dwork et al., 2010; ChanPt et al., 2011; Guha Thakurta & Smith,
    2013; Kairouz et al., 2021) to obtain a private estimate of j=0 gi (see line 8). More specifically, at
    the beginning of training, we create a binary tree T of size (2вҢҲlog2 N вҢү+1 вҲ’ 1) with N leaves. At t-th
    iteration, the tree aggregation protocol receives the vector gt , computed using the data (xt , yt ), then
    updates the binary tree T accordingly. Finally, it outputs g   eвүӨt , which is computed using the values
                                                                                                Pt
    stored in the current tree and perturbed by some random noise, as the private estimate of j=0 gi . A
    more detailed description can be found in Appendix A. Compared to previous approaches (Varshney
    et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023), the tree aggregation protocol has the advantage of providing strong pri-
    vacy guarantees without requiring uniform sampling/random shuffling of the training data or using
    large batches in each update. For example, it is possible to apply our analytical tools to DP-Shuffled
    SGD (Varshney et al., 2022) to obtain dimensional independent utility guarantees. However, the
    random shuffling technique behind DP-Shuffled SGD will lead to a stringent conditions on privacy


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                      вҲҡ
parameter, i.e., Пө вүӨ N (Feldman et al., 2022; Varshney et al., 2022)), which is very restrictive
in practice (one often considers a constant level privacy budget). In addition, this requirement will
give us a much worse condition on N . At the same time, our method with the tree aggregation tech-
nique does not have such a requirement on Пө. Note that our method requires more memory usage to
keep track of past stochastic gradients and noise vectors. Furthermore, we propose adding random
noise with a general covariance matrix ОЈ and magnitude Пғ 2 (see line 8) inside the tree aggregation
protocol. This enables us to achieve improved privacy and utility trade-offs.
Adaptive clipping. Gradient clipping (Abadi et al., 2016) (see line 6) is used to control the mag-
nitude of the stochastic gradient and thus determine the appropriate amount of random noise for
DP (see Lemma 2.6). The clipping parameter ПҲ could significantly affect the algorithmвҖҷs conver-
gence (Chen et al., 2020b). For instance, if ПҲ is set to be too small, the magnitude of the stochastic
gradient is significantly reduced, resulting in slower convergence. Conversely, if ПҲ is set to be too
large, excessive noise is added (the noise magnitude scales with ПҲ) to achieve DP, potentially caus-
ing divergence even though the stochastic gradient remains unchanged. Ideally, we want to select
ПҲ adaptively as the magnitude of the current stochastic gradient, i.e., вҲҘxt xвҠӨ      t wt вҲ’ xt yt вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 , such
that no clipping is required. To this end, we propose to estimate the magnitude of the stochastic
gradient at t-th iteration using some estimating data {(e  xi , yei )}m
                                                                      i=1 and set the clipping parameter ПҲt
accordingly. Note that we have вҲҘxt xt wt вҲ’ xt yt вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ вҲҘxt вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 В· в„“1/2 (wt ; xt , yt ). Thus, we set
                                           вҠӨ

ПҲt = Clt (see line 5), where C is the upper bound of вҲҘxi вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 for all xi in the training data and
lt is an estimate of в„“1/2 (wt ; xt , yt ), which can be obtained by the residual estimator established in
Liu et al. (2023). The key idea of the residual estimator,Pmi.e., R ESIDUAL       EST in line 4, is to use the
(private) empirical variance estimator of the residual i=1 (e           eвҠӨ
                                                                   yi вҲ’ x i w    2
                                                                              t /m. A detailed description
                                                                               )
can be found in Appendix A. It is worth noting that when no additional estimating data is available,
we can evenly split the training data and use one part as the estimating data. By doing so, all of our
results will still hold, with the only modification being to change N to N/2.
Note that when we choose ОЈ = I and use a fixed clipping parameter ПҲ, Algorithm 1 reduces to the
DP-FTRL algorithm (Kairouz et al., 2021). In the next section, we will provide a method to design
the non-isotropic noise, which allows us to achieve better privacy and utility trade-offs.
3.2   D ESIGN OF THE NOISE COVARIANCE
As mentioned previously, the additive noise, i.e., z вҲј N (0, Пғ 2 ОЈ) (see line 8 in Algorithm 1), in our
method performs a trade-off between privacy and utility. Intuitively, stronger noise will lead to a
better privacy guarantee but can hurt the convergence of the optimization algorithm. The standard
choice of the noise covariance, i.e., ОЈ = I, can be understood as treating all coordinates equally.
However, we notice that (1) this type of noise will incur large variance error in terms of the excess
risk in the high-dimensional regime; (2) using the same Gaussian noise for all coordinates may be
too conservative, as some coordinates may not have sufficient signals that need to be protected; and
(3) the noise magnitude Пғ 2 will also be determined by the choice of ОЈ (see Lemma 2.6).
Motivated by this, we seek to explore a better design of ОЈ that can (1) successfully protect the
gradient information and (2) achieve a faster convergence rate than when ОЈ = I. Note that for linear
problems, the stochastic gradient for the data pair (xi , yi ) is parallel to the feature xi , implying that
the design of ОЈ should be related to the signal strengths of all coordinates of xi . More specifically,
an improved design of ОЈ should concern the data covariance matrix H: one may use stronger noise
perturbation along the large-eigenvalue directions of H. In contrast, the noise level can be relatively
weaker along the small-eigenvalue directions of H. Therefore, we consider the following design:
                                               ОЈ = О»I + H,                                              (3.1)
where О» > 0 is a user-defined constant. It can be seen that when О» вҶ’ вҲһ, we have ОЈ вҶ’ О»I,
which is nearly the same as the identity design (ignoring the scaling parameter). Moreover, the
noise magnitude Пғ 2 is also determined by ОЈ, as discussed earlier. In our problem, Пғ 2 scales with
tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H) (see Theorem 4.2) in order to achieve the desired privacy guarantee. If we choose ОЈ вҶ’
H when О» вҶ’ 0, the noise magnitude Пғ 2 вҶ’ d, which explodes as d вҶ’ вҲһ. This implies that О»
should be a positive constant. Therefore, О» is a knob to control the noise along different directions.
However, it is also worth noting that H, i.e., the population covariance of the data, cannot be realized
in practice. In this work, we consider the scenarios in which we are allowed to access a set of
unlabeled public data {e xi }M
                             i=1 , which is sampled from the same distribution as the training data


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


points. In general, we consider the case that M вүҘ N . Therefore, we propose to use the unlabeled
data first to generate an estimation of H and then design the noise covariance matrix as follows
                                                     e вҠӨ /M,

                                        ОЈ = О»I + X  eX                                         (3.2)
where X e = [e              eM ] вҲҲ RdГ—M and О» > 0 is a user-defined parameter. The idea of using
               x1 , . . . , x
public data in the DP methods has been widely used in the literature (Kairouz et al., 2020; Yu et al.,
2022; Zhou et al., 2021). In addition, getting unlabeled public data is generally cheaper than labeled
training data. Note that if we do not have a public dataset, we can use the isotropic noise in our
method to still get a sharp excess risk bound (see Corollary 4.3).

4   M AIN RESULTS
In this section, we provide the privacy and utility guarantees of our proposed method.
                                                                                    p
Theorem 4.1 (Privacy guarantee). If we set П„ 2 = 4kМ„ log(1/Оҙ) + Пө)/Пө2 , e    Пө = Пө/ 8N log(2/Оҙ),
Оҙe = Оҙ/(2N ), where kМ„ = вҢҲlog2 N вҢү + 1, then Algorithm 1 is (Пө, Оҙ)-DP.

The choice of eПө, Оҙe in Theorem 4.1 is to ensure that R ESIDUAL E ST (see Algorithm 2 in Appendix
A) is (Пө, Оҙ)-DP when the estimating data {(e xi , yei )}m
                                                        i=1 are not public available. Furthermore, our
privacy guarantee does not rely on large batch gradients (Liu et al., 2023) or privacy amplification
techniques (Varshney et al., 2022), which often impose stringent conditions on privacy parameters.
ForвҲҡexample, the DP-S HUFFLED SGD (Varshney et al., 2022) requires the privacy budget Пө вүӨ
1/ N due to the random shuffling of the training data.
Next, we provide the utility guarantee, i.e., the excess risk, of our proposed method.
Theorem 4.2 (Utility guarantee for general ОЈ). Under the same conditions of П„ 2 , e           Пө, Оҙe as in
Theorem p   4.1, and suppose Assumptions 2.1, 2.3 hold. If we choose the clipping              parameter
C = 6Пғz (1 + Пғz2 ) tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H) log N , step size О· вүӨ 1/ 16(1 + Пғz4 ) tr(H) log2 N , and the num-


ber of estimating data m = в„Ұ(log2 (N/Оҙ)/e  e Пө), then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 1/N , the output of
Algorithm 1 satisfies
                                E L(wN ) вҲ’ L(wвҲ— ) вүӨ errbias + errvariance ,


where
              вҲҘw0 вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2HвҲ’1                            Пғz4 вҲҘw0 вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2I0:k + N О·вҲҘw0 вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2Hk:вҲһ

                                            вҲ— 2
   errbias вүІ                 0:k
                                 + вҲҘw0 вҲ’ w вҲҘHk:вҲһ +                                                     В· Оӣ;
                     О·2 N 2                                           N О·(1 вҲ’ Пғz4 О· tr(H))
                             X              X
errvariance вүІ ПғО¶2 Пғz4 1 + О·        О»i + N О·   О»2i     В· Оӣ + П„ 2 Пғz4 О·вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , GМ„p вҹ© В· Оӣ
                            iвүӨk           iвүҘk
                                                       1
                 + П„ 2 вҹЁHвҲ’1     2 2
                         0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , GМ„p вҹ© В·
                                                       N
                    1,  Оӣ = k/N + N О· 2 i>k О»2i , GМ„p = О·Пғz4 tr(HОЈ) В· I0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ +
                                        P
with
    arbitrary  k вүҘ
     2        4                                                        2
                   + 1 В· ОЈ, ПҲmax = Cl and l = max{l02 , l12 , . . . , lN

 E ПҲmax  + ПҲmax                                                          вҲ’1 }.

According to Theorem 4.2, the last two terms in errvariance correspond to the error introduced by the
privacy mechanism. Note that in the non-private case, i.e., Пө = вҲһ, the term П„ 2 = 4kМ„ log(1/Оҙ) +
Пө)/Пө2 becomes zero, and errvariance reduces to the non-private one (Zou et al., 2021b). Additionally,
the error bound in Theorem 4.2 is expressed as a function with respect to the full eigenspectrum of
H (i.e., О»i вҖҷs), which does not explicitly depend on the problem dimension d. This result is therefore
stronger than the existing dimension dependent utility bounds (Varshney et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2023). Note that ПҲmax = Cl in GМ„p determines the magnitude of the additive random noise to
                                                                                           N вҲ’1
achieve DP. The term C is dominated by tr(HОЈвҲ’1 ) and l вүІ max вҲҘwt вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2 t=0 .


Moreover, the error bound in Theorem 4.2, particularly the private error terms (e.g., the last two
terms), strongly depends on the design of ОЈ (see the definition of GМ„p ). Therefore, seeking a good
design of ОЈ is important to achieve a better utility guarantee. In particular, we prefer ОЈ with a H-like
head space (in contrast to I), so that the quantities вҹЁI0:k , ОЈвҹ© and вҹЁHвҲ’10:k , ОЈвҹ© can be well controlled.
Additionally, ОЈ should also attain a relatively heavy tail so that the tr(HОЈвҲ’1 ) in ПҲmax will not
explode. This is consistent with our high-level idea of the design of ОЈ in (3.1).


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Excess risks for our method under different eigenspectrum decays. The results are presented
under (Пө, Оҙ)-DP with constant Пө and log(1/Оҙ), and parameters other than N , d are considered to be
constants. * The results are restated by using different stepsizes to achieve the optimal excess risks.
                                                 Excess Risk for Polynomial       Excess Risk for Exponential
  Method
                                                 Decay: О»i = iвҲ’r for r > 1             Decay: О»i = eвҲ’i
                                                                 r

  N ON - PRIVATE SGD* (Zou et al., 2021b)               e N вҲ’ 1+r
                                                        O                                 Oe N вҲ’1

  DP-FTRL-I
                                                                r

                                                         e N вҲ’ 1+2r
                                                         O                               e N вҲ’1/2
                                                                                         O
  Corollary 4.4
  DP-FTRL-ОЈ
                                                             r вҲ§ 2r

                                                      e N вҲ’ 3+r
                                                      O         1+3r                     e N вҲ’2/3
                                                                                         O
  Corollary 4.6



4.1   U TILITY AND PRIVACY TRADE - OFFS FOR IDENTITY NOISE COVARIANCE MATRIX
In this section, we present the utility guarantee of our method using the identity noise covariance
matrix. To simplify the results, we assume that Пғz , О»1 (H), and tr(H) are in the constant level.
Corollary 4.3 (General utility guarantee for ОЈ = I). Under the same conditions of data, label noise,
and parameters П„ 2 , eПө, Оҙ,
                         e m,e О·, C as in Theorem 4.2. If we assume вҲҘw0 вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ B, then with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ 1/N , the output of Algorithm 1 satisfies
                                    2
                            B2      ПғО¶     B2
                                                                X                               X
E L(wN ) вҲ’ L(wвҲ— ) вүІ                               В· kвҲ— + N О·        О»i + l 2 П„ 2 О· В· k вҲ— + N О·

                               +        + 2                                                         О»i ,
                            NО·      N     N О·
                                                               i>kвҲ—                            i>kвҲ—
                            |                   {z                    } |                {z           }
                                          Non-private error component                    Private error component
          вҲ—
where k       = max{k : О»k вүҘ 1/(N О·)}, and l = max{l02 , l12 , . . . , lN
                                                                        2
                                                                          вҲ’1 }.

In Corollary 4.3, we decompose the excess risk into two components: the non-private error com-
ponent and the private error component. The former can be further decomposed into the bias and
variance errors (i.e., the first and second
                                        P terms in the developed bound). Moreover, it can also be
observed that the quantity k вҲ— + N О· i>kвҲ— is rather critical in the excess risk bound, which can
be understood as the effective dimension of the problem, denoted by EffectDim. Then, in order to
achieve vanishing excess risk, we need to guarantee that N О· вү« 1 and О· В· EffectDim вүӘ 1, which
suggests that the effective dimension should satisfy EffectDim вүӘ N .
To better illustrate the utility guarantee and identify the problem instances that the vanishing excess
risk can be achieved, we consider some examples of eigenspectrums and present their corresponding
guarantees as follows. The results presented consider parameters other than N , d, and Пө as constants.
Corollary 4.4 (Utility with I on specific distributions). Under the same conditions as Corollary 4.3.
1. If the eigenspectrum of H satisfies О»i = iвҲ’r for some r > 1, then with probability at least
                                                                          r
                                                                         1+2r
                                                     r              r
   1 вҲ’ 1/N , we have E L(wN ) вҲ’ L(wвҲ— ) = O   e N вҲ’ 1+r   1 + ПөвҲ’2 N 1+r

                                                                                 .
2. If the eigenspectrum of H satisfies О»i = eвҲ’i , then  with probability at least  1 вҲ’ 1/N , the output
                                              вҲ—            вҲ’1

                                                                      вҲ’2
                                                                              12
   of Algorithm 1 satisfies E L(wN ) вҲ’ L(w ) = O N   e          1+ Пө N              .

According to Corollary 4.4, our method with ОЈ = I achieves a vanishing excess risk that is inde-
pendent of the problem dimension when the eigenspectrum decays polynomially or exponentially.
ItвҖҷs worth noting that the state-of-the-art methods (Varshney et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
                                                                                     2023) for the
                                                                         2   2 2
private linear regression problem provide an excess risk of O d/N + d /(Пө N ) . However, this
                                                              e
approach becomes invalid in the over-parameterized setting, as the dimension d can be much larger
than N . If we choose a constant privacy budget Пө = O(1) for our method, we can achieve the excess
         e N вҲ’r/(1+2r) and O   e N вҲ’1/2 for polynomial and exponential decay, respectively. Fur-

risk of O
thermore, if we are willing to pay for the privacy budget Пө = O N r/(2+2r) and Пө = O N 1/2 , our

                                                                       e N вҲ’r/(1+r) and O e N вҲ’1

method can recover the non-private (Zou et al., 2021b) excess risk of O
for polynomial and exponential decay, respectively.


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   U TILITY AND PRIVACY TRADE - OFFS FOR SPECIALLY DESIGNED COVARIANCE MATRIX
We provide the utility guarantee of our method with the noise covariance matrix in (3.2). We assume
that Пғz , О»1 (H), and tr(H) are in the constant level in the following results.
Corollary 4.5 (General utility guarantee for ОЈ = M вҲ’1 О»I+ X       e вҠӨ ). Under the same conditions of

                                                                 eX
parameters П„ 2 , e
                 Пө, Оҙ,
                    e m,e О·, C as in Theorem 4.2, suppose Assumptions 2.2, 2.3 hold, вҲҘw0 вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ
B, and M вүҘ N . If we choose ОЈ = M вҲ’1 О»I + X           e вҠӨ with О» = M/(N О·) , then with probability

                                                    eX
at least 1 вҲ’ 1/N , the output of Algorithm 1 satisfies
                                     2
                            B2       ПғО¶    B2
                                                                 X
                      вҲ—                                вҲ—

E L(wN ) вҲ’ L(w ) вүІ              +       + 2       В· k + NО·           О»i
                           NО·        N     N О·
                                                                i>kвҲ—
                           |                    {z                      }
                                          Non-private error component
                                                                      X        1
                                                                                             X  3
                                + l2 П„ 2 В· О· 2 В· tr(H2 ) В· k вҲ— + N О·      О»i +   В· kвҲ— + N О·      О»i   ,
                                                                               N
                                                                     i>kвҲ—                   i>kвҲ—
                                  |                                    {z                           }
                                                                    Private error component
          вҲ—
where k       = max{k : О»k вүҘ 1/(N О·)}, and l = max{l02 , l12 , . . . , lN
                                                                        2
                                                                          вҲ’1 }.

By combining Corollaries 4.3 and 4.5, it is clear that (1) the non-private error component will
maintain the same as it does not depend on ОЈ; (2) the private error components for ОЈ = I and
ОЈ = M вҲ’1 (О»I + X  eX e вҠӨ ) are roughly О· В· EffectDim and О· 2 В· EffectDim + (EffectDim)3 /N , respec-
tively. Then, noting that we need to guarantee N О· вү« 1 to achieve vanishing bias error, it can be
seen that the private error component achieved by specially designed ОЈ outperforms that achieved
by ОЈ = I for the data distribution with small EffectDim (i.e., the eigenspectrum has a fast decay).
To better present the advantage of the specially designed noise covariance over the identity one, we
again consider some example data distributions and calculate their corresponding utility guarantees
in the following corollary. We consider parameters other than N , d and Пө to be constants as before.
Corollary 4.6 (Utility with ОЈ = M вҲ’1 О»I + X        e вҠӨ on specific distributions). Under the same

                                                 eX
conditions as Corollary 4.3.

1. If the eigenspectrum of H satisfies О»i = iвҲ’r for some r > 1, then with probability at least
                                                     h                r
                                                                     3+r                r
                                                                                       1+3r i
                                                  r             2                rвҲ’1
   1вҲ’1/N , we have E L(wN ) вҲ’L(wвҲ— ) = O    e N вҲ’ 1+r  1+ ПөвҲ’2 N 1+r       + ПөвҲ’2 N 1+r

                                                                                              .
2. If the eigenspectrum of H satisfies О»i = eвҲ’i , then  with probability at least  1 вҲ’ 1/N , the output
                                              вҲ—            вҲ’1

                                                                      вҲ’2
                                                                              13
   of Algorithm 1 satisfies E L(wN ) вҲ’ L(w ) = O     e N        1+ Пө N              .

According to Corollary 4.6, our method with the covariance matrix in (3.2) can also achieve a
vanishing empirical risk under the same eigenspectrum decay conditions as in Corollary 4.4. If we
                                            r     2r
                                     e N вҲ’ 3+r вҲ§ 1+3r       e N вҲ’2/3 excess risk for polynomial and

choose Пө = O(1), we can achieve O                      and O
exponential decay. Therefore, our method with this              ОЈ achieves
                                                       designedвҲ’1/2         a better excess risk than
                                                  r
                                         e N вҲ’ 1+2r

the one using I with the excess risk of O             and Oe N        when the eigenspectrum decays
at least quadratically fast, i.e., r вүҘ 2. Moreover, if we are willing to pay for the privacy budget
            1       rвҲ’1
Пө = O N 1+r вҲЁ N 2+2r and Пө = O N 1/2 for polynomial and exponential decay, our method can

also recover the non-private excess risk as before. Table 1 summarizes these results for comparison.

5     C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We develop a new variant of DP-FTRL for private linear regression in the over-parameterized
regime. The key innovation of our method is the utilization of non-isotropic noise, enabling us
to obtain improved privacy and utility trade-offs. We prove that our method achieves a sharp excess
risk, depending on the eigenspectrum of the data covariance matrix instead of the problem dimen-
sion. Specific examples of data distribution further validate the effectiveness of our method. As for
future work, exploring different designs of ОЈ and studying how to overcome the limitation of using
public data are both very interesting directions. Moreover, it is also interesting to extend our results
to the kernel setting.


                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308вҖ“318, 2016.
Hilal Asi, John Duchi, Alireza Fallah, Omid Javidbakht, and Kunal Talwar. Private adaptive gradient
  methods for convex optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 383вҖ“
  392. PMLR, 2021.
Peter L Bartlett, Philip M Long, GaМҒbor Lugosi, and Alexander Tsigler. Benign overfitting in linear
  regression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2020.
Raef Bassily, Adam Smith, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Private empirical risk minimization: Efficient
  algorithms and tight error bounds. In 2014 IEEE 55th annual symposium on foundations of
  computer science, pp. 464вҖ“473. IEEE, 2014.
Raef Bassily, Vitaly Feldman, Kunal Talwar, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta. Private stochastic
  convex optimization with optimal rates. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
RaphaeМҲl Berthier, Francis Bach, and Pierre Gaillard. Tight nonparametric convergence rates for
  stochastic gradient descent under the noiseless linear model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08212,
  2020.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877вҖ“1901, 2020.
Mark Bun, Kobbi Nissim, and Uri Stemmer. Simultaneous private learning of multiple concepts. In
 Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, pp.
 369вҖ“380, 2016.
T Tony Cai, Yichen Wang, and Linjun Zhang. The cost of privacy: Optimal rates of convergence for
  parameter estimation with differential privacy. The Annals of Statistics, 49(5):2825вҖ“2850, 2021.

Nicholas Carlini, Chang Liu, UМҒlfar Erlingsson, Jernej Kos, and Dawn Song. The secret sharer: Eval-
  uating and testing unintended memorization in neural networks. In USENIX Security Symposium,
  volume 267, 2019.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom B Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. In USENIX Security Symposium, volume 6, 2021.
T-H Hubert Chan, Elaine Shi, and Dawn Song. Private and continual release of statistics. ACM
  Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC), 14(3):1вҖ“24, 2011.
Kamalika Chaudhuri, Claire Monteleoni, and Anand D Sarwate. Differentially private empirical
  risk minimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(Mar):1069вҖ“1109, 2011.
Xi Chen, Qiang Liu, and Xin T Tong. Dimension independent generalization error with regularized
  online optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11196, 2020a.
Xiangyi Chen, Steven Z Wu, and Mingyi Hong. Understanding gradient clipping in private sgd: A
  geometric perspective. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:13773вҖ“13782,
  2020b.
Soham De, Leonard Berrada, Jamie Hayes, Samuel L Smith, and Borja Balle. Unlock-
  ing high-accuracy differentially private image classification through scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.13650, 2022.
Aymeric Dieuleveut and Francis R. Bach. Non-parametric stochastic approximation with large step
  sizes. The Annals of Statistics, 2015.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Christos Dimitrakakis, Blaine Nelson, Aikaterini Mitrokotsa, and Benjamin IP Rubinstein. Robust
  and private bayesian inference. In Algorithmic Learning Theory: 25th International Conference,
  ALT 2014, Bled, Slovenia, October 8-10, 2014. Proceedings 25, pp. 291вҖ“305. Springer, 2014.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography: Third Theory of Cryptography Conference,
  TCC 2006, New York, NY, USA, March 4-7, 2006. Proceedings 3, pp. 265вҖ“284. Springer, 2006.
Cynthia Dwork, Moni Naor, Toniann Pitassi, and Guy N Rothblum. Differential privacy under con-
  tinual observation. In Proceedings of the forty-second ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
  pp. 715вҖ“724, 2010.
Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations
  and TrendsВ® in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3вҖ“4):211вҖ“407, 2014.
Vitaly Feldman, Tomer Koren, and Kunal Talwar. Private stochastic convex optimization: optimal
  rates in linear time. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
  Computing, pp. 439вҖ“449, 2020.
Vitaly Feldman, Audra McMillan, and Kunal Talwar. Hiding among the clones: A simple and nearly
  optimal analysis of privacy amplification by shuffling. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on
  Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 954вҖ“964. IEEE, 2022.
James Foulds, Joseph Geumlek, Max Welling, and Kamalika Chaudhuri. On the theory and practice
  of privacy-preserving bayesian data analysis. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Conference on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 192вҖ“201, 2016.
Matt Fredrikson, Somesh Jha, and Thomas Ristenpart. Model inversion attacks that exploit confi-
 dence information and basic countermeasures. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC confer-
 ence on computer and communications security, pp. 1322вҖ“1333, 2015.
Gene H Golub and Charles F Van Loan. Matrix computations. JHU press, 2013.
Abhradeep Guha Thakurta and Adam Smith. (nearly) optimal algorithms for private online learning
  in full-information and bandit settings. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26,
  2013.
Elad Hazan et al. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and TrendsВ® in Opti-
  mization, 2(3-4):157вҖ“325, 2016.
Prateek Jain and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta. (near) dimension independent risk bounds for differen-
  tially private learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 476вҖ“484. PMLR,
  2014.
Prateek Jain, Sham M Kakade, Rahul Kidambi, Praneeth Netrapalli, Venkata Krishna Pillutla, and
  Aaron Sidford. A markov chain theory approach to characterizing the minimax optimality of
  stochastic gradient descent (for least squares). arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09430, 2017a.
Prateek Jain, Praneeth Netrapalli, Sham M Kakade, Rahul Kidambi, and Aaron Sidford. Paralleliz-
  ing stochastic gradient descent for least squares regression: mini-batching, averaging, and model
  misspecification. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):8258вҖ“8299, 2017b.
Peter Kairouz, Sewoong Oh, and Pramod Viswanath. The composition theorem for differential
  privacy. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1376вҖ“1385. PMLR, 2015.
Peter Kairouz, MoМҒnica Ribero, Keith Rush, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Fast dimension independent
  private adagrad on publicly estimated subspaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06570, 2020.
Peter Kairouz, Brendan McMahan, Shuang Song, Om Thakkar, Abhradeep Thakurta, and Zheng
  Xu. Practical and private (deep) learning without sampling or shuffling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.00039, 2021.
Vishesh Karwa and Salil Vadhan. Finite sample differentially private confidence intervals. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1711.03908, 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Daniel Kifer, Adam Smith, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Private convex empirical risk minimization
  and high-dimensional regression. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 25вҖ“1. JMLR Workshop
  and Conference Proceedings, 2012.

Xuechen Li, Daogao Liu, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, Huseyin A Inan, Janardhan Kulkarni, Yin-Tat
  Lee, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta. When does differentially private learning not suffer in high
  dimensions? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:28616вҖ“28630, 2022a.

Xuechen Li, Florian Tramer, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Large language models can be
  strong differentially private learners. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=bVuP3ltATMz.

Xiyang Liu, Prateek Jain, Weihao Kong, Sewoong Oh, and Arun Sai Suggala. Near optimal private
  and robust linear regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13273, 2023.

Po-Ling Loh and Martin J Wainwright. Regularized m-estimators with nonconvexity: Statistical and
  algorithmic theory for local optima. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  476вҖ“484, 2013.

Yi-An Ma, Teodor Vanislavov Marinov, and Tong Zhang. Dimension independent generalization
  of dp-sgd for overparameterized smooth convex optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01836,
  2022.

Harsh Mehta, Abhradeep Thakurta, Alexey Kurakin, and Ashok Cutkosky. Large scale transfer
  learning for differentially private image classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02973, 2022.

Kentaro Minami, HItomi Arai, Issei Sato, and Hiroshi Nakagawa. Differential privacy without
  sensitivity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.

Ilya Mironov. ReМҒnyi differential privacy. In 2017 IEEE 30th computer security foundations sympo-
   sium (CSF), pp. 263вҖ“275. IEEE, 2017.

Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. R\вҖҷenyi differential privacy of the sampled gaussian
   mechanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10530, 2019.

Sahand Negahban, Bin Yu, Martin J Wainwright, and Pradeep K Ravikumar. A unified framework
  for high-dimensional analysis of m-estimators with decomposable regularizers. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1348вҖ“1356, 2009.

Or Sheffet. Old techniques in differentially private linear regression. In Algorithmic Learning
  Theory, pp. 789вҖ“827. PMLR, 2019.

Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference at-
  tacks against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP),
  pp. 3вҖ“18. IEEE, 2017.

Shuang Song, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and Anand D Sarwate. Stochastic gradient descent with differ-
  entially private updates. In 2013 IEEE global conference on signal and information processing,
  pp. 245вҖ“248. IEEE, 2013.

Shuang Song, Thomas Steinke, Om Thakkar, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Evading the curse of dimen-
  sionality in unconstrained private glms. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 2638вҖ“2646. PMLR, 2021.

Kunal Talwar, Abhradeep Guha Thakurta, and Li Zhang. Nearly optimal private lasso. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3025вҖ“3033, 2015.

Alexander Tsigler and Peter L Bartlett. Benign overfitting in ridge regression. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.14286, 2020.

Prateek Varshney, Abhradeep Thakurta, and Prateek Jain. (nearly) optimal private linear regression
  via adaptive clipping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04686, 2022.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maksim Velikanov, Denis Kuznedelev, and Dmitry Yarotsky. A view of mini-batch sgd via gen-
 erating functions: conditions of convergence, phase transitions, benefit from negative momenta.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11124, 2022.
Duy Vu and Aleksandra Slavkovic. Differential privacy for clinical trial data: Preliminary evalua-
  tions. In 2009 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, pp. 138вҖ“143. IEEE,
  2009.
Di Wang, Minwei Ye, and Jinhui Xu. Differentially private empirical risk minimization revisited:
  Faster and more general. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Lingxiao Wang and Quanquan Gu. Differentially private iterative gradient hard thresholding for
  sparse learning. In 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019.
Yu-Xiang Wang. Revisiting differentially private linear regression: optimal and adaptive prediction
  & estimation in unbounded domain. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02596, 2018.
Jingfeng Wu, Difan Zou, Vladimir Braverman, Quanquan Gu, and Sham Kakade. Last iterate risk
   bounds of sgd with decaying stepsize for overparameterized linear regression. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 24280вҖ“24314. PMLR, 2022.
Da Yu, Saurabh Naik, Arturs Backurs, Sivakanth Gopi, Huseyin A Inan, Gautam Kamath, Janardhan
  Kulkarni, Yin Tat Lee, Andre Manoel, Lukas Wutschitz, Sergey Yekhanin, and Huishuai Zhang.
  Differentially private fine-tuning of language models. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Q42f0dfjECO.
Yingxue Zhou, Steven Wu, and Arindam Banerjee. Bypassing the ambient dimension: Private {sgd}
  with gradient subspace identification. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=7dpmlkBuJFC.
Difan Zou, Jingfeng Wu, Vladimir Braverman, Quanquan Gu, Dean P Foster, and Sham Kakade.
  The benefits of implicit regularization from sgd in least squares problems. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:5456вҖ“5468, 2021a.
Difan Zou, Jingfeng Wu, Vladimir Braverman, Quanquan Gu, and Sham Kakade. Benign overfitting
  of constant-stepsize sgd for linear regression. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4633вҖ“4635.
  PMLR, 2021b.
Difan Zou, Jingfeng Wu, Vladimir Braverman, Quanquan Gu, and Sham Kakade. Risk bounds
  of multi-pass sgd for least squares in the interpolation regime. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:12909вҖ“12920, 2022.


                                                13
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     A    A DDITIONAL A LGORITHMS

     Algorithm 2: R ESIDUAL E ST
 1 Input: Data {(e   xi , yei )}mi=1 , model w, parameters e      Пө, Оҙe
                               m
 2 Option 1: {(e   xi , yei )}i=1 is a public dataset
                                                           ei вҹ©)2
         p P
 3 l =      2 i=1 ri /m, where ri = (e       yi вҲ’ вҹЁw, x
                               m
 4 Option 2: {(e   xi , yei )}i=1 is a private data
                 m                      m
 5 Obtain {ri }i=1 and split {ri }i=1 into n        e subsets of equal size, each with |Sj | = m  e data for
                                                2
     j вҲҲ [en], where ri = (e    yi вҲ’ вҹЁw,  x
                                        P i
                                          e  вҹ©)   , ne =  вҢҲОІ 1  log(N/  Оҙ)/e
                                                                        e  Пө вҢү, where ОІ 1 is some large constant
                  n
 6 Obtain {rМ„j }j=1 , where rМ„j =                r  / m
                  e
                                          iвҲҲSj i       e
 7 Partition [0, вҲһ) into geometrically increasing intervals, i.e.,

     в„Ұ = {В· В· В· , [2вҲ’1 , 1), [1, 2), [2, 22 ), В· В· В· } вҲӘ {0}
                     Pne
 8 Compute r   bk = j=1 I(rМ„j вҲҲ Bk )/e        n, where Bk is the interval in в„Ұ
 9 if r
      bk вҲҲ (0, 2 log(1/Оҙ)/(e e    Пөn
                                   e) + (1/en)) then
10      rek = rbk + zk , where zk вҲј Lap 0, 2/(e          Пөn
                                                          e)
11   else
12       rek = 0
                                                                                        вҲҡ
13 Let [l1 , l2 ] be the nonempty interval containing the largest rek and set l =           2l2
14 Ouput: l



     In Algorithm 1, we propose to use the residual estimator established in Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2023) to
     estimate в„“1/2 (wt ; xt , yt ). The detailed description of this method is in Algorithm 2. The theoretical
     guarantees of Algorithm 2 can be found in Lemma B.3.

     Algorithm 3: Private Tree Aggregation Protocol
 1 Input: Vectors g0 , . . . , gN вҲ’1 (in an online sequence), Noise covariance Пғ 2 ОЈ
                                                        вҢҲlog2 N вҢү+1
 2 Initialization: Create a binary tree T of size 2                 вҲ’ 1 with leaves m1 , m2 , . . . , mN
 3 Online phase: At each iteration t, execute lines 3 to 17
 4 Accept gt from the data stream
 5 Let p = {n1 , n2 , . . . , nk } be a set of nodes from the root of T to the t-th leaf, where k is the
    depth of T , n1 is the root, and nk is the leaf mt
 6 Tree update: lines 4 to 8
 7 Let pj = {nj , nj+1 , . . . , nk }, where nj is the last node in p that is a left child in T
 8 for i вҲҲ [k] do
 9     ОҪi = ОҪi + gt , where ОҪi is the associated value of node ni
10     if ni вҲҲ pj then
11         ОҪi = ОҪi + z, where z вҲј N (0, Пғ 2 ОЈ)
12 Obtain private sum: lines 10 to 13
13 Initialize geвүӨt = 0 and let {b1 , . . . , bk } be the k bit binary representation of t
14 for i вҲҲ [k] do
15      if bi = 1 then
16           g
             eвүӨt = geвүӨt + bi , where bi = ОҪi if ni is the left child, otherwise bi is the value
              associated with the left sibling of ni
17   Output: g
             eвүӨt


     In Algorithm 1, we propose to use the tree aggregation protocol to achieve differential privacy. More
     specifically, the tree aggregation protocol we used (Algorithm 3) is motivated by Guha Thakurta &
     Smith (2013); Kairouz et al. (2021). We create a binary tree (see initialization in Algorithm 3) T with
     size 2 log2 N +1 вҲ’ 1 and N leaves (denoted by m1 , . . . , mN ) and initializes the values associated
     with each node to the zero vector (see Figure 1). At t-th iteration, the tree aggregation protocol will
     first accept a new vector g. Then, it adds the newly received vector g to all nodes along the path to


                                                           14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the root of T starting from the t-th leaf mt , and adding Gaussian noise to the nodes along this path
from mt to the first left child (see tree update in Algorithm 3). Finally, it retrieves the noisy sum
g
e, which serves as the private estimate of the sum of all the previously received vectors, using the
values stored in T (see obtain private sum in Algorithm 3).

                                                            g1:8


                                    g1:4                                                g5:8


                        g1:2                    g3:4                        g5:6                    g7:8

                   g1          g2          g3          g4              g5          g6          g7          g8
                   m1          m2          m3          m4              m5          m6          m7          m8

Figure 1: Illustration of a binary tree with 8 leaf nodes in the tree aggregation protocol. mi denotes
                                                       Pl
the i-th leaf nodes with associated value gi . gk:l = j=k gj denotes the value associated with the
internal node in the tree.

B     P ROOFS
B.1    P ROOFS OF P RIVACY G UARANTEES
In our analysis, we use the following lemma (Mironov, 2017) to convert the RDP guarantee to the
(Пө, Оҙ)-DP.
Lemma B.1. If a randomized mechanism M : S n вҶ’ R satisfies (Оұ, ПҒ)-RDP, then M satisfies
(ПҒ + log(1/Оҙ)/(Оұ вҲ’ 1), Оҙ)-DP for all Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1).

Now we are ready to provide the privacy guarantees of Algorithm 1.

Proof of Theorem 4.1. To establish the privacy guarantees of Algorithm 1, we need to prove that
                          вҲ’1                                                    N вҲ’1
{wt }tвҲҲ[N ] and {lt }N  t=0 are private. Since the training dataset {(xi , yi )}i=0 and estimating data
             m                                                                                        N вҲ’1
{(e
  xi , yei )}i=1 are disjoint, we only need to provide the privacy guarantees of {wt }tвҲҲ[N ] and {lt }t=0
separately.
We first show that the complete binary tree T is private since each g
                                                                    eвүӨt for t вҲҲ [N ] is a combination
of at most k = вҢҲlog2 N вҢү + 1 nodes in T . We will then show that Algorithm 2 is also differen-
tially private. Finally, we can prove that Algorithm 1 is private due to the parallel composition of
differential privacy.
                         вҖІ K
Let {vj }Kj=1 and {vj }j=1 be the values of the nodes in the post-order tree traversal generated by
adding Gaussian noises (line 11 in Algorithm 3) based on the neighboring datasets S and S вҖІ with
i-th data (will be stored in leaf node mi in T ) is different. Let {v1 , v2 , . . . , vK } be any set of values
of nodes in the post-order tree traversal of the binary tree T . We have the joint density of v1 , . . . , vK
as

p v 1 = v1 , . . . , v K = vK
          K
          Y
      =         p vj = vj |v1 = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1 = vjвҲ’1
          j=1
          Y                                                Y
      =          p vj = vj |v1 = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1 = vjвҲ’1 В·  p vj = vj |v1 = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1 = vjвҲ’1 ,
          jвҲҲpi                                                          j вҲҲp
                                                                          / i

where pi is the path from leaf node mi to the root of T . Similarly, we can get the joint density of
v1вҖІ , . . . , vK
               вҖІ
                 as

p v1вҖІ = v1 , . . . , vK
                      вҖІ

                        = vK


                                                            15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



          Y                                                 Y
                 p vjвҖІ = vj |v1 = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1
                                                вҖІ
                                                              p vjвҖІ = vj |v1 = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1
                                                                                             вҖІ

      =                                             = vjвҲ’1 В·                                     = vjвҲ’1 .
          jвҲҲpi                                                 j вҲҲp
                                                                 / i
                                   вҖІ
Therefore, let M(S) and M(S ) be the distributions of the output values of the nodes on the neigh-
boring datasets S and S вҖІ , we have (with a little bit of abuse of notations)
                                        Z Y
                     вҖІ
                                1                                                           1вҲ’Оұ
   DОұ M(S)||M(S ) =                 log           p vj = vj |v1 = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1 = vjвҲ’1
                             ОұвҲ’1         V jвҲҲp
                                                i
                                                   Y                                              1вҲ’Оұ
                                                Г—       p vj = vj |v1 = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1 = vjвҲ’1
                                                     j вҲҲp
                                                       / i
                                                     Y                                                     Оұ
                                                 Г—           p vjвҖІ = vj |v1вҖІ = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1
                                                                                             вҖІ
                                                                                                 = vjвҲ’1
                                                     jвҲҲpi
                                                     Y                                                     Оұ
                                                 Г—           p vjвҖІ = vj |v1вҖІ = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1
                                                                                             вҖІ
                                                                                                 = vjвҲ’1        dv.
                                                     j вҲҲp
                                                       / i

Since for j вҲҲ
            / pi , we have
          p vj = vj |v1 = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1 = vjвҲ’1 = p vjвҖІ = vj |v1вҖІ = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1
                                                                                     вҖІ

                                                                                         = vjвҲ’1 ,
we can integrate over vj for j вҲҲ
                               / pi to obtain
                                       Z Y
                               1                                                           1вҲ’Оұ
  DОұ M(S)||M(S вҖІ ) =

                                   log          p vj = vj |v1 = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1 = vjвҲ’1
                            ОұвҲ’1         V jвҲҲp
                                              i
                                                 Y                                              Оұ
                                              Г—      p vjвҖІ = vj |v1вҖІ = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1
                                                                                     вҖІ
                                                                                         = vjвҲ’1 dv.
                                                     jвҲҲpi
                                                                                                                (B.1)
Notice that each node along the path pi is a summation query and will only be affected by its
leaf nodes. Therefore, the sensitivity of each node along this path is upper bounded by 2ПҲ where
ПҲ = max{ПҲ1 , . . . , ПҲj } and ПҲ1 , . . . , ПҲj is the norm bound of its leaf nodes. As a result, according
to Lemma 2.6, line 11 in Algorithm 3 can ensure that each node along path pi is (Оұ, Оұ/П„ 2 )-RDP
for all i вҲҲ [N ] (recall the definition of Пғ 2 = П„ 2 ПҲ 2 in Algorithm 1). Therefore, for each integral in
(B.1), we have
    Z
                                                      1вҲ’Оұ                                            Оұ
         p vj = vj |v1 = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1 = vjвҲ’1         p vjвҖІ = vj |v1вҖІ = v1 , . . . , vjвҲ’1
                                                                                          вҖІ
                                                                                              = vjвҲ’1 dvj
     Vj

          вүӨ exp Оұ(Оұ вҲ’ 1)/(2П„ 2 ) .


Plugging the above result into (B.1), we can obtain
                                                    Y
                                  вҖІ
                                           1                             kОұ
               DОұ M(S)||M(S ) вүӨ                log      exp(Оұ(Оұ вҲ’ 1)/2) вүӨ 2 ,
                                        ОұвҲ’1         jвҲҲp
                                                                         2П„
                                                                i

where k = вҢҲlog2 N вҢү + 1. Thus, we show that the tree aggregation protocol is (Оұ, Оұk/П„ 2 )-RDP.
Therefore, wN is (Оұ, ОұПҒ)-RDP, where ПҒ = k/П„ 2 .

                                                       p wN is (Пө, Оҙ)-DP with Пө = ОұПҒ +
Next, we translate the RDP to DP. According to Lemma B.1,
log(1/Оҙ)/(Оұ вҲ’ 1). Therefore, we can choose Оұ = 1 + log(1/Оҙ)/ПҒ to get the smallest Пө =
     p                                     p                  p      2
ПҒ + 2 log(1/Оҙ)ПҒ. Thus, we can obtain ПҒ =     log(1/Оҙ) + Пө вҲ’ log(1/Оҙ) = k/П„ 2 . Therefore,
let

                                 2   k    4k log(1/Оҙ) + Пө
                               П„ = вүӨ                        ,
                                     ПҒ           Пө2
the tree aggregation protocol is (Пө, Оҙ)-DP.
                             вҲ’1
Next, we show that {lt }N  t=0 is differentially
                                         p        private. According to Lemma 2.3 in Karwa &
Vadhan
   p    (2017),  if we   choose Пө
                                e   =  Пө/  8N   log(2/Оҙ)  and Оҙe = Оҙ/(2N ), then Algorithm 2 is
(Пө/ 8N log(2/Оҙ), Оҙ/(2N ))-DP. Therefore, by the advanced composition result (Kairouz et al.,
                           вҲ’1
2015), we have that {lt }N
                         t=0 is (Пө, Оҙ)-DP.


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2     P ROOFS OF U TILITY G UARANTEES
B.2.1     U PPER BOUNDS ON THE STOCHASTIC GRADIENT
To establish the utility guarantee of Algorithm 1, we will first show that the event E = xt xвҠӨ

                                                                                              t wt вҲ’
xt yt ОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ ПҲt , вҲҖ0 вүӨ t вүӨ N вҲ’ 1 holds with high probability, where ПҲt = Clt , lt is the output
                               p
of Algorithm 2, and C = 3 2Оі1 Оі4 tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H) log N . Therefore, under the event E, we do not
need to perform any clipping procedure, and line 5 in Algorithm 1 reduces to gt = xt xвҠӨ  t wt вҲ’ xt yt .
Therefore, we can directly use the learning guarantee results derived in the next subsection, i.e.,
section B.2.2. To prove the event E holds, we need following lemmas
Lemma B.2. Under Assumption 2.2, we have
        вҖў (Bounded norm) There exist positive constants Оі1 = 2Пғz2 , such that for any PSD matrix ОЈ,
          the following holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ c1 ОІ
                                           1    2
                                     ОЈвҲ’ 2 x 2 вүӨ Оі1 tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H) log(1/ОІ),
          where c1 is an absolute constant.
        вҖў (Bounded product) There exist positive constants Оі2 = Пғz2 , such that for any fixed vector
          v, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ c2 ОІ
                                          вҹЁx, vвҹ©2 вүӨ Оі2 vвҠӨ Hv log(1/ОІ),
          where c2 is an absolute constant.
In addition, under Assumption 2.3, we have
      вҖў (Bounded noise) There exists positive constant Оі3 = ПғО¶2 , such that the following holds with
         probability at least 1 вҲ’ c3 ОІ
                                            О¶ 2 вүӨ Оі3 log(1/ОІ),
         where c3 is an absolute constant.
Lemma B.3. For Algorithm 2 with option 1, if we have m = в„Ұ(log N ), then we have l2 вүҘ вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’
wвҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2 holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 1/N 10 . Algorithm 2 with option 2 is (e    Пө, Оҙ)-DP.
                                                                                              e
In addition, if we have m = в„Ұ ОІ1 log(ОІ2 /Оҙ) e log N/e Пө), then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 1/ОІ2 ,
   вҲ—       2     2     2          вҲ—     2      2

вҲҘw вҲ’ wвҲҘH + ПғО¶ вүӨ l вүӨ 2 вҲҘw вҲ’ wвҲҘH + ПғО¶ .

Now we are ready to prove the results. We have
                            вҲҘxt xвҠӨ
                                 t wt вҲ’ xt yt вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ вҲҘxt вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 В· в„“
                                                                      1/2
                                                                          (wt ; xi , yi ).
                                     2                 вҲ’1
By Lemma B.2, we have вҲҘxt вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ Оі1 tr(ОЈ H) log(1/ОІ) holds with high probability. In addi-
tion, we have
                                                                  q
                в„“1/2 (wt ; xt , yt ) = xвҠӨ             вҲ—
                                                                    2 xвҠӨ              вҲ— 2 + 2О¶ 2 .

                                         t  (wt  вҲ’  w   ) + О¶ t вүӨ       t (wt вҲ’ w )           t
According to Lemma B.2, we have with high probability
                                              вҲ— 2
                                xвҠӨ                   вүӨ Оі2 log(1/ОІ)вҲҘwt вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2H .

                                  t (wt вҲ’ w )
Additionally, due to Lemma B.2, we have with high probability
                                                О¶t2 вүӨ Оі3 log(1/ОІ).
Therefore, we have
                             q                                    q
      в„“1/2 (wt ; xt , yt ) вүӨ 2 xвҠӨ                вҲ— ) 2 + 2О¶ 2 вүӨ     2Оі4 log(1/ОІ) вҲҘwt вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2 ,

                                     t (w t вҲ’ w             t

where Оі4 = max{Оі2 , 1}. Next, we need to estimate the upper bound of вҲҘwt вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2 at each
iteration. To this end, we propose to use Algorithm 2. Thus, according to Lemma B.3, we have with
high probability вҲҘwt вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2 вүӨ lt2 . As a result, we have
        вҲҘxt xвҠӨ             2          2
             t wt вҲ’ xt yt вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ вҲҘxt вҲҘОЈвҲ’1 В· в„“(wt ; xi , yi )
                                вүӨ Оі1 tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H) log(1/ОІ) В· 2Оі4 log(1/ОІ) вҲҘwt вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2


                                вүӨ 2lt2 Оі1 Оі4 log2 (1/ОІ) tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H).
Thus, if we choose C 2 = 2Оі1 Оі4 log2 (1/ОІ) tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H), set ОІ = 1/N 3 , by union bound, the event E
holds with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 1/N .


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2.2    L EARNING GUARANTEES
Connection between DP-SGD and DP-FTRL. Next, we will establish the connection between
Algorithm 1 and DP-SGD, and thus use the technique developed in Zou et al. (Zou et al., 2021b).
According to line 9 in Algorithm 1, we have
                                                                   1
                                 wt+1 = argminвҹЁe
                                               gвүӨt , wвҹ© +            вҲҘwвҲҘ22 ,                    (B.2)
                                                w                 2О·
       eвүӨt is the differentially private estimate of ti=0 вҲҮв„“(wi ; xi , yi ) generated by the tree ag-
                                                       P
where g
gregation protocol (see Algorithm 3). It has been observed (Kairouz et al., 2021) that g      eвүӨt =
Pt
   i=0 вҲҮв„“(wi ; xi , yi ) + ОҪt , where ОҪt is a combination of at most O вҢҲlog2 tвҢү independent random
Gaussian vectors. Plugging this form in to (B.2), we have
                                      t
                                      X                                            1
                  wt+1 = argmin             вҹЁвҲҮв„“(wi ; xi , yi ), wвҹ© + вҹЁОҪt , wвҹ© +      вҲҘwвҲҘ22 .    (B.3)
                                 w
                                      i=0
                                                                                  2О·

Since w0 = 0, we can obtain
                                 wt+1 = wt вҲ’ О· В· [вҲҮв„“(wt ; xi , yi ) + Оҫt ],                     (B.4)
where Оҫt = ОҪt вҲ’ ОҪtвҲ’1 , ОҪвҲ’1 = 0. According to (B.4), we have the update rule of DP-FTRL as
             wt+1 = wt вҲ’ О· В· [вҲҮв„“(wt ; xi , yi ) + Оҫt ] = wt вҲ’ О· В· [xi xвҠӨ
                                                                       i wt вҲ’ xi yi + Оҫt ]

where Оҫt = ОҪt вҲ’ ОҪtвҲ’1 , ОҪвҲ’1 = 0. In addition, we have y = вҹЁwвҲ— , xвҹ© + Пө. As a result, we can perform
a similar bias-variance decomposition in Zou et al. (Zou et al., 2021b). Note that we will focus on
the outer product of the error vector wt вҲ’ wвҲ— :
                               Errt := EAlg (wt вҲ’ wвҲ— )(wt вҲ’ wвҲ— )вҠӨ .


Besides, we also introduce the following tensor operations on the matrix space that will be repeatedly
applied in the theoretical analysis:
Definition B.4. Given stepsize О· вүІ 1/ tr(H), we define

                              I = I вҠ— I, M = E[xвҠ—4 ], M
                                                      f = H вҠ— H.

Besides, given any PSD matrix A, we define the operators T and Te that satisfies

   (I вҲ’ О·T ) в—Ұ A = E[(I вҲ’ О·xxвҠӨ )A(I вҲ’ О·xxвҠӨ )], (I вҲ’ О· Te ) в—Ұ A = E[(I вҲ’ О·H)A(I вҲ’ О·H)].
Then it can be also verified that
                         (I вҲ’ О·T ) в—Ұ A = (I вҲ’ О· Te ) в—Ұ A + (M вҲ’ M)
                                                                f в—Ұ A.

Based on the above tensor operations, the following theorem provides the bias-variance decomposi-
tion of Errt as well as their updated forms.
Theorem B.5. Under Assumptions 2.1 and 2.3, let ОІ = 16Пғz2 , the error covariance Errt can be
decomposed as follows,
                                              Errt = Bt + Ct ,
where
Bt = (I вҲ’ О·T ) в—Ұ BtвҲ’1 ,     B0 = (w0 вҲ’ wвҲ— )(w0 вҲ’ wвҲ— )вҠӨ ;
Ct = (I вҲ’ О·T ) в—Ұ CtвҲ’1 + О· 2 Gt ,        C0 = 0, Gt вӘҜ ПғО¶2 H + O E ПҲ(t)2 + ПҲ(t)4 П„ 2 log2 N ОЈ + D,


where
                          X
D вӘҜ O П„ 2 log2 N              (I вҲ’ О· Te )tвҲ’j+1 в—Ұ ОЈ + O(О·ОІ log2 N ) В· tr(HОЈ) В· I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N ,


                        jвҲҲS(t)

S(t) is a index set with |S(t)| вүӨ вҢҲlog2 N вҢү + 1.


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, we will establish the guarantee on the excess risk E[LD (wМ„)] вҲ’ LD (wвҲ— ). In particular, this
will be performed based on the update forms of bias covariance Bt and variance covariance Ct in
Theorem B.5. First, note that we consider the iterate average as the algorithm output, the following
lemma provides the bound on the excess risk:
                                                                              PN вҲ’1
Lemma B.6 (Lemma B.3 in Zou et al. (Zou et al., 2021b)). Let wМ„N = 1/N t=0 wt , then if the
stepsize satisfies О· вүӨ 1/О»1 (H), we have
                                N вҲ’1 N вҲ’1                             N вҲ’1 N вҲ’1
                              1 X X                                1 X X
E[LD (wМ„N )] вҲ’ LD (wвҲ— ) вүӨ                 вҹЁ(I вҲ’ ОіH) kвҲ’t
                                                        H, Bt вҹ© +              вҹЁ(I вҲ’ ОіH)kвҲ’t H, Ct вҹ© .
                            N 2 t=0                               N 2 t=0
                                     k=t                                   k=t
                            |                {z              } |                  {z             }
                                             bias                               variance


Upper bound for the variance error. The key to proving the upper bound of the variance error is
to establish a sharp characterization of Ct . Recall the update rule of Ct :
                            Ct = (I вҲ’ О·T ) в—Ұ CtвҲ’1 + О· 2 Gt ,          C0 = 0.
Then, we would like to remark that although the above update rule is similar to that of the standard
SGD, the proof technique in Zou et al. (Zou et al., 2021b) cannot be applied. In particular, Zou
et al. (Zou et al., 2021b) first proves an upper bound for CвҲһ and uses this quantity to control the
update of Ct . However, when introducing the additive noise, the matrix Gt will no longer be well
aligned with H so that CвҲһ will explode (e.g., becoming HвҲ’1 ОЈ). To this end, rather than leveraging
CвҲһ as a reference to control the dynamics of Ct , we consider to use a sharper reference CN . The
following lemma gives a вҖңroughвҖқ bound on CN .
Lemma B.7. Let G be an union upper  bound on G0 , . . . , GN вҲ’1 , then under Assumption 2.1, if the
step size satisfies О· вүІ 1/ tr(H) log N , let ОІ = 16Пғz4 , it holds that
                                    ОІО· 2
                                             В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , Gвҹ© В· I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N

            C0 вӘҜ В· В· В· вӘҜ CN вӘҜ
                                1 вҲ’ ОІО· tr(H)
                                           N
                                           X вҲ’1
                                  + О·2 В·          (I вҲ’ О· Te )t в—Ұ G.
                                           t=0


Given this rough bound of Ct for all t вүӨ N , we can then get the following bound on the variance
error.
Lemma B.8. If the step size satisfies О· вүІ 1/ tr(H) log N , then let ОІ = 16Пғz2 , the following holds

for any k вүҘ 1,
               ОІО·                                       X         1
   variance вүІ     В· вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , GМ„вҹ© В· k + N 2 О· 2   О»2i +      В· вҹЁHвҲ’1       2 2
                                                                         0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , GМ„вҹ©,
               N                                                 N
                                                             i>k

where
                    GМ„ = ПғО¶2 В· H + П„ 2 ОІ В· (log2 N )2 О· tr(HОЈ) В· I0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ


                            + E ПҲ(N )2 + ПҲ(N )4 + 1 В· П„ 2 В· log2 N В· ОЈ.



Upper bound for the bias error. By Lemma B.11 in Zou et al. (Zou et al., 2021b), the upper
bound on the bias error can be directly obtained, which is summarized in the following lemma.
Lemma B.9. If the step size satisfies О· вүӨ 1/О»1 , then it holds that for any k вүҘ 1,
                   1
        bias вүӨ          В· вҲҘw0 вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2HвҲ’1 + вҲҘw0 вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2Hk:вҲһ
                 О·2 N 2               0:k

                      2ОІ вҲҘw0 вҲ’ w вҲҘI0:k + N О·вҲҘw0 вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2Hk:вҲһ
                                  вҲ— 2

                                                                k        X
                                                                       2
                   +                                         В·    + NО·    О»2i .               (B.5)
                                 N О·(1 вҲ’ ОІО· tr(H))              N
                                                                                i>k


B.3     P ROOFS FOR C OROLLARIES
In this section, we provide proofs of our corollaries.


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3.1     P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 4.3
Proof of Corollary 4.3. In addition, according to Lemma B.8, we have
              ОІО·                                        X         1
  variance вүӨ     В· вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , GМ„вҹ© В· (k + N 2 О· 2   О»2i ) +   В· вҹЁHвҲ’1     2 2
                                                                        0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , GМ„вҹ©,
              N                                                   N
                                                                   i>k

where k вүҘ 1, and
                       GМ„ = ПғО¶2 В· H + П„ 2 ОІ В· (log2 N )2 О· tr(HОЈ) В· I0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ


                               + E ПҲ(N )2 + ПҲ(N )4 + 1 В· П„ 2 В· log2 N В· ОЈ.


and ПҲ(N )2 = 18lОі1 Оі4 log2 (N ) tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H), l = max{l02 , l12 , . . . , lN
                                                                        2
                                                                          вҲ’1 }. Therefore, we can get
(ignore some constant parameters)
              GМ„ вӘҜ O(polylog(N )) В· ПғО¶2 H + П„ 2 О· tr(HОЈ)I + l2 П„ 2 tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H)2 ОЈ


                 вӘҜ O(polylog(N )) В· ПғО¶2 H + П„ 2 I + l2 П„ 2 tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H)2 ОЈ ,


where the second line comes from О· вүӨ 1/(ОІ tr(HОЈ)). As a result, we have
             ОІО·                                             X           1
variance вүІ      В· вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , ПғО¶2 Hвҹ© В· (k + N 2 О· 2       О»2i ) +   В· вҹЁHвҲ’1      2 2       2
                                                                              0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , ПғО¶ Hвҹ©
             N                                                          N
                                                            i>k
                  ОІО·                                                                  X
              +       В· вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , П„ 2 I + l2 П„ 2 tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H)2 ОЈвҹ© В· (k + N 2 О· 2   О»2i )
                  N
                                                                                            i>k
                 1
               +   В· вҹЁHвҲ’1     2 2        2     2 2
                       0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , П„ I + l П„ tr(ОЈ
                                                      вҲ’1
                                                         H)2 ОЈвҹ©.                                      (B.6)
                 N
Note that the first line on the right hand side corresponds to the nonprivate variance and the re-
maining part corresponds
                            to the
                                  error introduced by the private mechanism. Note that we have
        4 вҢҲlog N вҢү+1     log(1/Оҙ)+Пө
П„2 вүӨ        2
                  Пө2             . When Пө goes to infinity, which means we do not have any privacy
guarantee, then the variance error reduces to the non-private one. In the following discussion, we
assume ОІ = 16Пғz2 = O(1), tr(H) вүӨ ПҒ1 and О»1 вүӨ 1, where ПҒ1 = Оҳ(1), and we mainly focus on the
error introduced by the private mechanism, denoted by as it will dominate the non-private part (note
that H вӘҜ I).
First, we consider the nonprivate part. According to (B.6), noting that ОІ is in the constant order, we
have
               О·                                           X          1
variancenp вүІ     В· вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , ПғО¶2 Hвҹ© В· (k + N 2 О· 2    О»2i ) +   В· вҹЁHвҲ’1        2 2           2
                                                                              0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , ПғО¶ Hвҹ©.
              N                                                       N
                                                                    i>k
                                                                                                      (B.7)
               вҲ—
Then we set k = max{k : О»k вүҘ 1/(N О·)}, we have I0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ вӘҜ I and then
                            ПғО¶2 О·                          X          ПғО¶2                  X
            variancenp вүІ          В· tr(H) В· (k вҲ— + N 2 О· 2    О»2i ) +     В· (k вҲ— + N 2 О· 2    О»2i )
                             N                              вҲ—
                                                                      N                     вҲ—
                                                             i>k                         i>k
                           ПғО¶2                  X
                         вүІ     В· (k вҲ— + N 2 О· 2    О»2i ),
                           N                     вҲ—
                                               i>k

where we use the fact that О· tr(H) вүӨ 1 in the last inequality.
In addition, according to (B.5) and the assumption that вҲҘw0 вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2 вүӨ B, it holds that
                                            2 B 2 + N О·О»kвҲ— +1 B 2

                     B2          2                                    kвҲ—      2
                                                                                 X
          bias вүІ 2 2        + B О»kвҲ— +1 +                           В·     + NО·         О»2i
                 О· N О»kвҲ—                      N О·(1 вҲ’ О· tr(H))        N             вҲ—
                                                                                i>k
                  B2      B2
                                              X
               вүІ      +       В· kвҲ— + N 2 О·2        О»2i
                 N О· N 2О·                        вҲ—i>k


                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 B2   B2
                                   X
                             вҲ—
               вүІ    +     В· k + NО·    О»i ,                                                                   (B.8)
                 N О· N 2О·           вҲ—            i>k

where the last line is due to the fact that О»i вүӨ 1/(N О·) for all i > k вҲ— .
Combining (B.7) and (B.8), we have
                      ПғО¶2                           B2   B2
                                         X                             X
                              вҲ—     2 2       2                  вҲ—
              errnp вүІ     В· (k + N О·         О»i ) +    +     В· k + NО·      О»i                                (B.9)
                      N                             N О· N 2О·
                                        i>kвҲ—                          i>kвҲ—
                                2
                      B2        ПғО¶    B2
                                                         X
                    вүӮ       +      + 2       В· kвҲ— + N О·     О»i .                                            (B.10)
                      NО·        N     N О·                 вҲ—          i>k

On the other hand, according to (B.6), we have
                      l2 П„ 2
                                                                      X
                                     вҲ—                     вҲ—     2 2
                                                                           О»2i

        variancep вүІ          В· О· В· k + N О· tr(HkвҲ— :вҲһ ) В· k + N О·
                       N                                                 вҲ—
                                                                     i>k

                               + tr(HвҲ’1          2 2

                                       0:kвҲ— ) + N О· tr(Hk :вҲһ )
                                                         вҲ—



                         l2 П„ 2
                                               X  2                  X
                     вүІ          В· О· В· kвҲ— + N О·    О»i + N О· k вҲ— + N О·    О»i ,                                (B.11)
                          N                     вҲ—                     вҲ—
                                                    i>k                                 i>k
                                                     PkвҲ— вҲ’1
where the second inequality holds since tr(HвҲ’1
                                            0:kвҲ— ) =  i=1 О»i вүӨ N О· В· k вҲ— . Further note that we
have assumed О· вүӨ 1/ tr(H), thus
                                        X            X
                              kвҲ— + N О·      О»i вүӨ N О·    О»i вүӨ N.                          (B.12)
                                               i>kвҲ—                 i

Therefore, (B.11) becomes
                                                                X
                               variancep вүІ l2 П„ 2 О· В· k вҲ— + N О·  О»i .
                                                                           i>kвҲ—

Combine the above result with (B.11), we can get that
        errp вүІ errnp + variancep
                        2
               B2       ПғО¶    B2
                                             X                         X
                                      вҲ—                2 2     вҲ—
             вүІ      +      + 2     В· k + NО·      О»i + l П„ О· В· k + N О·      О»i .
               NО·       N    N О·
                                            i>kвҲ—                      i>kвҲ—
               |                 {z                } |           {z          }
                             Non-private error component                          Private error component

This completes the proof.

B.3.2    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 4.4
                                                                                              1
Proof of Corollary 4.4. If О»i = iвҲ’r , we can immediately get that k вҲ— = (N О·) r and
                               X                1              1вҲ’r          1
                     kвҲ— + N О·        О»i вүӮ (N О·) r + N О· В· (N О·) r вүӮ (N О·) r .
                                   i>kвҲ—

Therefore, we can get
                                   ПғО¶2   B2                         B2

                                                                1                         1
                      errp вүІ           + 2          В· (N О·) r +        + l2 П„ 2 О· В· (N О·) r .
                                   N    N О·                         NО·
Note that we can choose the following step size

                                              1       1+r       2r
                                           вҲ’ 1+r    вҲ’ 1+2r   вҲ’ 1+2r
                              О· вүӮ min N          ,N        П„          ,


                                                           21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we can get
                                               r                            r
                     errp вүІ ПғО¶2 + B 2 ) В· N вҲ’ 1+r + (B 2 + l2 В· (П„ вҲ’2 N )вҲ’ 1+2r .


Therefore, we have
                                        r       2r       r

                                 e N вҲ’ 1+r
                          errp = O         + П„ 1+2r N вҲ’ 1+2r
                                                                r
                                                               1+2r
                                        r                  r
                                     вҲ’ 1+r           2
                               =O N
                                 e         В· 1+ П„ N      1+r           .

Note that П„ 2 = O(1/Пө
                  e      2
                           ). Therefore,
                                         to achive the nonprivate rate, we need to pay for the extra
                                    r
privacy at the order of Пө = O e N 2+2r .

If О»i = eвҲ’i , we can get k вҲ— = log(N О·) and then
                                X
                     kвҲ— + N О·      О»i вүӮ log(N О·) + N О· В· (N О·)вҲ’1 вүӮ log(N О·).
                               i>kвҲ—

Then, the excess risk bound becomes
                             2
                             ПғО¶   B2                  B2

                    errp вүІ      + 2      В· log(N О·) +    + l2 П„ 2 О· В· log(N О·)
                              N   N О·                 NО·
                           ПғО¶2   B2
                         вүІ     +    + l2 П„ 2 О·.
                           N     NО·
Then we can choose the following step size
                                      О· вүӮ min 1, (N П„ 2 )вҲ’1/2 ,


and obtain

                              1
                     errp вүІ     + (П„ вҲ’2 N )вҲ’1/2 = O
                                                  e N вҲ’1 1 + (ПөвҲ’2 N )1/2 ,
                              N

where we use the fact that П„ 2 = O(1/Пө)
                                 e      in the last equality. This completes the proof.

B.3.3   P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 4.5
Proof of Corollary 4.5. In this case, we consider the following design of ОЈ:

                                      ОЈ = M вҲ’1 (X
                                                eXe вҠӨ + О»I).

Then we first give the following two useful lemmas.
                                                                                    P
Lemma B.10. Under Assumption 2.2, let denote b      k := mink {k : О»k+1 M вүӨ О» + i>k О»i } and
set ОЈ = M вҲ’1 (О»I + X   eXe вҠӨ ) for some positive constant О» > 0, then with probability at least 1 вҲ’
exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(M )),
                                                 P
                                             О» + j>bk О»j X M О»i

                                вҖ 
                           tr(ОЈ H) вүІ k В· b                 +            .
                                                   О»               О»
                                                              i>b
                                                                k

Lemma B.11. Let H = i О»i vi viвҠӨ be the eigen-decomposition of H, then for any PSD matrix A
                         P

that can be decomposed as A = i Вөi vi viвҠӨ , we have with probability at least 1вҲ’exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(M 1/2 )),
                             P

                                             О»
                                  tr(AОЈ) вүІ     tr(A) + tr(AH).
                                             M

By Lemma B.8, we have
     GМ„ вүӨ O polylog(N ) В· ПғО¶2 H + П„ 2 О· tr(HОЈ) В· (I0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ ) + l2 П„ 2 tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H)2 ОЈ .


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that the design of the noise covariance matrix ОЈ does not affect the non-private error compo-
nent, we only need to consider the private error component. In particular, we have
variancep
  l2 П„ 2
                                                                          X
                         2                                            2 2
вүІ         В· tr(HОЈ) В· О· В· вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , I0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ вҹ© В· k + N О·          О»2i
   N
                                                                          i>k

     + О· В· вҹЁHвҲ’1          2 2
                 0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , I0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ вҹ©

         l2 П„ 2
                                                                  X
                      вҲ’1    2                                 2 2       2           вҲ’1 2 2
     +          В· tr(ОЈ H) В· О· В· вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , ОЈвҹ© В· k + N О·         О»i + вҹЁH0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , ОЈвҹ©
           N
                                                                  i>k

  l2 П„ 2
                                       X  2           X                X
вүӮ         В· tr(HОЈ) В· О· 2 В· k + N 2 О· 2     О»2i +О·В·        О»вҲ’1
                                                           i  + N  3 3
                                                                    О·      О»2i
   N
                                       i>k            iвүӨk              i>k
                       |                          {z                              }
                                                      I1
         2 2
                                                           X
       l П„       вҲ’1 2                                  2 2      2     вҲ’1     2 2
     +     В· tr(ОЈ H) В· О· В· вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , ОЈвҹ© В· k + N О·      О»i + вҹЁH0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , ОЈвҹ© .
        N
                                                           i>k
                      |                                 {z                               }
                                                                            I2
                                вҲ—
Regarding I1 , we can again set k = max{k : О»k вүҘ 1/(N О·)}, then
                          X  2                      X                     X
          2      вҲ—                     2     вҲ—                   2   вҲ—
   I1 вүӨ О· В· k + N О·           О»i + N О· В· k + N О·         О»i вүІ N О· k + N О·  О»i ,
                         i>kвҲ—                                    i>kвҲ—                     i>kвҲ—

where the second inequality is by (B.12). Regarding I2 , two quantities demand to be characterized:
вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , ОЈвҹ© and вҹЁHвҲ’1        2 2
                             0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , ОЈвҹ©. Then by Lemma B.11, we have with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(M 1/2 )), it holds that
                                      О»
            вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , ОЈвҹ© вүІ      tr(I0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ ) + вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , Hвҹ©
                                      M
                                      О»            X   X                   X
                                    =   В· k + NО·      О»i +        О»i + N О·   О»2i .
                                      M
                                                           i>k            iвүӨk     i>k

Besides, we have
                                   О»
       вҹЁHвҲ’1     2 2
         0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , ОЈвҹ© вүІ       tr(HвҲ’1 + N 2 О· 2 Hk:вҲһ ) + вҹЁHвҲ’1     2 2
                                                                 0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , Hвҹ©
                                   M   0:k
                                   О»    X                 X                   X
                                 =   В·     О»вҲ’1
                                            i  +  N   2 2
                                                       О·     О»i + k + N 2 О· 2   О»2i .
                                   M
                                           iвүӨk                      i>k                 i>k

Then, letting О» = NMО· and setting k = k вҲ— , using the fact that N О·                                 2
                                                                                         P
         P           P                                                                        i>kвҲ— О»    вүӨ
N О·О»kвҲ— +1 i>kвҲ— О»i вүҘ i>kвҲ— О»i , we further get that
                                                         X
                                           1
                  вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , ОЈвҹ© вүІ       В· k + NО·      О»i + tr(H);
                                          NО·
                                                        i>kвҲ—
                                                  X
               вҹЁHвҲ’1       2 2
                  0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , ОЈвҹ© вүІ k + N О·      .
                                                            i>kвҲ—

Therefore, we can finally get the following bound for I2 ,
                    1
                                     X  2                                X
             I2 вүІ     В· kвҲ— + N О·          О»i + (О· tr(H) + 1) В· k вҲ— + N О·    О»i .
                   N                    вҲ—                                 вҲ—
                                    i>k                                          i>k

Applying the fact that О· вүӨ tr(H) and (B.12), we have
                                                    X
                                     I2 вүІ k вҲ— + N О·   О»i .
                                                           i>kвҲ—


                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining the results for I1 and I2 , we can finally get the following upper bound for variancep :
                                              X   l2 П„ 2                                  X
              2 2 2                  вҲ—                                 вҲ’1   2    вҲ—
 variancep вүІ l П„ О· В· tr(HОЈ) В· k + N О·              О»i +          В· tr(ОЈ H) В· k + N О·           О»i .
                                                 вҲ—
                                                            N                                вҲ—
                                                    i>k                                           i>k

Furthermore, by the assumption that M вүҘ N and using our choice О» = M/(N О·) вүҘ 1/О· вүҘ tr(H),
we can get the following by Lemma B.10

                          О» + tr(H) X M О»i                 X                  X
        tr(ОЈ2 H) вүІ b   kВ·           +           вүІb k + NО·      О»i вүІ k вҲ— + N О·    О»i ,
                              О»           О»                                    вҲ—
                                              i>b
                                                k                               i>b
                                                                                  k         i>k
                                           P
where bk := mink {k : О»k+1 M вүӨ О»+ i>k О»i } and the last inequality holds since О»i вүӮ 1/N О· for all
i вҲҲ [k вҲ— , b           k, k вҲ— ]). Besides, we also get the following by Lemma B.11: with probability at
           k] (or i вҲҲ [b
least 1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(M 1/2 )), it holds that tr(HОЈ) вүІ 1/(N О·) tr(H) + tr(H2 ) вүІ tr(H2 ). Therefore,
we can finally get the following bound for variancep :
                                                           X           1
                                                                                    X  3
                        2 2        2       2      вҲ—                         вҲ—
       variancep вүІ l П„ В· О· В· tr(H ) В· k + N О·                    О»i +    В· k + NО·        О»i   .
                                                               вҲ—
                                                                       N               вҲ—
                                                               i>k                        i>k

Combining with the non-private error results in (B.9), we can finally obtain
        errp вүІ errnp + variancep
                        2
               B2       ПғО¶    B2
                                             X
                                      вҲ—
             вүІ      +      + 2     В· k + NО·      О»i
               NО·       N    N О·
                                            i>kвҲ—
               |                 {z                 }
                            Non-private error component
                                                        X        1
                                                                               X  3
                  + l2 П„ 2 В· О· 2 В· tr(H2 ) В· k вҲ— + N О·      О»i +   В· kвҲ— + N О·      О»i   .
                                                                 N
                                                       i>kвҲ—                   i>kвҲ—
                    |                                    {z                           }
                                                      Private error component


B.3.4    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 4.6
                                                                                      1
Proof of Corollary 4.6. If О»i = iвҲ’r , we can immediately get k вҲ— = (N О·) r and
                               X                1              1вҲ’r          1
                     kвҲ— + N О·        О»i вүӮ (N О·) r + N О· В· (N О·) r вүӮ (N О·) r .
                                    i>kвҲ—

Therefore, we can get
               2
               ПғО¶     B2                B2

                                    1                                       1   1         1
     errp вүІ       + 2       В· (N О·) r +    + l2 П„ 2 В· О· 2 В· tr(H2 ) В· (N О·) r +   В· (N О·) r .
               N      N О·               NО·                                      N
Then, assuming ПғО¶2 , B 2 , l2 , and tr(H2 ) are constants, we further obtain
                                             1
                                 1     (N О·) r                     1   1          3
                    errp вүІ          +          + П„ 2 В· О· 2 В· (N О·) r +    В· (N О·) r .
                                NО·       N                             N
Therefore, we can pick

                                     1         2r      3         2r      1+r
                        О· вүӮ min N вҲ’ 1+r , П„ вҲ’ r+3 N вҲ’ r+3 , П„ вҲ’ 1+3r N вҲ’ 1+3r ,

and obtain the following bound of errp ,
                                r                     r                     2r
                  errp вүІ N вҲ’ 1+r + (П„ вҲ’2 N )вҲ’ 3+r + (П„ вҲ’1 N )вҲ’ 1+3r
                                     h                   r
                                                        3+r                r
                                                                          1+3r i
                                  r                2                rвҲ’1
                               вҲ’ 1+r        вҲ’2                   вҲ’2
                       =O N
                         e             1+ Пө N     1+r       + Пө N   1+r          ,


                                                          24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we use the fact that П„ 2 = O(Пө
                                   e вҲ’2 ).
If О»i = eвҲ’i , then we can get k вҲ— + N О· i>kвҲ— О»i вүӮ log(N ), then
                                        P

                                            1               1
                                   errp вүІ     + П„ 2 В· О·2 +      .
                                           NО·              N
Picking the stepsize

                                                       2 вҲ’1/3     1
                                   О· вүӮ min 1, (N П„ )            , 2 2 ,
                                                                 N П„

applying the fact that П„ 2 = O(Пө
                             e вҲ’2 ), we can then get

                        1                                                    1
             errp вүІ                                         e N вҲ’1 1 + ПөвҲ’2 N 3
                          + (П„ вҲ’2 N 2 )вҲ’1/3 + (N П„ вҲ’2 )вҲ’1 = O                     .
                        N



B.4    P ROOFS OF T HEOREM B.5
In this section, we provide the proof of Theorem B.5.

Properties of the additive noises Оҫt . Recall that we have
                                wt+1 = wt вҲ’ О· В· [xi xвҠӨ
                                                     i wt вҲ’ xi yi + Оҫt ]                        (B.13)
where Оҫt = ОҪt вҲ’ ОҪtвҲ’1 , ОҪвҲ’1 = 0. According to Algorithm 3,        Pwe have that Оҫt is a combination
of at most вҢҲlog2 t + 1вҢү random Gaussian vectors, i.e., Оҫt =        kвҲҲK(t) ПҲ(k)zk , where K(t) is an
index set and K(t) = {2QвҲ’1 , 2QвҲ’1 + 2QвҲ’2 , . . . , 2QвҲ’1 + 2QвҲ’2 + В· В· В· + 20 } when t = 2Q with
Q вҲҲ N. When t вҲҲ (2QвҲ’1 , 2Q ), K(t) consists of at most (вҢҲlog2 tвҢү + 1) terms staring from 2QвҲ’1 to
t. ПҲ(k) = max{ПҲ1 , . . . , ПҲk }, and zk вҲј N (0, П„ 2 ОЈ). The reason that we use the indexed zk is that
Оҫt and Оҫj may have the same zk , and the index will help us in the analysis. In addition, consider Оҫt
and Оҫj , where j < t and j вҲҲ/ K(t), we have

                                           E Оҫj ОҫtвҠӨ = 0,

                                                                                              (B.14)
where the equality is due to the fact that only Оҫk will depend on zk , where k вҲҲ K(t).

Bias-variance decomposition. According to (B.13) and yi = xвҠӨ  вҲ—
                                                           i w + О¶i , we have

                   wt+1 вҲ’ wвҲ— = I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ             вҲ—

                                          t (wt вҲ’ w ) + О·xt О¶t вҲ’ О·Оҫt .

Therefore, we can obtain
            E (wt+1 вҲ’ wвҲ— )(wt+1 вҲ’ wвҲ— )вҠӨ


            = E I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ          вҲ—        вҲ— вҠӨ
                                                  I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ    + О· 2 E О¶t2 xt xвҠӨ

                          t (wt вҲ’ w )(wt вҲ’ w )             t                    t

                 вҲ’ О·E I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ      вҠӨ          вҠӨ           вҠӨ
                                                                  + О· 2 E Оҫt ОҫtвҠӨ ,

                               t wt Оҫt вҲ’ О·E Оҫt wt I вҲ’ О·xt xt

where the first line on R.H.S. is the original bias-variance decomposition, and the second line on
R.H.S. is the extra variance error introduced  by the random    noise generated by the private mecha-
nism. We next consider the term E I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ            вҠӨ

                                                t w t Оҫ t  , we have
                                         t
                                         X
wt+1 = I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ

                t   wt + О·x  y
                            t t + О·Оҫ t =   At AtвҲ’1 В· В· В· Aj (О·xjвҲ’1 yjвҲ’1 + О·ОҫjвҲ’1 ) + О·xt yt + О·Оҫt ,
                                                j=1

where At = I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ
                    t . Therefore, we can obtain

                 tвҲ’1
                 X
      wt ОҫtвҠӨ =         AtвҲ’1 AtвҲ’2 В· В· В· Aj (О·xjвҲ’1 yjвҲ’1 + О·ОҫjвҲ’1 ) ОҫtвҠӨ + О·xtвҲ’1 ytвҲ’1 ОҫtвҠӨ + О·ОҫtвҲ’1 ОҫtвҠӨ .

                 j=1



                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


According to (B.14), E Оҫj ОҫtвҠӨ Мё= 0 when j вҲҲ K(t) and |K(t)| = вҢҲlog2 tвҢү + 1 = k(t). As a result,

we have
                                      X
    E I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ        вҠӨ
                                            AtвҲ’1 AtвҲ’2 В· В· В· Aj ОҫjвҲ’1 ОҫtвҠӨ + E О·At ОҫtвҲ’1 ОҫtвҠӨ

                 t w t Оҫt    = E О·At
                                                 jвҲҲK(t)

                                      + E О·At xtвҲ’1 ytвҲ’1 ОҫtвҠӨ .


Note that we have
                                                     X           вҠӨ
                               вҠӨ                          вҖІ

              E О·At xtвҲ’1 ytвҲ’1 Оҫt = E О·At xtвҲ’1 ytвҲ’1     ПҲ(k )zkвҖІ      = 0,
                                                                         kвҖІ вҲҲK(t)

where the last equality is due to the fact that {zi }ti=1 are zero mean and are independent of other
rvs. In addition, for j вҲҲ K(t), we have
                                    X                                X                       вҠӨ
                              вҠӨ                                                       вҖІ
                        ОҫjвҲ’1 Оҫt =                     ПҲ(k)zk                     ПҲ(k )zkвҖІ           ,
                                       kвҲҲK(jвҲ’1)                       kвҖІ вҲҲK(t)

Therefore, we can obtain
                                                            X                    X                             вҠӨ
E At AtвҲ’1 AtвҲ’2 В· В· В· Aj ОҫjвҲ’1 ОҫtвҠӨ = E At:j                                                       ПҲ(k вҖІ )zkвҖІ

                                                                     ПҲ(k)zk
                                                          kвҲҲK(jвҲ’1)                   kвҖІ вҲҲK(t)
                                                              X                                    X
                                                                         ПҲ(k1 ) zk1 zвҠӨ
                                                                                 2
                                                                                                           ПҲ(k)ПҲ(k )zk zвҠӨ
                                                                                                                       вҖІ

                                      = E At:j                                       k1 +                               kвҖІ
                                                          k1 вҲҲK(jвҲ’1,t)                             kМё=kвҖІ
                                                              X
                                                                         ПҲ(k1 )2 zk1 zвҠӨ

                                      = E At:j                                        k1
                                                          k1 вҲҲK(jвҲ’1,t)
                                                     X
                                             2
                                                                 E ПҲ(k1 )2 At:j ОЈ],

                                      =П„
                                                 k1 вҲҲK(jвҲ’1,t)

where At:j = At В· В· В· Aj , K(j вҲ’ 1, t) = K(j вҲ’ 1) вҲ© K(t), and the third and last lines are due to the
fact that {zi }ti=1 are independent of {ПҲi }ti=1 and {Ai }ti=1 . Therefore, we can get
                  X                                      X          X
                         AtвҲ’1 AtвҲ’2 В· В· В· Aj ОҫjвҲ’1 ОҫtвҠӨ =                      О·П„ 2 E ПҲ(k1 )2 At:j ОЈ].

       E О·At
              jвҲҲK(t)                                              jвҲҲK(t) k1 вҲҲK(jвҲ’1,t)

Following the same proof, we can obtain that
                                             X
                      E О·At ОҫtвҲ’1 ОҫtвҠӨ =                              О·П„ 2 E ПҲ(k1 )2 At ОЈ].

                                                                                                                           (B.15)
                                                     k1 вҲҲK(tвҲ’1,t)

Thus, we have
            вҲ’ О·E I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ      вҠӨ          вҠӨ            вҠӨ

                           t wt Оҫt вҲ’ О·E Оҫt wt I вҲ’ О·xt xt
                           X      X
                = вҲ’О· 2 П„ 2               E ПҲ(k1 )2 At:j ОЈ] + E ПҲ(k1 )2 ОЈAj:t ]


                             jвҲҲK(t) k1 вҲҲK(jвҲ’1,t)
                                     X
                  вӘҜ О· 2 П„ 2 k(N )

                                             E At AtвҲ’1 В· В· В· Aj ОЈAj В· В· В· AtвҲ’1 At
                                    jвҲҲK(t)

                          + О· П„ E ПҲ(t)4 ]k(N )ОЈ.
                           2 2


As a result, we can obtain
   E (wt+1 вҲ’ wвҲ— )(wt+1 вҲ’ wвҲ— )вҠӨ


         вӘҜ E I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ                вҲ—           вҲ— вҠӨ
                                                       I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ      + О· 2 E О¶t2 xt xвҠӨ

                            t (wt вҲ’ w )(wt вҲ’ w )                t                      t
                                X
               + О· 2 П„ 2 k(N )      E At В· В· В· Aj ОЈAj В· В· В· At + О· 2 П„ 2 (E ПҲ(t)2 + ПҲ(t)4 )k(N )ОЈ,


                            jвҲҲK(t)
                                                                                                                           (B.16)
where the upper bound of О· E Оҫt ОҫtвҠӨ is due to the similar proof from (B.15).
                            2


Now the remaining proof can be conducted based on the following lemma.


                                                            26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma B.12. If the stepsize satisfies О· вүӨ 1/(4ОІ tr(H) log N , then let S(t) be a set of iterate
indices that satisfy j вүӨ t вҲҖj вҲҲ S(t), we have
          X                                   X
                                                          tвҲ’j+1

               E At В· В· В· Aj ОЈAj В· В· В· At вӘҜ     (I вҲ’ О· T )
                                                       e          в—ҰОЈ
         jвҲҲS(t)                               jвҲҲS(t)

                                              + O(О·ОІ|S(t)|) В· tr(HОЈ) В· I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N .



Proof of Theorem B.5. According to Lemma B.12 and use the fact that |K(t)| = O(log2 N ), k(t) вүӨ
k(N ) = O(log2 N ), we can obtain the following by (B.16): for all t вүӨ N

E (wt+1 вҲ’ wвҲ— )(wt+1 вҲ’ wвҲ— )вҠӨ


     вӘҜ E I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ               вҲ—        вҲ— вҠӨ
                                                 I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ    + О· 2 E О¶t2 xt xвҠӨ

                       t (wt вҲ’ w )(wt вҲ’ w )               t                    t
        + О· 2 П„ 2 (E ПҲ(t)2 + ПҲ(t)4 )k(N )ОЈ

                                 X
                 2 2                            tвҲ’j+1                                              N

        + O О· П„ log2 N В·              (I вҲ’ О· T )
                                             e          в—Ұ ОЈ + O(О·ОІ log2 N ) В· tr(HОЈ) В· I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)      ,
                                   jвҲҲS(t)

where S(t) is a set of iterate indices satisfying |S(t)| = O(log2 N ). Then accordingly, we have the
new bias-variance  decomposition: considering     the bias and variance-covariance matrices Bt and Ct
that satisfy E (wt вҲ’ wвҲ— )(wt вҲ’ wвҲ— )вҠӨ = Bt + Ct , we have


            Bt+1 = E I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ                     вҠӨ
                                                         , B0 = (w0 вҲ’ wвҲ— )(w0 вҲ’ wвҲ— )вҠӨ ,

                                   t Bt I вҲ’ О·xt xt

and
  Ct+1 вӘҜ E I вҲ’ О·xt xвҠӨ             вҠӨ
                                       + О· 2 E О¶t2 xt xвҠӨ    2 2       2      4

                    t Ct I вҲ’ О·xt xt                    t + О· П„ (E ПҲ(t) + ПҲ(t) )k(N )ОЈ
                + О·2 D
      C0 = 0,
where
                           X
           2                             tвҲ’П„ +1                                               N

D вӘҜ O П„ log2 N                 (I вҲ’ О· T )
                                      e           в—Ұ ОЈ + O(О·ОІ log2 N ) В· tr(HОЈ) В· I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)       .
                         П„ вҲҲS(t)

This completes the proof.

B.5     P ROOFS OF A DDITIONAL L EMMAS
B.5.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2.6
Proof of Lemma 2.6. By the definition of ReМҒnyi divergence, we have

   DОұ N (0, ОЈ)||N (Вө, ОЈ)
                Z
         1               1
                                В· exp вҲ’ ОұzОЈвҖ  z + (Оұ вҲ’ 1)(z вҲ’ Вө)вҠӨ ОЈвҖ  (z вҲ’ Вө) /2

   =        log     p
      ОұвҲ’1        Rd        k
                      (2ПҖ) |ОЈ|
                Z
         1               1
                                В· exp вҲ’ zвҠӨ ОЈвҖ  z + 2(1 вҲ’ ОұВөвҠӨ ОЈвҖ  z + (Оұ вҲ’ 1)ВөвҠӨ ОЈвҖ  Вө) /2

   =        log     p
      ОұвҲ’1        Rd
                           k
                      (2ПҖ) |ОЈ|
         1
            log exp Оұ(Оұ вҲ’ 1)ВөвҠӨ ОЈвҖ  Вө /2

   =
      ОұвҲ’1
      Оұ
   = В· вҲҘВөвҲҘ2ОЈвҖ  .
       2



B.5.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA B.2
Proof of Lemma B.2. For Bounded norm, we use the following lemma.


                                                 27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma B.13. Suppose z is a zero mean, sub-Gaussian random vector with sub-Gaussian norm Пғz .
Let B be an m Г— n matrix, then for any t вүҘ 0, we have

                                 2   2     2
                                                            ct
                        P вҲҘBzвҲҘ2 вүҘ Пғz вҲҘBвҲҘF + t вүӨ exp вҲ’ 2             ,
                                                         Пғz вҲҘBвҲҘ22
where c is an absolute constant.
                                                            1       1
According to Lemma B.13, we can choose B = ОЈвҲ’ 2 H 2 and t = Пғz2 вҲҘBвҲҘ22 log(1/ОІ), we can obtain
that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ cвҖІ ОІ
                                      1   2
                                  ОЈвҲ’ 2 x 2 вүӨ 2Пғz2 tr(ОЈвҲ’1 H) log(1/ОІ),
where cвҖІ вүҘ ОІ cвҲ’1 .
For Bounded product, using Markov inequality, we have
                                                      1
                        P вҹЁx, vвҹ©2 вүҘ t2 = P вҹЁz, H 2 vвҹ©2 вүҘ t2

                                              вҹЁz,evвҹ©2                  t2

                                                  2 EвҹЁz,ev вҹ©2      2 EвҹЁz,ev вҹ©2
                                        =P e    Пғz
                                                              вүҘe Пғz



                                                  t2
                                                                 вҹЁz,evвҹ©2
                                            вҲ’ Пғ2 EвҹЁz,e   2
                                        вүӨe z         v вҹ©
                                                            В· E e Пғz2 EвҹЁz,evвҹ©2
                                                           t    2
                                                     вҲ’ Пғ2 EвҹЁz,e
                                                              v вҹ©2
                                              вүӨ 2e      z               ,
                   1
where v  e = H v and the last inequality is due to Assumption 2.2.
                   2                                                               By choosing t2 =
         e вҹ©2 log(1/ОІ), we can derive the result.
Пғz2 EвҹЁz, v
For Bounded noise, according to Assumption 2.3, we can directly prove it by the definition of sub-
Gaussian random variable with Оі3 = ПғО¶2 .



B.5.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA B.3
Proof of Lemma B.3. Therefore, we propose to estimate the upper bound of вҲҘwt вҲ’ wвҲ— вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2
at each iteration. To this end, we can use: (1) public data to estimate it; or (2) The (Пө0 , Оҙ0 )-DP
algorithm, i.e., the stability-based histogram (Bun et al.,
                                                        p2016; Karwa & Vadhan, 2017; Liu et al.,
2023), on half of the data to estimate it. Here Пө0 = Пө/4 T log(1/Оҙ0 ) and Оҙ0 = Оҙ/(2T ) (due to the
composition rule, we need to make sure each iteration our method is private, and by composition,
we have for T iteration, our method is (Пө, Оҙ)-DP). For both of the methods, the key idea is to make
use of
For option 1, we have {(e xi , yei )}m                                               m
                                     i=1 is public dataset. Recall that we have {ri }i=1 with ri = (e
                                                                                                    yi вҲ’
           2
вҹЁwt , x
      ei вҹ©) . Thus, we have
                                                                              2
                         ri = О¶ei2 + 2О¶ei (wвҲ— вҲ’ wt )вҠӨ x ei + x eвҠӨ     вҲ—
                                                                i (w вҲ’ wt ) .
In addition, by BernsteinвҖҷs inequality, we have
                       m
                   1 X
                           xi , wвҲ— вҲ’ wt вҹ©2 вҲ’ вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’ wt вҲҘ2H вүӨ C1 вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’ wt вҲҘ2H ,
                          вҹЁe
                   m i=1
                                                  m
                                              1 X e2
                                                   О¶ вҲ’ ПғО¶2 вүӨ C2 ПғО¶2 ,
                                              m i=1 i
                                          m
                                     1 Xe
                                               xi , wвҲ— вҲ’ wt вҹ© вүӨ C3 ПғО¶ вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’ wt вҲҘH ,
                                           О¶i вҹЁe
                                     m i=1
where C1 , C2 , C3 are much less than 1 due to large number of m вүҘ O(log N ). Then, by triangle
inequality, we have
                       m
                    1 X
                         ri вҲ’ вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’ wt вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2 вүӨ C4 вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’ wt вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2 ,

                                                                                         (B.17)
                   m i=1


                                                      28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                          Pm
where C4 вүӨ 1/2 given m вүҘ O(log N ). Thus, if we have public data, we can use 2               i=1 ri /m to
estimate the upper bound of вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’ wt вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2 .
For option 2, we have {(e xi , yei )}m                                                            m
                                     i=1 is a private dataset. Recall that we split the data {ri }i=1 with
                      2
ri = (e
      yi вҲ’ вҹЁwt , x
                 ei вҹ©) into n
                            e subsets of equal size, each with |Sj | = m   e data for j вҲҲ [en]. According
to (Karwa & Vadhan, 2017), if Оҙe вүӨ 1/e     n, and we have

                                                   8        4
                                            n
                                            eвүҘ       log        ,
                                                  ПөОІ
                                                  e        ОҙОұ
                                                           e
we can obtain

                                        P |e
                                           rk вҲ’ rbk | вүҘ ОІ вүӨ Оұ.
Therefore, if m
              e is large enough, i.e., m
                                       e вүҘ O(log N ), according to (B.17), we have
                       rМ„k вҲ’ вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’ wt вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2 вүӨ C4 вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’ wt вҲҘ2H + ПғО¶2 .


Thus, if we choose C4 вүӨ 1/4 (by having large enough m),    e we can show that all rМ„k вҖҷs lie in two
consecutive bins. According to the private algorithm, we can see that all rek вҖҷs lie in the same two
consecutive bins. Let [l1 , l2 ] be the nonempty bins containing the most rek вҖҷs. We can ensure that
2l2 вүҘ вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’wt вҲҘ2H +ПғО¶2 . Therefore, we can use 2l2 to estimate the upper bound of вҲҘwвҲ— вҲ’wt вҲҘ2H +ПғО¶2 .
In this case, we require
                                         p
                    8         4       16 2N log(2/Оҙ)         8N
              n
              eвүҘ       log         =                   log         and m
                                                                       e вүҘ O(log N ),
                   ПөОІ
                   e         ОҙОұ
                             e               ПөОІ              ОҙОұ
                            p
where we plugging e  Пө = Пө/ 8N log(2/Оҙ) and Оҙe = Оҙ/(2N ).

B.5.4    P ROOF OF L EMMA B.7
We first provide the following useful lemma.
Lemma B.14. Under Assumption 2.1, for every A вӘ° 0, let ОІ = 16Пғz4 , it holds that

                 f в—Ұ T вҲ’1 в—Ұ A вӘҜ M в—Ұ T вҲ’1 в—Ұ A вӘҜ                  ОІ tr(A)
            (M вҲ’ M)                                                       В· H вӘҜ ОІ tr(A)H.
                                                             1 вҲ’ ОІОі tr(H)

Proof. It can be shown by the same methods as in (Zou et al., 2021b; Jain et al., 2017b;a).

Proof of Lemma B.7. Based on the update rule of Ct , we can further obtain
                                                N
                                                X вҲ’1
                                     CN = О· 2         (I вҲ’ О·T )t в—Ұ Gt .
                                                t=0

Then, it is clear that if О· вүӨ 1/О»1 , we have I вҲ’ О·T is a PSD mapping so that
                                        C0 вӘҜ C1 вӘҜ В· В· В· вӘҜ CN .
Then denote G as an union upper bound on G0 , . . . , GN вҲ’1 , then due to the fact that (I вҲ’ О·T ) is a
PSD mapping, we further have
                            N
                            X вҲ’1
                 CN вӘҜ О· 2         (I вҲ’ О·T )t в—Ұ G = О· В· T вҲ’1 в—Ұ (I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·T )N ) в—Ұ G.
                            t=0

Note that Te вҲ’ T , I вҲ’ О· Te and I вҲ’ О·T is a PSD mapping, we have
           (I вҲ’ О· Te )N в—Ұ G вӘҜ (I вҲ’ О· Te )N вҲ’1 в—Ұ (I вҲ’ О·T ) в—Ұ G вӘҜ В· В· В· вӘҜ (I вҲ’ О·T )N в—Ұ G.
Then using the fact that T вҲ’1 is a PSD mapping, we further thave
                               CN вӘҜ О· В· T вҲ’1 в—Ұ (I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·T )N ) в—Ұ G.


                                                      29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then we can apply Lemma B.14 and obtain

                   (M вҲ’ M)                 f в—Ұ T вҲ’1 в—Ұ (I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О· Te )N ) в—Ұ G
                        f в—Ұ CN вӘҜ О· В· (M вҲ’ M)
                                       ОІО·
                                              В· tr (I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О· Te)N ) в—Ұ G В· H

                               вӘҜ
                                 1 вҲ’ ОІО· tr(H)
                                       ОІО·
                               вӘҜ              В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , Gвҹ© В· H.
                                 1 вҲ’ ОІО· tr(H)
Then, given the above rough bound on CN , we can further obtain a refined version as follows:

                        Ct+1 = (I вҲ’ О· Te ) в—Ұ Ct + О· 2 В· (M вҲ’ M)
                                                             f в—Ұ Ct + О· 2 Gt
                             вӘҜ (I вҲ’ О· Te ) в—Ұ Ct + О· 2 В· (M вҲ’ M)
                                                             f в—Ұ CN + О· 2 G.

Then, it follows that
             N
             X вҲ’1                                              N
                                                               X вҲ’1
CN вӘҜ О· 2 В·         (I вҲ’ О· Te )N вҲ’1вҲ’t в—Ұ (M вҲ’ M)
                                            f в—Ұ CN + О· 2 В·           (I вҲ’ О· Te )N вҲ’1вҲ’t в—Ұ G
             t=0                                               t=0
                3                                 N вҲ’1                         N вҲ’1
            ОІО·                                    X                            X
    вӘҜ                В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , Gвҹ© В·     (I вҲ’ О· Te )N вҲ’1вҲ’t в—Ұ H + О· 2 В·     (I вҲ’ О· Te )N вҲ’1вҲ’t в—Ұ G
        1 вҲ’ ОІО· tr(H)                         t=0                               t=0
                                                             N вҲ’1
          ОІО· 2                    N                   N   2
                                                             X
                                                                 (I вҲ’ О· Te )t в—Ұ G.

    =              В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H) , Gвҹ© В· I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H) + О· В·
      1 вҲ’ ОІО· tr(H)                                           t=0

This completes the proof.



B.5.5   P ROOF OF L EMMA B.8
Proof of Lemma B.8. By Lemma B.6, we have
                                              N вҲ’1 N вҲ’1
                                           1 X X
                             variance =                вҹЁ(I вҲ’ О·H)kвҲ’t H, Ct вҹ©
                                          N 2 t=0
                                                   k=t
                                               N вҲ’1
                                           1   X
                                      =             вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N вҲ’t , Ct вҹ©
                                          N 2 О· t=0
                                                                N вҲ’1
                                           1                N
                                                                X
                                      вүӨ        вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)  ,      Ct вҹ©
                                          N 2О·                  t=0
                                           1
                                      вүӨ      вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , CN вҹ©,
                                          NО·
where the first inequality is due to the fact that Ct вӘҜ CN for all t вүӨ N (see Lemma B.7). Then
applying Lemma B.7, we have
                           1
             variance вүӨ       В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , CN вҹ©
                          NО·
                          2ОІО·
                        вүӨ      В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , Gвҹ© В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N вҹ©
                           N
                                                      N вҲ’1
                               О·                      X
                            +      В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N ,     (I вҲ’ О· Te )t в—Ұ Gвҹ©
                              N                       t=0
                            2ОІО·
                        =       В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , Gвҹ© В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N вҹ©
                             N
                                       N вҲ’1
                                О·      X
                                           (I вҲ’ О· Te )t в—Ұ I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , Gвҹ©

                             +      В·вҹЁ
                                N      t=0


                                                      30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      2ОІО·
                     вүӨ     В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , Gвҹ© В· вҹЁI вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N , I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N вҹ©
                       N
                           1                     2
                        +      В· вҹЁ I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N HвҲ’1 , Gвҹ©.                                    (B.18)
                          N
Further by Theorem B.5, we can get for any t вүӨ N ,


Gt вӘҜ ПғО¶2 H + O E ПҲ(t)2 + ПҲ(t)4 П„ 2 log2 N ОЈ

                          X
              2                          tвҲ’П„ +1                                               N

        + O П„ log2 N           (I вҲ’ О· T )
                                       e          в—Ұ ОЈ + O(О·ОІ log2 N ) В· tr(HОЈ) В· I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)       .
                             П„ вҲҲKМ„(t)

Noting that ПҲ(t) вүӨ ПҲ(N ) for all t вүӨ N and (I вҲ’О· Te )в—ҰA вӘҜ A for any PSD matrix A that commutes
with H. Therefore, we can further get that
          вҹЁA, Gвҹ© вүІ ПғО¶2 В· вҹЁA, Hвҹ© + П„ 2 ОІ В· (log2 N )2 О· В· tr(HОЈ) В· A, I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N


                      + E ПҲ(N )2 + ПҲ(N )4 + 1 В· П„ 2 В· log2 N В· вҹЁA, ОЈвҹ©,


where A can be any PSD matrix that commutes with H. Moreover, noting that for any x вҲҲ (0, 1/О·),
we have 1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ О·x)N вүӨ min{1, N О·x}, then
                                I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N вӘҜ I0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ
for any k вүҘ 0. Therefore, we can define a new matrix as follows:
                   GМ„ = ПғО¶2 В· H + П„ 2 ОІ В· (log2 N )2 О· tr(HОЈ) В· I0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ


                           + E ПҲ(N )2 + ПҲ(N )4 + 1 В· П„ 2 В· log2 N В· ОЈ.


Therefore, putting the above results into (B.18), we obtain
               ОІО·                                        X        1
  variance вүІ       В· вҹЁI0:k + N О·Hk:вҲһ , GМ„вҹ© В· k + N 2 О· 2    О»2i +   В· вҹЁHвҲ’1     2 2
                                                                        0:k + N О· Hk:вҲһ , GМ„вҹ©.
               N                                                  N
                                                        i>k

This completes the proof.

B.5.6   P ROOF OF L EMMA B.12
The following lemma is useful in the subsequent proof.
Lemma B.15 (Lemma C.4 in Wu et al. (Wu et al., 2022)). For a sequence of PSD matrices
{Mt }t=0...N that satisfy Mt = (I вҲ’ О·T ) в—Ұ MtвҲ’1 and M0 = ОЈ, then if О· вүӨ 1/(4ОІ tr(H) log N ,
it holds that for any t вҲҲ [0, N ]

                                                 1
                               tr(HMt ) вүӨ 4 В·      I0:k + Hk:вҲһ , ОЈ ,
                                                О·N
where k вҲҲ [N ] can be arbitrarily chosen.

Proof of Lemma B.12. Note that ОЈ is independent of At , . . . , Aj , therefore when taking the expec-
tation of over At , . . . , Aj , then can be treated equally. In particular, for any t and j, we have
                             E At В· В· В· Aj ОЈAj В· В· В· At = (I вҲ’ О·T )tвҲ’j+1 в—Ұ ОЈ.


Then define Ms = (I вҲ’ О·T )s в—Ұ ОЈ and M0 = ОЈ, we can get the following:
               Ms+1 = (I вҲ’ О·T ) в—Ұ Ms вӘҜ (I вҲ’ О· Te ) в—Ұ Ms + ОІО· 2 В· tr(HMs ) В· H.                (B.19)
Then by Lemma B.15 and set k = 0, we can immediately obtain that
                                        tr(HMs ) вүӨ 4 В· tr(HОЈ).
Plugging the above inequality into (B.19), we have
                  Ms вӘҜ (I вҲ’ О· Te ) в—Ұ MsвҲ’1 + 4ОІО· 2 В· tr(HОЈ) В· H


                                                 31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                           sвҲ’1
                                                                           X
                        = (I вҲ’ О· Te )s в—Ұ ОЈ + 4ОІО· 2 В· tr(HОЈ) В·                  (I вҲ’ О· Te)r в—Ұ H
                                                                               r=0
                                                                           N
                                                                           X вҲ’1
                        вӘҜ (I вҲ’ О· Te )s в—Ұ ОЈ + 4ОІО· 2 В· tr(HОЈ) В·                        (I вҲ’ О· Te)r в—Ұ H
                                                                               r=0

                        вӘҜ (I вҲ’ О· Te )s в—Ұ ОЈ + 4ОІО· В· tr(HОЈ) В· I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N


                                                P
Then, it suffices to prove the upper bound for jвҲҲS(t) MtвҲ’j+1 . In particular, applying the above
result leads to
    X                  X
                            (I вҲ’ О· Te )tвҲ’j+1 в—Ұ ОЈ + 4ОІО· В· tr(HОЈ) В· I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N В· |S(t)|

          MtвҲ’j+1 вӘҜ
  jвҲҲS(t)               jвҲҲS(t)
                         X
                                          tвҲ’j+1
                                                  в—Ұ ОЈ + O(О·ОІ|S(t)|) В· tr(HОЈ) В· I вҲ’ (I вҲ’ О·H)N .

                   вӘҜ            (I вҲ’ О· T )
                                       e
                        jвҲҲS(t)

This completes the proof.



B.5.7   P ROOF OF L EMMA B.10

Proof of Lemma B.10. Note that ОЈ = M вҲ’1 (О»I + X
                                              eXe вҠӨ ), by the Woodbury identity (Golub &
Van Loan, 2013), we have
                       (О»I + X
                             eXe вҠӨ )вҖ  = О»вҲ’1 I вҲ’ О»вҲ’2 X(I
                                                    e + О»вҲ’1 X
                                                            e вҠӨ X)
                                                                e вҲ’1 X
                                                                     eвҠӨ
Therefore, we can further obtain
              tr(ОЈвҖ  H) = M В· tr О»вҲ’1 H вҲ’ О»вҲ’2 HX(I  e + О»вҲ’1 X  e вҠӨ X)
                                                                  e вҲ’1 X  eвҠӨ


                         = M В· О»вҲ’1 tr(H) вҲ’ M О»вҲ’2 tr X  e вҠӨ HX(I
                                                             e + О»вҲ’1 X       e вҠӨ X)
                                                                                 e вҲ’1 .

                                                                                            (B.20)
Then by Assumption 2.2, let H = i О»i vi viвҠӨ , where О»i and vi denote the i-th largest eigenvalue
                                  P

of H and its corresponding eigenvector, we can further define zi = X  e вҠӨ vi /О»1/2 вҲҲ RM . Then zi вҖҷs
                                                                                 i
will be independent Пғz -subGaussian random vectors and the following identities hold:
                                  X                         X
                          e вҠӨX
                          X           О»i zi zвҠӨ   e вҠӨ HX          О»2i zi zвҠӨ
                                             i , X                       i .
                             e =                       e =
                                           i                                    i

Then, we can further obtain that
                                                            X                                   X                   вҲ’1
           e вҠӨ HX(I
                e + О»вҲ’1 X
                        e вҠӨ X)
                            e вҲ’1 = tr                              О»2i zi zвҠӨ         I + О»вҲ’1          О» i zi zвҠӨ

        tr X                                                               i                                  i
                                                               i                                 i
                                                     X                               X                 вҲ’1
                                                 =       О»2i В· zвҠӨ
                                                                i I + О»вҲ’1                 О» i zi zвҠӨ
                                                                                                  i         zi .
                                                     i                                i

By This further implies that
                                X           X                   X           вҲ’1
               вҖ              вҲ’1          вҲ’2     2    вҠӨ       вҲ’1          вҠӨ
          tr(ОЈ H) = M В· О»         О»i вҲ’ О»      О» i В· zi I + О»      О»i zi zi    zi
                                       i                  i                                 i
                                  X                                   X           вҲ’1
                    = M О»вҲ’1 В·                        вҲ’1 2   вҠӨ
                                               О»i вҲ’ О» О»i В· zi I + О»вҲ’1          вҠӨ
                                                                        О»i zi zi    zi .                                   (B.21)
                                   i                                                 i

By Sherman-Morrison formula, denote A = I+О»вҲ’1 i О»i zi zвҠӨ                          вҲ’1                вҠӨ
                                                       P                             P
                                                               i and AвҲ’i = I+О»          jМё=i О»j zj zj ,
we have
                                        вҲ’1
                                                              О»вҲ’1 О»i AвҲ’1     вҠӨ вҲ’1
                                                                      вҲ’i zi zi AвҲ’i
                       X
                                                         вҲ’1
           zвҠӨ
            i  I + О»вҲ’1
                           О» i z i z вҠӨ
                                     i     z i = z вҠӨ
                                                   i   A вҲ’i вҲ’                  вҲ’1    zi
                        i
                                                              1 + О»вҲ’1 О»i zвҠӨ
                                                                          i AвҲ’i zi


                                                          32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                вҲ’1
                                                                                         2
                                                          вҲ’1         О»вҲ’1 О»i zвҠӨ
                                                                             i AвҲ’i zi
                                                    = zвҠӨ
                                                       i AвҲ’i zi вҲ’                   вҲ’1
                                                                     1 + О»вҲ’1 О»i zвҠӨ
                                                                                 i AвҲ’i zi
                                                                 вҲ’1
                                                             zвҠӨ
                                                              i AвҲ’i zi
                                                    =                  вҲ’1      .
                                                        1 + О»вҲ’1 О»i zвҠӨ
                                                                    i AвҲ’i zi
Moreover, we have
                                                     вҲ’1                                 вҲ’1
                                                                            О»вҲ’1 О»2i zвҠӨ
                                                                                     i AвҲ’i zi
                                          X
             О»i вҲ’ О»вҲ’1 О»2i В· zвҠӨ
                             i   I + О» вҲ’1
                                            О» z z
                                             i i i
                                                  вҠӨ
                                                        zi = О»i вҲ’                        вҲ’1
                                            i
                                                                          1 + О»вҲ’1 О»i zвҠӨ
                                                                                      i AвҲ’i zi
                                                                             О»i
                                                                 =                 вҲ’1 .
                                                                     1 + О» О»i zвҠӨ
                                                                          вҲ’1
                                                                                i AвҲ’i zi
Putting the above results into (B.21) leads to
                                  X             О»i              X       О»i
            tr(ОЈвҖ  H) = M О»вҲ’1 В·                     вҠӨ
                                            вҲ’1 О» z A вҲ’1   = M В·           вҠӨ вҲ’1
                                                                                  .
                                   i
                                      1 + О»     i i     z
                                                     вҲ’i i       i
                                                                  О» + О»i i AвҲ’i zi
                                                                        z

We then provide the following lemma that is adapted from the proof of Lemma 7 in Tsigler &
Bartlett (2020).
                                                                          P
Lemma B.16. Under Assumption 2.2, denote b     k := mink {k : О»k+1 M вүӨ О» + i>k О»i }, then with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(n)), it holds that
                                      вҲ’1              О»M
                                zвҠӨ
                                 i AвҲ’i zi вүҘ C В·       P         ,
                                                   О» + j>bk О»j
where C is an absolute positive constant.
Based on the above lemma, we can obtain
                             X          О»i                 X            О»i
              tr(ОЈвҖ  H) = M В·                  вҲ’1    вүӨ M  В·                 M
                                                                                   .
                                 О» +  О» z
                                       i i
                                          вҠӨA     z              О» + C В·    PО»i О»
                              i               вҲ’i i           i          О»+ j>kb О»j
                     P
Note that О»i M вүҘ О» + j>bk О»j for all i вүӨ b
                                         k, then we have
                                P                                       P
                           О» + j>bk О»j X О»i                        О» + j>bk О»j X M О»i
                       X
      вҖ          вҖІ                                          вҖІ
 tr(ОЈ H) вүӨ C В· M В·                        +           =C В· kВ·   b                +       .
                                MО»                О»                      О»           О»
                           iвүӨb
                             k                       i>b
                                                       k                                        i>b
                                                                                                  k

This completes the proof.

B.5.8    P ROOF OF L EMMA B.11

Proof of Lemma B.11. Recall that ОЈ = M вҲ’1 (О»I + X    eX  e вҠӨ ), we have
                                         О»               1      e вҠӨ AX).
                              tr(AОЈ) =     tr(A) +          tr(X      e
                                        M              M
Similar to the proof of Lemma B.10, defining zi = Xve i /О»1/2 , we can get
                                        X                   i X
                      tr(Xe вҠӨ AX)
                                e = tr       О»i Вөi zi zвҠӨ     =      О»i Вөi В· вҲҘzi вҲҘ22 .                 (B.22)
                                                       i
                                                i                    i
Then noting that zi is a sub-Gaussian random vector with identity covariance matrix, we can further
get that with probability at 1 вҲ’ exp(вҲ’в„Ұ(M 1/2 )),
                                              X
                          tr(Xe вҠӨ AX)
                                   e вүӨC В·M        О»i Вөi = C В· M tr(AH),                     (B.23)
                                                        i
for some absolute constant C > 1. Putting (B.23) into (B.22), we obtain

                                              О»
                            tr(AОЈ) вүӨ C В·         tr(A) + tr(AH) .
                                             M
This completes the proof.


                                                        33
