Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


RO CA: A ROBUST M ETHOD TO D ISCOVER C AUSAL OR
A NTICAUSAL R ELATION BY N OISE I NJECTION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Understanding whether the data generative process is causal or anticausal is im-
         portant for algorithm design. It helps machine learning practitioners understand
         whether semi-supervised learning should be employed for real-world learning tasks.
         In many cases, existing causal discovery methods cannot be adaptable to this task,
         as they struggle with scalability and are ill-suited for high-dimensional perceptual
         data such as images. In this paper, we propose a method that detects whether
         the data generative process is causal or anticausal. Our method is robust to label
         errors and is designed to handle both large-scale and high-dimensional datasets
         effectively. Both theoretical analyses and empirical results on a variety of datasets
         demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method in determining the causal or
         anticausal direction of the data generative process.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In real-world machine learning applications, acquiring unlabeled data is usually an easy process.
However, the task of annotating data can be both time-consuming and expensive, which often results
in the availability of a small amount of annotated data (Castro et al., 2020; Sohn et al., 2020). Training
deep neural networks on limited annotated data can hinder their generalization ability (Kawaguchi
et al., 2017; Xie et al., 2020; Verma et al., 2022). This has motivated a great deal of work on
semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Laine & Aila, 2016; Sohn et al., 2020; Englesson & Azizpour, 2021;
Amini et al., 2022; Laine & Aila, 2016; Kingma et al., 2014; Harris & Mazibas, 2013; Blanchard
et al., 2010), which seeks to improve model generalization by also leveraging unlabeled data.
Let X represent the variable for instances, and let Y denote the class. Existing research (Chapelle
et al., 2006; Schölkopf et al., 2012; Kügelgen et al., 2020) has shown that the success of SSL depends
on whether the instance distribution P (X) provides information about the class-posterior distribution
P (Y |X). The extent of this information is influenced by the causality inherent in the data generative
process. In an anticausal setting, the class Y influences some causal variables in X during the
data generative process (Schölkopf et al., 2012). In this context, the instance distribution P (X)
contains information about the class-posterior distribution P (Y |X). Under such conditions, certain
prerequisites for SSL, such as the clustering condition (Kügelgen et al., 2020), low-density separation
(Chapelle & Zien, 2005), and manifold condition (Niyogi, 2013), are likely to be met. As a result,
SSL can enhance the model’s generalization capability. Conversely, in a causal setting, where the
class Y doesn’t influence any causal variables in X, but some causal variables in X influence Y , the
distribution P (X) doesn’t offer insights about P (Y |X) (Schölkopf et al., 2012). In such scenarios,
SSL typically fails to enhance the model’s generalization ability.
Understanding the causal or anticausal setting of a classification dataset is crucial for machine
learning practitioners to determine the applicability of SSL. However, the setting is often unknown
in real-world datasets and requires inference. Directly applying existing causal discovery methods
(Kalainathan et al., 2020; Shimizu et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2018; Geiger & Heckerman, 1994;
Zhang & Hyvarinen, 2009; Peters et al., 2011; 2014; Chen & Chan, 2013) to determine this tends
to be impractical. One challenge is the difficulty in scaling. When faced with a multitude of causal
variables, the computational demands escalate. Many existing causal discovery methods demand
pairwise conditional independence tests for every potential edge between two variables (Akbari et al.,
2022). This can lead to an exponential surge in runtime, especially when there’s no prior knowledge
to guide the discovery process (Le et al., 2016). While score-based greedy algorithms offer a potential


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


solution by enhancing computational efficiency, they come with their own set of challenges. Due
to their inherent greedy search approach, these algorithms can get trapped in local optima, leading
to potential inaccuracies in determining the causal or anticausal nature of a dataset (Glymour et al.,
2019b). Another challenge arises when dealing with datasets that consist of perceptual data, such as
images or audio. In these situations, causal variables remain unobservable (Schölkopf et al., 2021).
Most existing causal discovery methods are tailored to detect relationships between observed causal
variables, making them ill-suited for these types of datasets. As of now, we are unaware of any
method that can effectively determine causal or anticausal relations in such datasets.
Adding to the aforementioned challenges, in real-world scenarios, observed labels in large-scale
datasets can contain label errors (Deng et al., 2009; Xiao et al., 2015; Li et al., 2019) which have
not been considered by existing causal discovery methods. In the mining process of large-scale
datasets, inexpensive but imperfect annotation methods are wildly employed, for example, querying
commercial search engines (Li et al., 2017), downloading social media images with tags (Mahajan
et al., 2018), or leveraging machine-generated labels (Kuznetsova et al., 2020). These methods
inevitably yield examples with label errors. When label errors are present, the randomness of these
errors affects the strength of the causal association between features and the observed (noisy) label
Ỹ , making it more challenging to accurately discern the true relationships. For instance, existing
methods employ conditional independence tests (Zhang & Hyvarinen, 2009; Peters et al., 2011; 2014)
or score optimizations (Imoto et al., 2002; Hyvärinen & Smith, 2013; Huang et al., 2018) to evaluate
the strength and structure of these relationships. Label errors introduce random fluctuations that
distort the underlying relationships between features and labels. Consequently, these tests or score
optimizations may be misled by the noise, leading to inaccurate estimations of the causal associations.
In this paper, we introduce a robust method aimed at determining whether a dataset is causal or
anticausal. Recognizing that our primary interest lies in the causal associations between features
and labels to assess whether the instance distribution P (X) is informative to the class-posterior
distribution P (Y |X), we can focus on these relationships rather than all possible causal associations
among all causal variables with common causality assumptions, i.e., faithfulness and acyclic graph
assumption (Pearl, 2000). Consequently, the extensive computational costs and strict assumptions re-
quired for recovering or identifying all potential causal associations among one-dimensional variables
are not necessary. However, when data contains label errors, verifying whether the distribution of
instances P (X) carries relevant information about class-posterior distribution P (Y |X) is difficult, as
the clean class Y is latent. We found that the noisy class-posterior distribution P (Ỹ |X) can be used
as an effective surrogate for P (Y |X). The intuition of using P (Ỹ |X) as a surrogate of P (Y |X) is
that these two distributions are generally correlated, then if P (X) carries relevant information about
P (Y |X), it also carries relevant information about P (Ỹ |X).
The core idea of our method is to check if the distribution of instances P (X) carries relevant
information about the prediction task P (Ỹ |X) to determine whether a dataset is causal or anticausal.
To achieve it, we generate clusters by employing advanced unsupervised or self-supervised methods
(Van Gansbeke et al., 2020; Ghosh & Lan, 2021). Then a pseudo label Y ′ is assigned to each cluster
based on the majority of observed labels within the cluster. To identify regions that can help predict
observed (noisy) labels, different levels of noise are manually injected into observed labels, and
the correlation of mismatch (disagreement) between pseudo labels and observed labels after noise
injection is observed. In Section 3.3, we prove that in a causal setting, the mismatch and noise levels
are not correlated; in an anticausal setting, the mismatch and noise levels are correlated. Experimental
results on synthetic and real datasets demonstrate that our method can accurately determine the causal
or anticausal direction.
It is worth noting that the application of our method extends beyond merely determining if a dataset
is causal or anticausal. It can also be used to detect the causal direction between a set of continuous
(or discrete) variables and a discrete variable. Specifically, there are cases where, based on prior
knowledge or existing causal discovery methods, one recognizes the existence of causal associations
between the variable set and a discrete variable, but the direction of this causality remains elusive. In
such scenarios, our method is applicable.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     P RELIMINARIES

Let D be the distribution of a pair of random variables (X, Ỹ ) ∈ X × {1, . . . , C}, where C denotes
the number of classes, X ∈ Rd represents an instance, and Ỹ denotes observed label which may
not be identical to the clean class Y . Given a training sample S = {xi , ỹi }m  i=1 , we aim to reveal
whether the dataset is a causal or an anticausal. Owing to space limitations, a review of existing
causal discovery methods is left in Appendix B.
The Principle of Independent Mechanisms According to independent mechanisms (Peters et al.,
2017b), the causal generative process of a system’s variables consists of autonomous modules.
Crucially, these modules do not inform or influence each other. In the probabilistic cases (detailed
in Chapter 2 of Peters et al. (2017b)), the principle states that “the conditional distribution of each
variable given its causes (i.e., its mechanism) does not inform or influence the other conditional
distributions.” In other words, assuming all underlying causal variables are given and there are no
latent variables, the conditional distributions of each variable, given all its causal parents (which
can be an empty set), do not share any information and are independent of each other. To explain
the independence concretely, we include an example in Appendix D. Note that in the case of two
variables, a cause variable C and an effect variable E, the principle simplifies to the independence
between the cause distribution P (C) and the effect distribution P (E|C) (Schölkopf et al., 2012).
Causal or Anticausal We follow the definition of Causal and
Anticausal datasets from Schölkopf et al. (2012). For causal datasets,
some variables in X act as causes for the class Y , and no variable
in X is an effect of the class Y or shares a common cause with the
class Y (e.g., Fig. 1a). In this case, Y can only be an effect of some
variables in X. Two distributions P (X) and P (Y |X) satisfy the
independent causal mechanisms. The distribution P (X) does not                   (a) The causal setting.
contain information about P (Y |X).
For anticausal datasets, however, the label Y can be a cause variable.
In such cases, the independent causal mechanisms are not satisfied
for P (X) and P (Y |X), implying that P (X) contains information
about P (Y |X).
We assume that there are no latent confounders, similar to many                 (b) The anticausal setting.
existing causal discovery methods. If latent confounders exist, our         Figure 1: Examples of causal
method will interpret it as anticausal, as in such cases, P (X) also        and anticausal settings. The
contains information about P (Y |X), resembling an anticausal case.         direction of the back-colored
To further check whether it is an anticausal or confounded case,            edge determines whether a
existing methods specifically designed for finding latent confounders       dataset is causal or anticausal.
can be applied (Chen et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022).

3     A ROBUST C AUSAL AND A NTICAUSAL (RoCA) E STIMATOR

In this section, we present RoCA, a practical and robust method designed to infer whether a dataset is
causal or anticausal while taking into account the presence of label errors in observed labels.

3.1   R ATIONALE BEHIND RO CA

We first introduce a generative process of a dataset, which may include label errors. Then we explain
that even if label errors exist in observed labels, they can still be used to infer if a dataset is causal or
anticausal. Lastly, we discuss how our robust method is designed by utilizing observed labels.
Data Generative Processes with Label Errors A dataset with label errors can be viewed as a
result of a random process where labels are flipped based on certain probabilities. Data generation
involves two stages (see Fig. 2). Initially, an annotator is trained using a clean set Z, acquiring
specific prior knowledge, θ, for the labeling task. This knowledge helps the annotator form an
annotation mechanism Pθ (Ỹ |X), approximating the true class posterior P (Y |X). This mechanism,
being correlated with P (Y |X), provides insights into the true class posterior. In the annotation
phase, the annotator encounters a new instance X without an observed clean class Y . Using the


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


prior knowledge θ, the annotator assigns an observed label Ỹ based on Pθ (Ỹ |X). This process can
sometimes lead to mislabeling. It’s noteworthy that Pθ (Ỹ |X) generally maintain a dependence with
Pθ (Y |X). Imagine if this dependence did not exist; the annotation mechanism Pθ (Ỹ |X) would
essentially be a random guess of P (Y |X), rendering the observed label Ỹ meaningless. We will
demonstrate that, due to this dependence, Pθ (Ỹ |X) can serve as a surrogate for P (Y |X) to help
determine whether a dataset is causal or anticausal.

Pθ (Ỹ |X) as a Surrogate of P (Y |X) Follow-
ing the principles of independent mechanisms, for
causal datasets, P (X) does not provide any in-
formation about P (Y |X). When Y is the cause
of X, P (X) generally contains information about
P (Y |X). (Kügelgen et al., 2020; Peters et al.,
2017b). Therefore, to determine whether a dataset is
causal or anticausal, one can examine whether P (X)
can inform P (Y |X). However, this requires both
P (X) and P (Y |X) can be accurately estimated.
When data contains label errors, the clean label Y is
latent, estimating P (Y |X) challenging. One natural Figure 2: An illustration of annotation involv-
thought is to identify a surrogate distribution that can ing label errors.
assist in determining the causal direction.
In particular, the surrogate distribution must satisfy two key conditions. The first condition is that
under a causal setting, P (X) should not be informative to the surrogate distribution. The second
condition is that under an anticausal setting, P (X) should be informative to the surrogate. If such
a surrogate distribution can be found, we can infer whether a dataset is causal or anticausal by
examining whether P (X) is informative to the surrogate distribution. To meet both conditions, our
aim is to find a surrogate distribution that carries information about P (Y |X) but remains disentangled
with P (X) under a causal setting. We find that Pθ (Ỹ |X) fits these requirements. As it estimates the
underlying distribution P (Y |X). It is usually highly correlated with and informative about P (Y |X).
Moreover, under a causal setting, P (X) cannot inform P (Ỹ |X), since Ỹ and Y are effects of X,
and P (X) and P (Ỹ |X) follows causal factorization and are disentangled according to independent
mechanisms (Peters et al., 2017b). Thus, Pθ (Ỹ |X) is an proper surrogate.

Validating if P (X) Informs Pθ (Ỹ |X) According to the above analysis that Pθ (Ỹ |X) can be em-
ployed as a surrogate of P (Y |X), the problem we need to solve is to effectively infer whether P (X)
informs Pθ (Ỹ |X). To achieve it, our proposed method involves the use of clustering algorithms on
P (X) to generate clusters. We then assign a pseudo label Y ′ to each cluster based on the majority
of observed labels within it. If these pseudo labels are informative to observed labels, it indicates
that P (X) informs Pθ (Ỹ |X). To check if these pseudo labels are informative to observed labels,
we need to validate whether each pseudo label Y ′ is a random guess of its corresponding observed
label Ỹ given an instance X. In other words, we have to verify whether P (Ỹ = ỹ|Y ′ = y ′ , X = x)
equals 1/C for each instance x.
However, accurately estimating the distribution P (Ỹ |Y ′ , X) from data can be difficult in gen-
eral. Firstly, the instance or feature vector X can be high-dimensional, estimating the conditional
probability distribution a daunting task because of the “curse of dimensionality” (Köppen, 2000).
As the dimensionality increases, the data becomes sparse, and we require an exponentially larger
amount of data to maintain the same level of statistical significance. More importantly, the distribution
P (Ỹ |Y ′ , X) can be diverse across different datasets. The diversity poses a significant challenge when
trying to develop a robust and unified model that can accurately estimate the different distribution
P (Ỹ |Y ′ , X) across different datasets.
Avoiding Estimation of P (Ỹ |Y ′ , X) via Noise Injection To void directly estimating P (Ỹ |Y ′ , X),
we propose a simple and effective noise-injection method. We propose that we can inject different
levels of instance-dependent noise to observed label Ỹ , then compare the trend of the average
disagreement between pseudo labels and modified labels under different levels of noise. The rationale
is that, under a causal setting, P (X) is not informative to both P (Y |X) and P (Ỹ |X). Then


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Figure 3: A illustration of our noise injection on causal and anticausal dataset.

exploiting P (X) does not help predict observed labels. Therefore the pseudo labels obtained from
P (X) are random guesses of the observed labels. If we introduce noise to these observed labels
by randomly flipping some of them, the pseudo labels should continue to guess the modified labels
randomly. This is due to the fact that pseudo labels guess any label with a fixed probability of 1/C.
As such, the average disagreement between pseudo labels and the modified labels remains consistent,
regardless of the noise level. As a result, we would not expect any trend in the average disagreement
between pseudo labels and modified labels under different noise levels.
By contrast, under an anticausal setting, P (X) is informative to both P (Y |X) and P (Ỹ |X). This
means that pseudo labels obtained by sufficiently exploiting P (X) should not be simply random
guesses of the observed labels. When we modify observed labels by injecting noise, these modified
labels become increasingly random and unpredictable. This would result in a change of disagreement
between the pseudo labels and the modified labels. As a result, we can expect a trend in the average
disagreement between pseudo labels and modified labels under different noise levels.
An Intuitive Illustration of RoCA Let’s consider an example illustrated in Fig. 3. We’re dealing
with a binary classification dataset, where features X ∈ R2 . Assume that a clustering method
separates instances into two clusters, with half of them assigned the pseudo label Y ′ = 0, and the
other half assigned Y ′ = 1. We’ll focus on instances with the pseudo label Y ′ = 1, which are located
in two regions (R1 and R2 ) based on their X values.
In Fig. 3 (a), on a causal dataset, before noise injection, the distribution of observed labels in regions
R1 and R2 indicate that P (Ỹ = 1|Y ′ = 0, X = x) = P (Ỹ = 0|Y ′ = 0, X = x) = 1/2. This
suggests that each instance’s pseudo label is a random guess of its observed label, rendering an average
disagreement P (Ỹ ρ = 1|Y ′ = 0) as 1/2. after noise injection, say with an instance-dependent noise
flipping 40% and 20% observed labels in regions R1 and R2 , the average disagreement remains
unaltered. It indicates no discernible trend in average disagreements between pseudo labels and
modified labels across different noise levels.
Fig. 3 (b) demonstrates an anticausal dataset scenario. Despite the average disagreement for class
Ỹ = 0 being 0.5, each instance’s pseudo label isn’t a random guess of its observed label. In region
R1 , all instances have the observed label Ỹ = 0; while in region R2 , all instances have Ỹ = 1.
This results in P (Ỹ = 1|Y ′ = 0, X = x) = 1 in region R1 and P (Ỹ = 0|Y ′ = 0, X = x) = 1
in region R2 , deviating from the expected 1/2. After injecting the same instance-dependent noise
into observed labels in regions R1 and R2 , the average disagreement P (Ỹ ρ = 1|Y ′ = 0) drops to
0.3, reflecting the regions where P (Ỹ = ỹ|Y ′ = y ′ , X = x) doesn’t equal 1/C. Thus, our method
successfully identifies this as an anticausal dataset.

3.2   P ROCEDURE OF THE RO CA E STIMATOR
We employ a clustering method to exploit P (X) and estimate pseudo labels Y ′ for each cluster based
on the majority of observed labels within it on training instances. Then we generate different sets of
generated labels by manually injecting different levels of noise into the observed labels. By using 0-1
loss, we calculate the disagreement between pseudo labels and the generated labels with different
injected noise levels, respectively. When X causes Y , the disagreement and the noise level should
not be correlated in general. In contrast, when Y causes X, the disagreement (between Y ′ and Ỹ )
and the noise level are statistically dependent.

Learning Pseudo Labels The task of learning pseudo labels involves two steps: firstly, the data is
clustered using a chosen clustering algorithm. Each cluster is then assigned a pseudo label, Y ′ , based
on the majority of observed labels within that cluster. More specifically, consider K = i as the i-th


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


cluster ID, and Xki as the set of instances with the i-th cluster ID, i.e.,
                                  Xki = {x|(x, ỹ) ∈ S, f (x) = i},                             (1)
where f is a clustering algorithm that assigns an instance x with a cluster ID. Similarly, let XỸj
denote the set of instances with the observed label Ỹ = j. We define 1A as an indicator function that
returns 1 if the event A holds true and 0 otherwise. The pseudo label Y ′ assigned to the instances in
the set Xki is determined by the most frequent observed label within the cluster, i.e.,
                                                         1{x∈XỸ } .
                                                    X
                                   Y ′ = arg max                                                   (2)
                                                j∈C                           j
                                                         x∈ Xki

Empirically, the assignment is implemented by applying Hungarian assignment algorithm (Jonker &
Volgenant, 1986) which ensures an optimal assignment of pseudo labels to clusters such that the total
number of mislabeled instances within each cluster is minimized.
An Instance-Dependent Noise Injection The core of our approach revolves around generating
instance-dependent noise. We have to ensure that for any given instance x, there’s a dependence
between its features and its flip rate ρx . As illustrated in Fig. 3, this dependence is pivotal for
monitoring how the disagreement between pseudo labels and modified labels changes with different
(average) noise levels in a dataset. Moreover, according to Theorem 1, in causal settings, to let
average disagreement between pseudo labels and modified labels remain consistent across different
noise levels, the noise must be introduced in a particular way. To be precise, for each flip rate ρx of
an instance x, the probability of flipping an observed label to any other class should be uniformly
                                  ρx
distributed, which translates to C−1 . The details are as follows.
To begin, for each instance in the dataset, we compute its ℓ1 norm using its features. These computed
norms are stored in a vector A. Subsequently, we generate a vector P of length m, where each
element represents a distinct flip rate. These flip rates are derived from a truncated normal distribution
ψ with an average noise level ρ. The probability density function ψ for this distribution is given by:
                                                       
                                                       
                                                                   0                x≤a
                                                                ϕ(µ,σ 2 ;ρi )
             ψ(µ = ρ, σ = 1, a = 0, b = 1; ρi ) =                2            2 ;a) a<x<b
                                                        Φ(µ,σ ;b)−Φ(µ,σ
                                                       
                                                                    0                b ≤ x.
Here, µ is the mean value, σ is the standard deviation, ϕ and Φ are the probability density function
and cumulative density function of a normal distribution, and a and b are the lower and upper limits
of the truncated interval, respectively. To ensure that there’s a dependency between the instances
and the sampled flip rates in P , we sort both A and P in ascending order. This step ensures that an
instance with a smaller ai value corresponds to a lower individual flip rate ρi . The specific steps for
our noise generation process are detailed in the pseudocode provided in Appendix F.
Measuring Disagreement To quantify the disagreement introduced by the noise, we adopted a
non-parametric bootstrap approach where we resample the data (X, Y ) a large number of times (i.e.,
30), and apply the noise injection procedure for each resampled dataset to get corresponding pseudo
labels Y ′ and noisy labels Y ρ . Specifically, the modified label set Ỹ ρ is defined as the observed
labels post the injection of our instance-dependent noise with an average noise level ρ. Note that
these noise levels employed are randomly sampled from the range between 0 and 0.5.
The disagreement is then quantified using the 0-1 loss ℓ01 on the training examples. This is achieved
by comparing Y ′ and Ỹ ρ with 0 − 1 loss, i.e.,
                                                                   1{y′ i ̸=ỹiρ }
                                                  Pm
                                                             i=1
                                   ℓ01 (Y ′ , Ỹ ρ ) =            .                                (3)
                                                       m
After measuring the disagreement. To infer whether a data set is causal or anticausal, the key lies in
understanding the dependence between the disagreement and noise levels. In causal scenarios, there
should not be any dependence, whereas in anticausal settings, a dependence is expected.
To achieve it, intuitively, we sample different noise levels and inject each noise level ρi to observed
labels and calculate the different average disagreement by using the 0-1 loss. A linear regression
model is employed to characterize the dependences between noise level ρ and the loss ℓ01 , i.e.,
                                                        n
                                                     1X i
                           {β̂0 , β̂1 } = arg min          (ℓ01 − (β1 ρi + β0 ))2 ,                  (4)
                                              β0 ,β1 n
                                                       i=1



                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where β̂0 , β̂1 refer to the estimated intercept and slope of the regression line, ℓi01 denotes 0 − 1 loss
calculated under the ρi noise level, respectively, and n is the total number of noise levels. Accordingly,
for causal datasets, the slope β̂1 should approximate 0. In contrast, for anticausal datasets, this slope
should deviate significantly from 0.

3.3   T HEORETICAL A NALYSES

In Theorem 1, we show that under the causal setting, the disagreement and the noise level should
not correlated to each other, i.e., the slope β1 is 0. In Theorem 2, we show that under the anticausal
setting, the disagreement and the noise level are correlated to each other, i.e., the slope β1 is not 0.
It is important to note that our method is not only applicable in the special case when the observed
labels contain instance-dependent label errors but also when they have no label errors or contain
class-dependent noise.
Let X be the instance space and C the set of all possible classes. Let S = {(xi , ỹi )}m        t=0 be an
sample set. Let h : X → {1, . . . , C}, be a hypothesis that predicts pseudo labels of instances.
Concretely, it can be a K-means algorithm together with the Hungarian algorithm which matches
the cluster ID to the corresponding pseudo labels. Let H be the hypothesis space, where h ∈ H. Let
R̃ρ (h) = E(x,ỹρ )∼P (X,Ỹ ρ ) [1{h(x)̸=ỹρ } ]be the expected disagreement R̃(h) between pseudo labels
and generated labels ỹ ρ with ρ-level noise injection. Let R̃     ˆ ρ (h) be the average disagreement (or
                                                                S
empirical risk) of h on the set S after ρ-level noise injection. Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 leverage the
concept of empirical Rademacher complexity, denoted as R̂S (H) (Mohri et al., 2018).
Theorem 1 (Invariant Disagreements Under the Causal Settings). Under the causal setting, assume
that for every instance and clean class pair (x, y), its observed label ỹ is obtained by a noise rate
                                            ρx
ρx such that P (Ỹ = ỹ|Y = y, X = x) = C−1      for all ỹ ̸= y ∧ ỹ ∈ C. Then after injecting noise to
the sample with arbitrary average noise rates ρ1 and ρ2 such that 0 ≤ ρ1 ≤ ρ2 ≤ 1, with a 1 − δ
probability and δ > 0,
                                                                  s
                             ˆ ρ1      ˆ ρ2                           log 4δ
                           |R̃S (h) − R̃S (h)| ≤ 4R̂S (H) + 6                .                       (5)
                                                                       2m
                                           q 4
                                             log
As the sample size m increases, the term 3 2mδ tends towards 0 at a rate of O( √1m ). Additionally,
the empirical Rademacher complexity R̂S(H) of the K-means algorithm also tends towards 0 at a rate
of O( √1m ), as demonstrated by Li & Liu (2021). Consequently, the right-hand side of Inequality (5)
converges to 0 at a rate of O( √1m ). This implies that with an increasing sample size, the difference
between the disagreements R̃ ˆ ρ1 (h) and R̃
                                           ˆ ρ2 (h), obtained by introducing different noise levels, will
                               S            S
tend towards 0. In other words, the level of disagreement remains unaffected by changes in noise
levels, consequently leading to the conclusion that the slope β1 equals zero.
Theorem 2 (Variable Disagreements Under the Anticausal Setting). Under    h  the anticausal
                                                                                           isetting,
after injecting noise with a noise level ρ = EX [ρx ], R̃ρ (h) − R̃(h) = E 1 − C R̃(h,x)
                                                                                 C−1      ρx .

Theorem 2h shows that the difference
                              i      of the risk after noise injection between the risk on observed
                C R̃(h,x)
labels is E 1 − C−1        ρx . Under the anticausal setting, the pseudo labels predicted by h are
not random guesses. In this case, R̃(h, x) ̸= (C − 1)/C, then the difference is always nonzero. It
implies that after injecting noise, the slope β1 will be nonzero.

Assumptions for Discovering Causal and Anticausal Our method is based on commonly ac-
cepted assumptions in causal disovery: causal faithfulness, acyclic graph assumption, absence of
latent confounders, and independent causal mechanisms (Peters et al., 2014). To ensure that the
disagreements (or expected risks) under different noise levels remain constant in a causal setting
when employing RoCA, we need an additional assumption to constrain the types of label errors in
datasets. Specifically, this assumption posits that for every instance and clean class pair (x, y), the
                                                                                            ρx
observed label ỹ is derived with a noise rate ρx such that P (Ỹ = ỹ|Y = y, X = x) = C−1      for all
ỹ ̸= y ∧ ỹ ∈ C. This assumption can satisfy not only when data contains instance-dependent label


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      (SynCausal, Ins-30.0%)                                          (SynCausal, Sym-30.0%)                                        (SynAnticausal, Ins-30.0%)                                        (SynAnticausal, Sym-30.0%)
                    1.0                                                             1.0                                                             1.0                                                               1.0
                           Slope: 0.0044                                                   Slope: 0.0060                                                   Slope: 0.2478                                                     Slope: 0.2473
                           P-value: 0.6729                                                 P-value: 0.9722                                                 P-value: 0.0000                                                   P-value: 0.0000
                    0.8                                                             0.8                                                             0.8                                                               0.8


     Disagreement


                                                                     Disagreement


                                                                                                                                     Disagreement


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Disagreement
                    0.6                                                             0.6                                                             0.6                                                               0.6

                    0.4                                                             0.4                                                             0.4                                                               0.4

                    0.2                                                             0.2                                                             0.2                                                               0.2

                    0.0                                                             0.0                                                             0.0                                                               0.0
                          0.0      0.1       0.2        0.3    0.4                        0.0      0.1      0.2        0.3     0.4                        0.0      0.1       0.2        0.3      0.4                        0.0      0.1      0.2        0.3       0.4
                                            Noise Level                                                    Noise Level                                                      Noise Level                                                      Noise Level


Figure 4: The average disagreement and its standard deviation under different noise rates for synthetic
datasets: synCausal (left) and synAnticausal (right).

errors but also when there are no label errors or when data contains class-dependent errors (Patrini
et al., 2017; Xia et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021).
Furthermore, to use Pθ (Ỹ |X) as a proxy for P (Y |X), we assume a dependence between Pθ (Ỹ |X)
and P (Y |X). This assumption is typically valid, as the absence of such a dependence would imply
that the annotation mechanism Pθ (Ỹ |X) is merely a random guess of P (Y |X), rendering the
observed label Ỹ meaningless.
Additionally, the effectiveness of our method can be influenced by the choice of a backbone clustering
method. Specifically, when dealing with an anticausal dataset, our approach relies on a clustering
method that is capable enough to extract some information from P (X) for predicting P (Y |X), rather
than merely making a completely random guess. Thanks to the recent successes of unsupervised and
self-supervised methods, some methods (Niu et al., 2021) based on contrastive learning have even
achieved competitive performance compared to supervised methods on benchmark image datasets
such as CIFAR10 and MNIST.

4    E XPERIMENTS
Our code is implemented using PyTorch. To obtain the pseudo label Y ′ , we employ the K-means
clustering method (Likas et al., 2003) for non-image datasets. For image datasets, specifically
CIFAR10 and Clothing1M, we use the SPICE∗ clustering method (Niu et al., 2021). All models are
trained on Nvidia V100 GPUs. We evaluated our RoCA estimator across 18 datasets. This includes 2
synthetic datasets (synCausal and synAnticausal), 13 multi-variate real-world datasets, and 3 image
datasets (CIFAR10, CIFAR10N, Clothing1M). Notably, CIFAR10N and Clothing1M contain real-
world label errors and are large-scale (1M images on Clothing1M). Our approach was benchmarked
against 9 causal discovery baseline algorithms. Most experimental results and descriptions of baseline
methods and datasets are left in Appendix E.

Labels Errors and Implementation Different label errors are employed to validate the robustness
of RoCA estimator. (1) Symmetry Flipping (Sym) (Patrini et al., 2017) which randomly replaces a
percentage of labels in the training data with all possible labels. (2) Pair Flipping (Pair) (Han et al.,
2018) where labels are only replaced by similar classes. For datasets with binary class labels, Sym
and Pair noises are identical. (3) Instance-Dependent Label Error (IDN) (Xia et al., 2020) where
different instances have different transition matrices depending on parts of instances. To simulate
scenarios where datasets contain label errors, the different errors are injected into the clean classes.
To rigorously validate the disagreement, rather than directly evaluating if the slope β̂1 contained from
Eq. (4) is near 0, we use a hypothesis test on the slope. The level of noise ρ is randomly sampled
20 times from a range between 0 and 0.5. For every selected noise level, a disagreement between
Y ′ and Ỹ can be calculated. Consequently, a slope value is calculated from the correlation of these
20 noise levels and their respective disagreement ratios. By repeating such procedure for 30 times,
a set of slope values can be obtained. These slope values are then utilized in our hypothesis test to
verify if the average slope is significantly different from 0. The details of this test are provided in
Appendix A. Intuitively, if the resulting p-value from the test exceeds 0.05, the slope is likely close to
zero, indicating a causal dataset. Conversely, a p-value below 0.05 suggests an anticausal dataset.

Disagreements with Different Noise Levels on Synthetic Datasets Fig. 4 demonstrates the trend
of disagreement with different noise levels for synCausal and synAnticausal datasets. To construct
datasets with label errors, 30% label errors are added into these datasets. For the synCausal dataset,
the trend of disagreement remains unchanged at 0.5 with the increase of injected noise rates, and the


                                                                                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Table 1: Comparing with other baselines on UCI datasets.
                  Method       Original                   Instance                                  Pair                                   Sym
                                  0%           10%         20%            30%          10%          20%           30%          10%          20%          30%
                    GES       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    GIES      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                     PC          causal    anticausal   anticausal     anticausal     causal     anticausal    anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal
                    ICD          causal    anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
     KrKp           RAI       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
    (causal)         FCI      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  LINGAM       unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                    SAM        unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                   CCDR          causal       causal     unknown        unknown       causal      unknown       unknown       causal      unknown      unknown
                               p=0.3263     p=0.7719     p=0.6757       p=0.2009     p=0.4315     p=0.1548      p=0.3520     p=0.4315     p=0.1564     p=0.3504
                 Our method
                                 causal       causal      causal         causal       causal       causal        causal       causal       causal       causal
                    GES       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    GIES      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                     PC       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    ICD       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
     Splice         RAI        unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
    (causal)         FCI      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  LINGAM       unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                    SAM        unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                   CCDR       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                               p=0.0022     p=0.7749     p=0.7748       p=0.2731     p=0.0395     p=0.8958      p=0.0000     p=0.0085     p=0.1976     p=0.0314
                 Our method
                              anticausal      causal      causal         causal     anticausal     causal      anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal
                    GES       anticausal      causal      causal         causal       causal       causal        causal       causal     anticausal     causal
                    GIES      anticausal      causal      causal         causal       causal       causal        causal       causal     anticausal     causal
                     PC       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal      unknown     anticausal    unknown       unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown
                    ICD       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal      unknown     anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
   WDBC             RAI        unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
 (anticausal)        FCI      anticausal   anticausal    unknown        unknown     anticausal    unknown       unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown
                  LINGAM       unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                    SAM        unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                   CCDR          causal       causal      causal         causal       causal       causal        causal       causal       causal       causal
                               p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000       p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000      p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                 Our method
                              anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    GES       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    GIES      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                     PC       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    ICD       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
    Letter          RAI        unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
 (anticausal)        FCI      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  LINGAM       unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                    SAM        unknown      unknown      unknown        unknown      unknown      unknown       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                   CCDR         unkown       unkown       causal         causal     anticausal   anticausal      causal     anticausal    unknown     anticausal
                               p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000       p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000      p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                 Our method
                              anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal

               Table 2: Performance of RoCA on large-scale image datasets containing label errors.
                              Clothing1M                                            CIFAR10N
                                               Clean           Worst          Aggre        Random1         Random2      Random3
                               p=0.0000       p=0.0000       p=0.0000        p=0.0000      p=0.0000         p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                              anticausal     anticausal     anticausal      anticausal    anticausal       anticausal   anticausal



slope β̂1 of the regression line is close to 0. This is because Y ′ is poorly estimated and should be a
random guess of noised Ỹ ′ . On the other hand, for the synAnticausal dataset with small label errors
(e.g., Sym and Ins-10% to 20%), there is a strong positive correlation between the disagreement and
the noise level. In this case, Y ′ is better than a random guess of both Ỹ and the latent clean class
Y . Specifically, with the increase of noise level ρ, the corresponding Ỹ ρ becomes more seriously
polluted and tends to deviate far away from the observed label Ỹ . This results in a larger disagreement
between Ỹ ρ and Y ′ .

Performance of RoCA on Real-World Datasets We have also benchmarked the RoCA method
against other causal discovery algorithms. Our results, as presented in Tab. 1 and Tab. 2, demonstrate
that our method is both more accurate and robust. In these tables, the term ’unknown’ indicates
cases where the algorithm either failed to detect the causal relation, or did not complete the analysis
within a feasible running time. Note that only RoCA can applied to image datasets CIFAR10N and
Clothing1M to detect causal and anticausal relations.

5       C ONCLUSION
This paper presents a label-error robust estimator for inferring whether a dataset is causal or anticausal.
The intuition is to leverage the information asymmetry between the distributions P (X) and P (Ỹ |X)
of the observed label Ỹ on anticausal and causal datasets by noise injection. Our theoretical analyses
and empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of the RoCA estimator in determining the causal
or anticausal nature of a dataset.


                                                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sina Akbari, Fateme Jamshidi, Ehsan Mokhtarian, Matthew J Vowels, Jalal Etesami, and Negar
  Kiyavash. Causal discovery in probabilistic networks with an identifiable causal effect. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2208.04627, 2022.
Massih-Reza Amini, Vasilii Feofanov, Loic Pauletto, Emilie Devijver, and Yury Maximov. Self-
 training: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12040, 2022.
Bryon Aragam and Qing Zhou. Concave penalized estimation of sparse gaussian bayesian networks.
  The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):2273–2328, 2015.
Gilles Blanchard, Gyemin Lee, and Clayton Scott. Semi-supervised novelty detection. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 11(Nov):2973–3009, 2010.
Daniel C Castro, Ian Walker, and Ben Glocker. Causality matters in medical imaging. Nature
  Communications, 11(1):1–10, 2020.
Olivier Chapelle and Alexander Zien. Semi-supervised classification by low density separation. In
  International workshop on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 57–64. PMLR, 2005.
Olivier Chapelle, Bernhard Scholkopf, and Alexander Zien. Semi-supervised learning. 2006.
Zhengming Chen, Feng Xie, Jie Qiao, Zhifeng Hao, Kun Zhang, and Ruichu Cai. Identification of
  linear latent variable model with arbitrary distribution. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 6350–6357, 2022.
Zhitang Chen and Laiwan Chan. Causality in linear nongaussian acyclic models in the presence of
  latent gaussian confounders. Neural Computation, 25(6):1605–1641, 2013.
D.M. Chickering. Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 3(Nov), 2002.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Erik Englesson and Hossein Azizpour. Consistency regularization can improve robustness to label
  noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01242, 2021.
D. Geiger and D. Heckerman. Learning Gaussian networks. Proceedings of the 10th Conference on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 1994.
Aritra Ghosh and Andrew Lan. Contrastive learning improves model robustness under label noise.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  2703–2708, 2021.
C. Glymour, K. Zhang, and P. Spirtes. Review of causal discovery methods based on graphical
  models. Frontiers in Genetics, 10, 2019a.
Clark Glymour, Kun Zhang, and Peter Spirtes. Review of causal discovery methods based on
  graphical models. Frontiers in genetics, 10:524, 2019b.
P.D. Grünwald and P.M. Vitányi. Handbook of the Philosophy of Information, chapter Algorithms
  information theory. North Holland, 2008.
Bo Han, Quanming Yao, Xingrui Yu, Gang Niu, Miao Xu, Weihua Hu, Ivor Tsang, and Masashi
  Sugiyama. Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks with extremely noisy labels. In
  NeurIPS, pp. 8527–8537, 2018.
R. D. F. Harris and M. Mazibas. Dynamic hedge fund portfolio construction: A semi-parametric
  approach. Journal of Banking and Finance, 37:139–149, 2013.
Alain Hauser and Peter Bühlmann. Characterization and greedy learning of interventional markov
  equivalence classes of directed acyclic graphs. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):
  2409–2464, 2012.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D. Heckerman, D. Geiger, and D.M. Chickering. Learning Bayesian networks: the combination of
  knowledge and statistical data. Machine Learning, 20, 1995.
B. Huang, K. Zhang, Y. Lin, B. Schölkopf, and C. Glymour. Generalized score functions for causal
  discovery. KDD, 2018.
Biwei Huang, Charles Jia Han Low, Feng Xie, Clark Glymour, and Kun Zhang. Latent hierarchical
  causal structure discovery with rank constraints. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:5549–5561, 2022.
A. Hyvärinen and S.n.M. Smith. Pairwise likelihood ratios for estimation of non-gaussian structural
  equation models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14:111–152, 2013.
S. Imoto, T. Goto, and S. Miyano. Estimation of genetic networks and functional structures be-
   tween genes by using Bayesian networks and nonparametric regression. Pacific Symposium on
  Biocomputing, (175-186), 2002.
D. Janzing and B. Schölkopf. Causal inference using the algorithmic Markov condition. IEEE
  Transactions on Information Theory, 56(10), 2010.
D. Janzing, J. Mooij, J. Zhang, K.and Lemeire, J. Zscheischler, P. Daniusis, B. Steudel, and
  B. Schölkopf. Information-geometric approach to inferring causal directions. Artificial Intel-
  ligence, 182-183, 2012.
Roy Jonker and Ton Volgenant. Improving the hungarian assignment algorithm. Operations Research
  Letters, 5(4):171–175, 1986.
D. Kalainathan, O. Goudet, I. Guyon, D. Lopez-Paz, and M. Sebag. Structural agnostic modeling:
  Adversarial learning of causal graphs. arXiv:1803.04929v3, 2020.
Diviyan Kalainathan, Olivier Goudet, Isabelle Guyon, David Lopez-Paz, and Michèle Sebag. Struc-
  tural agnostic modeling: Adversarial learning of causal graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.04929,
  2018.
Kenji Kawaguchi, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Yoshua Bengio. Generalization in deep learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1710.05468, 2017.
D. P. Kingma, D. J. Rezende, S. Mohamed, and M. Welling. Semi-supervised learning with deep
  generative models. arXiv:1406.5298, 2014.
Mario Köppen. The curse of dimensionality. In 5th online world conference on soft computing in
 industrial applications (WSC5), volume 1, pp. 4–8, 2000.
Julius Kügelgen, Alexander Mey, Marco Loog, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Semi-supervised learning,
  causality, and the conditional cluster assumption. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 1–10. PMLR, 2020.
Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Neil Alldrin, Jasper Uijlings, Ivan Krasin, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Shahab
  Kamali, Stefan Popov, Matteo Malloci, Alexander Kolesnikov, et al. The open images dataset v4.
  International Journal of Computer Vision, 128(7):1956–1981, 2020.
Samuli Laine and Timo Aila. Temporal ensembling for semi-supervised learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1610.02242, 2016.
Thuc Duy Le, Tao Hoang, Jiuyong Li, Lin Liu, Huawen Liu, and Shu Hu. A fast pc algorithm for
  high dimensional causal discovery with multi-core pcs. IEEE/ACM transactions on computational
  biology and bioinformatics, 16(5):1483–1495, 2016.
Michael S Lewicki and Terrence J Sejnowski. Learning overcomplete representations. Neural
 computation, 12(2):337–365, 2000.
Junnan Li, Richard Socher, and Steven CH Hoi. Dividemix: Learning with noisy labels as semi-
  supervised learning. In ICLR, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shaojie Li and Yong Liu. Sharper generalization bounds for clustering. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 6392–6402. PMLR, 2021.
Wen Li, Limin Wang, Wei Li, Eirikur Agustsson, and Luc Van Gool. Webvision database: Visual
 learning and understanding from web data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02862, 2017.
Xuefeng Li, Tongliang Liu, Bo Han, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Provably end-to-end
  label-noise learning without anchor points. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02400, 2021.
Aristidis Likas, Nikos Vlassis, and Jakob J Verbeek. The global k-means clustering algorithm. Pattern
  recognition, 36(2):451–461, 2003.
Dhruv Mahajan, Ross Girshick, Vignesh Ramanathan, Kaiming He, Manohar Paluri, Yixuan Li,
 Ashwin Bharambe, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Exploring the limits of weakly supervised
  pretraining. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 181–196,
  2018.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning. MIT
 press, 2018.
Chuang Niu, Hongming Shan, and Ge Wang. Spice: Semantic pseudo-labeling for image clustering.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.09382, 2021.
Partha Niyogi. Manifold regularization and semi-supervised learning: Some theoretical analyses.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14(5), 2013.
Giorgio Patrini, Alessandro Rozza, Aditya Krishna Menon, Richard Nock, and Lizhen Qu. Making
  deep neural networks robust to label noise: A loss correction approach. In CVPR, pp. 1944–1952,
  2017.
J. Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY,
   USA, 2000. ISBN 0-521-77362-8.
J Peters, JM Mooij, D Janzing, and B Schölkopf. Causal discovery with continuous additive noise
   models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):2009–2053, 2014.
J. Peters, D. Janzing, and B. Scholkopf. Elements of Causal Inference. MIT Press, Cambridge,
   Massachusetts, 2017a.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Scholkopf. Causal inference on discrete data using
  additive noise models. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 33(12):
  2436–2450, 2011.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations
  and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017b.
Raanan Y Rohekar, Shami Nisimov, Yaniv Gurwicz, and Gal Novik. Iterative causal discovery in
  the possible presence of latent confounders and selection bias. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:2454–2465, 2021.
B Schölkopf, D Janzing, J Peters, E Sgouritsa, K Zhang, and J Mooij. On causal and anticausal
  learning. In 29th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2012), pp. 1255–1262.
  International Machine Learning Society, 2012.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of the
  IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.
R. D. Shah and J. Peters. The hardness of conditional independence testing and the generalised
  covariance measure. The Annals of Statistics, 48(3), 2020.
Shohei Shimizu, Patrik O Hoyer, Aapo Hyvärinen, Antti Kerminen, and Michael Jordan. A linear
  non-gaussian acyclic model for causal discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7(10),
  2006.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shohei Shimizu, Takanori Inazumi, Yasuhiro Sogawa, Aapo Hyvärinen, Yoshinobu Kawahara,
  Takashi Washio, Patrik O Hoyer, and Kenneth Bollen. DirectLiNGAM: A direct method for
  learning a linear non-Gaussian structural equation model. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  12(Apr):1225–1248, 2011.
Kihyuk Sohn, David Berthelot, Chun-Liang Li, Zizhao Zhang, Nicholas Carlini, Ekin D. Cubuk,
  Alex Kurakin, Han Zhang, and Colin Raffel. Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning with
  consistency and confidence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07685, 2020.
P. Spirtes, C. Glymour, and R. Scheines. Causation, prediction, and search. MIT Press, Cambridge,
   Massachusetts, 2nd edition, 2000a.
Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, Richard Scheines, and David Heckerman. Causation, prediction,
  and search. MIT press, 2000b.
Tatsuya Tashiro, Shohei Shimizu, Aapo Hyvärinen, and Takashi Washio. Parcelingam: A causal
  ordering method robust against latent confounders. Neural computation, 26(1):57–83, 2014.
Wouter Van Gansbeke, Simon Vandenhende, Stamatios Georgoulis, Marc Proesmans, and Luc
 Van Gool. Scan: Learning to classify images without labels. In European Conference on Computer
 Vision, pp. 268–285. Springer, 2020.
Vikas Verma, Kenji Kawaguchi, Alex Lamb, Juho Kannala, Arno Solin, Yoshua Bengio, and David
  Lopez-Paz. Interpolation consistency training for semi-supervised learning. Neural Networks, 145:
  90–106, 2022.
Julius Von Kügelgen, Yash Sharma, Luigi Gresele, Wieland Brendel, Bernhard Schölkopf, Michel
  Besserve, and Francesco Locatello. Self-supervised learning with data augmentations provably
  isolates content from style. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:16451–16467,
  2021.
Xiaobo Xia, Tongliang Liu, Nannan Wang, Bo Han, Chen Gong, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama.
  Are anchor points really indispensable in label-noise learning? In NeurIPS, pp. 6835–6846, 2019.
Xiaobo Xia, Tongliang Liu, Bo Han, Nannan Wang, Mingming Gong, Haifeng Liu, Gang Niu,
  Dacheng Tao, and Masashi Sugiyama. Part-dependent label noise: Towards instance-dependent
  label noise. NerurIPS, 2020.
Tong Xiao, Tian Xia, Yi Yang, Chang Huang, and Xiaogang Wang. Learning from massive noisy
  labeled data for image classification. In CVPR, pp. 2691–2699, 2015.
Qizhe Xie, Minh-Thang Luong, Eduard Hovy, and Quoc V Le. Self-training with noisy student
  improves imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 10687–10698, 2020.
Raanan Yehezkel and Boaz Lerner. Bayesian network structure learning by recursive autonomy
  identification. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10(7), 2009.
Kun Zhang and Aapo Hyvarinen. On the identifiability of the post-nonlinear causal model. In
 Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2009.


A    T HE H YPOTHESIS T EST
We perform the one-sample t-test to quantify whether the slope β1 is significantly different from zero.
To validate this, we perform a t-test, and the null hypothesis is that the slope β̂1 is zero. Let T refer to
the observed test statistic, P0 denotes the t-distribution of the test statistic under the null hypothesis,
then the p-valtue of the t-test where β̂1 is significantly different from zero are as follows.
                                                                           β̂1 − 0
            p-value = P (T ≥ t∗ | T ∼ P0 ) , t∗ = r                                                      .
                                                             1
                                                                  Pn
                                                                   i=1
                                                                                               2
                                                                         (Pℓ01i −(β̂1 ρi +β̂0 ))    √
                                                            n−2             n           2          / n
                                                                            i=1 (ρi −ρ̄)


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We check the condition of whether the larger p-value is less than the significance level 0.05 or
not. If the condition holds, the null hypotheses will be rejected, and the slope β̂1 is significantly
different from zero. Then the dataset is anticausal. Otherwise, the null hypothesis cannot be rejected,
suggesting the slope β̂1 is zero. Then the dataset is very likely to be causal.

B    A D ETAILED R EVIEW OF C AUSAL D ISCOVERY M ETHODS
Constraint-Based and Score-Based Approaches. To build a graph that captures these conditional
independencies, the majority of constraint-based techniques look for conditional independencies in
the empirical joint distribution. Since numerous graphs frequently satisfy a given set of conditional
dependencies, as was discussed above, constraint-based methods frequently produce a graph that
represents some Markov equivalence classes. Unfortunately, large sample sizes are necessary for
conditional independence tests to be reliable, and (Shah & Peters, 2020) highlights further difficulties
in controlling Type I errors.
Score-based approaches test the validity of a candidate graph G according to some scoring function
S. The goal is therefore stated as (Peters et al., 2017a):
                                    Ĝ = argmaxG over X S(D, G)                                      (6)
where the empirical data for the variables X is represented by D. Common scoring functions include
the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) (Geiger & Heckerman, 1994), the Minimum Description
Length (as an approximation of Kolmogorov Complexity) (Janzing & Schölkopf, 2010; Grünwald &
Vitányi, 2008; Kalainathan et al., 2020), the Bayesian Gaussian equivalent (BGe) score (Geiger &
Heckerman, 1994), the Bayesian Dirichlet equivalence (BDe) score (Heckerman et al., 1995), the
Bayesian Dirichlet equivalence uniform (BDeu) score (Heckerman et al., 1995), and others (Imoto
et al., 2002; Hyvärinen & Smith, 2013; Huang et al., 2018).

Functional Causal Models.         Methods based on causal function provide an alternate strategy
for estimating causal effects. Assumptions about the data generation process are used in these
causal function-based techniques. The causal function-based approach fits the causal function model
among variables and then infers causal directions using causal assumptions, such as a non-Gaussian
assumption of the noise (Shimizu et al., 2006; 2011) the independence assumption between cause
variables and noise (Zhang & Hyvarinen, 2009; Peters et al., 2011; 2014) and the independence
assumption between the distribution of cause variables and the causal function (Janzing et al., 2012).
Most LiNGAM-based approaches for the linear case (Shimizu et al., 2006) assume non-Gaussian
noise and linear causal relations between variables. This model seeks to determine a causal order
among the random observed variables.
To deal with linear latent confounders, an estimation method utilizing overcomplete ICA (Lewicki &
Sejnowski, 2000) is suggested. However, overcomplete ICA algorithms usually suffer from local
optimum and cannot be employed when the number of variables is large.
By evaluating the independence between the estimated exogenous variables and the residual, (Tashiro
et al., 2014) identify latent confounders. They discover that variables from subsets that are not
impacted by latent confounders are included, and they estimate causal orders one at a time. (Chen
& Chan, 2013) investigate linear non-Gaussian acyclic models in the presence of latent Gaussian
confounders (LiNGAM-GC), which assumes that the latent confounders are Gaussian distributed
independently.

C    C AUSAL G RAPHS AND S TRUCTURAL C AUSAL M ODELS (SCM)
Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) serve as a formalism for representing causal relationships. In these
graphs, arrows point from the parent node (direct cause) to the child node (direct effect) (Pearl, 2000).
Building upon this graphical representation, a structural causal model (SCM) can be constructed to
capture the causal mechanisms that underlie the data distribution.
An SCM is composed of a set of variables interconnected by functions, representing the flow
of information. This model elucidates the causal relationships among variables, offering a de-
tailed insight into the data generation process. Consider a DAG G = (V, E) defined over a set


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of variables {X1 , X2 , · · · , Xd , Y }, with P representing their joint distribution. Let X be the set
{X1 , X2 , · · · , Xd }. The notation XP AG  i
                                               refers to the direct causes of Xi , while YP AG denotes the
direct causes of Y . Disturbances or errors in the generative processes of Xi and Y are represented by
Ni and Ny , respectively. The SCM for a classification dataset can be expressed as:
                     Xi := fi (XP AG
                                   i
                                     , Ni ), i = 1, ..., d; Y := fy (YP AG , Ny ).

The causal factorization of the joint distribution is given by:
                                                         Y
                            P (X, Y ) = P (Y |YP AG )       P (Xi |XP AG
                                                                       i
                                                                         ).                           (7)
                                                          i

It’s worth noting that both XP AG
                                i
                                  and YP AG are allowed to be empty sets.

D     U NDERSTANDING THE I NDEPENDENCE BETWEEN D ISTRIBUTIONS

To concretely explain that the conditional distribution of each variable, given its causes (i.e., its
mechanism), does not inform or influence the other conditional distributions, let’s consider an
interesting example that follows the generative process of causal datasets.

       • We act as the data collector. 1). we randomly sample a photo X from Instagram.
       • Let Tom be the annotator. He will annotate each X we pass but without any knowledge of
         P (X).
       • Following the generative process, 2). we pass the photo X to Tom. Tom writes the label Y
         on the back of the photo X and puts the photo in a black box.
       • We repeat the process 1), and Tom repeats the process 2).

The question then arises: can we act like a clustering algorithm by looking at P (X) to understand
how photos in the box are labeled? Generally, the answer is no. Intuitively, there are too many
possible ways to annotate the photo. Tom could label the photos based on whether the image contains
a human, the number of humans, night vs. day, and other characteristics. We have no idea about his
mechanism by only looking at P (X). In this case, P (X) does not inform P (Y |X).

E     M ORE E XPERIMENTS

E.1   I NTRODUCTION OF R EAL - WORLD C AUSAL DATASETS
1. KrKp dataset contains 3196 instances with 36 attributes. Each instance is a board description
   for the chess endgame, where the feature attributes describe the board and the label determines
   whether it is ”win” or ”nowin”. It is considered a causal dataset since the board description
   causally influences whether white will win.
2. Splice dataset contains 3190 instances with 60 attributes, where attributes describe sequential
   DNA nucleotide positions and the label is the type of splice sites. It is considered a causal dataset
   since the DNA sequence causes the splice sites.
3. SecStr dataset contains 83680 instances with 15 attributes, where attributes describe the amino
   acid and the label is the corresponding secondary chemical structure. It is considered a causal
   dataset since the secondary structure is determined by its amino acid features.

E.2   I NTRODUCTION OF R EAL - WORLD A NTICAUSAL DATASETS
1. WDBC dataset contains 569 instances with 32 attributes. It is an anticausal dataset, where the
   class causes some of the tumor features.
2. Letter dataset contains 20000 instances with 16 attributes. It is an anticausal daset, where the class
   (letter) causes the produced image of the letter.
3. Breastcancer dataset contains 286 instances with 9 attributes. It is an anticausal dataset, where the
   class causes some of the tumor features.


                                                   15
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 4. Coil dataset contains 1500 instances with 241 attributes. It is considered an anticausal/confounded
    dataset because the six-state class and the features are confounded by the 24-state variable of all
    objects.
 5. G241C dataset contains 1500 instances with 241 attributes. It is considered an anticausal dataset
    since the class determines the features.
 6. Iris dataset contains 150 instances with 4 attributes. It is an anticausal dataset, where the size of
    the plant is an effect of the category.
 7. Mushroom dataset contains 8124 instances with 22 attributes. It is an anticausal dataset, where the
    attributes of the mushroom and the class are confounded by the mushroom taxonomy.
 8. Segment dataset contains 2310 instances with 19 attributes. It is an anticausal dataset, where the
    class causes the features of the image.
 9. Usps dataset contains 1500 instances with 240 attributes. It is an anticausal dataset, where the
    class and the features are confounded by the 10-state variable of all digits.
10. Waveform dataset contains 5000 instances with 21 attributes attributes and 1 label. Each class is
    generated from a combination of 2 or 3 ”base” waves. It is considered an anticausal dataset since
    the class of the wave causes its attributes.
11. CIFAR10 dataset contains 60000 32 × 32 color images (attributes) in 10 classes (label), with 6000
    images per class. It is considered an anticausal dataset since the images are collected according to
    the predefined 10 different labels.
12. CIFAR10N has the same number of instances and attributes as those of CIFAR10 while there are 5
    different types of human-annotated real-world noisy labels from Amazon Mechanical Turk.
13. Clothing1M contains 1M clothing images in 14 classes. It is a causal dataset with noisy labels since
    the image determines its class and the data is collected from several online shopping websites.
14. Digit1 dataset contains 1500 instances with 241 attributes. It is considered an anticausal dataset
    because the positive or negative angle and the features are confounded by the variable of continuous
    angle.

 E.3   I NTRODUCTION OF S YNTHETIC DATASETS

 In addition, we have generated two additional synthetic datasets, namely synCausal and synAnticausal,
 to validate our RoCA estimator. Each dataset consists of 20000 instances with 5 attributes and 1 label.
 In the case of synCausal, we generate each instance by randomly sampling 5 values from a standard
 normal distribution to represent X, and then compute the corresponding y value using a polynomial
 function. This process simulates the data generative process where X causes Y . Conversely, the
 instances in synAnticausal are generated similarly, but in the opposite direction, to reflect that Y
 causes X.

 E.4   I NTRODUCTION OF BASELINE C AUSAL D ISCOVERY M ETHODS

 The baseline causal discovery methods we employed are as follows.

 1. GES (Chickering, 2002): The Greedy Equivalence Search algorithm is a score-based Bayesian
    approach that heuristically searches for a graph that minimizes a likelihood score on the given
    data.
 2. GIES (Hauser & Bühlmann, 2012): The Greedy Interventional Equivalence Search algorithm is
    similar to GES, but it incorporates interventional data for inference.
 3. PC (Spirtes et al., 2000b): The Peter-Clark algorithm is one of the renowned score-based methods
    for causal discovery. It efficiently employs conditional tests on variables and variable sets.
 4. ICD (Rohekar et al., 2021): Iterative Causal Discovery recovers causal graphs in the presence
    of latent confounders and selection bias. ICD relies on the causal Markov and faithfulness
    assumptions and identifies the equivalence class of the underlying causal graph.
 5. RAI (Yehezkel & Lerner, 2009): Recursive Autonomy Identification learns the structure by
    sequentially applying conditional independence tests, edge direction, and structure decomposition
    into autonomous sub-structures.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  (SynCausal, Ins-10.0%)                                          (SynCausal, Sym-10.0%)                                         (SynAnticausal, Ins-10.0%)                                        (SynAnticausal, Sym-10.0%)
                1.0                                                             1.0                                                              1.0                                                               1.0
                       Slope: -0.0002                                                  Slope: 0.0047                                                    Slope: 0.4579                                                     Slope: 0.4945
                       P-value: 0.4466                                                 P-value: 0.1399                                                  P-value: 0.0000                                                   P-value: 0.0000
                0.8                                                             0.8                                                              0.8                                                               0.8


 Disagreement


                                                                 Disagreement


                                                                                                                                  Disagreement


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Disagreement
                0.6                                                             0.6                                                              0.6                                                               0.6

                0.4                                                             0.4                                                              0.4                                                               0.4

                0.2                                                             0.2                                                              0.2                                                               0.2

                0.0                                                             0.0                                                              0.0                                                               0.0
                      0.0      0.1       0.2        0.3    0.4                        0.0      0.1      0.2        0.3     0.4                         0.0      0.1       0.2        0.3      0.4                        0.0      0.1      0.2        0.3       0.4
                                        Noise Level                                                    Noise Level                                                       Noise Level                                                      Noise Level

                                  (SynCausal, Ins-20.0%)                                          (SynCausal, Sym-20.0%)                                         (SynAnticausal, Ins-20.0%)                                        (SynAnticausal, Sym-20.0%)
                1.0                                                             1.0                                                              1.0                                                               1.0
                       Slope: 0.0027                                                   Slope: 0.0033                                                    Slope: 0.3629                                                     Slope: 0.3726
                       P-value: 0.9772                                                 P-value: 0.8041                                                  P-value: 0.0000                                                   P-value: 0.0000
                0.8                                                             0.8                                                              0.8                                                               0.8
 Disagreement


                                                                 Disagreement


                                                                                                                                  Disagreement


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Disagreement
                0.6                                                             0.6                                                              0.6                                                               0.6

                0.4                                                             0.4                                                              0.4                                                               0.4

                0.2                                                             0.2                                                              0.2                                                               0.2

                0.0                                                             0.0                                                              0.0                                                               0.0
                      0.0      0.1       0.2        0.3    0.4                        0.0      0.1      0.2        0.3     0.4                         0.0      0.1       0.2        0.3      0.4                        0.0      0.1      0.2        0.3       0.4
                                        Noise Level                                                    Noise Level                                                       Noise Level                                                      Noise Level

                                  (SynCausal, Ins-30.0%)                                          (SynCausal, Sym-30.0%)                                         (SynAnticausal, Ins-30.0%)                                        (SynAnticausal, Sym-30.0%)
                1.0                                                             1.0                                                              1.0                                                               1.0
                       Slope: 0.0044                                                   Slope: 0.0060                                                    Slope: 0.2478                                                     Slope: 0.2473
                       P-value: 0.6729                                                 P-value: 0.9722                                                  P-value: 0.0000                                                   P-value: 0.0000
                0.8                                                             0.8                                                              0.8                                                               0.8
 Disagreement


                                                                 Disagreement


                                                                                                                                  Disagreement


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Disagreement
                0.6                                                             0.6                                                              0.6                                                               0.6

                0.4                                                             0.4                                                              0.4                                                               0.4

                0.2                                                             0.2                                                              0.2                                                               0.2

                0.0                                                             0.0                                                              0.0                                                               0.0
                      0.0      0.1       0.2        0.3    0.4                        0.0      0.1      0.2        0.3     0.4                         0.0      0.1       0.2        0.3      0.4                        0.0      0.1      0.2        0.3       0.4
                                        Noise Level                                                    Noise Level                                                       Noise Level                                                      Noise Level



Figure 5: The average disagreement and its standard deviation under different noise rates for synthetic
datasets: synCausal (left) and synAnticausal (right).


6. FCI (Spirtes et al., 2000a): Fast Causal Inference stands out among constraint-based methods for
   its ability to detect latent confounders.
7. LiNGAM (Shimizu et al., 2006): Linear Non-Gaussian Acyclic Model assumes that there are no
   hidden confounders and all of the error terms are non-gaussian and detects causal relationships
   from observed data accordingly.
8. SAM (Kalainathan et al., 2018): Structural Agnostic Model is a causal discovery algorithm for
   DAG recovery, leveraging both distributional asymmetries and conditional independencies.
9. CCDR (Aragam & Zhou, 2015): Concave Penalized Coordinate Descent with Reparametrization
   is a fast, score-based method for learning Bayesian networks, utilizing sparse regularization and
   block-cyclic coordinate descent.


E.5                         D ISAGREEMENTS WITH D IFFERENT N OISE L EVELS

Fig. 5 demonstrates the trend of disagreement with 10%, 20% and 30% label errors for synCausal
and synAnticausal datasets. For the synCausal dataset, the trend of disagreement remains unchanged
at 0.5 with the increase of noise rates, and the slope β̂1 of the regression line is close to 0. This
is because Y ′ is poorly estimated and should be a random guess of noised Y˜′ , which is proved in
Theorem 1. On the other hand, for the synAnticausal dataset, there is a strong positive correlation
between the disagreement and the noise level. In this case, Y ′ is well estimated, and both Y ′ and Ỹ
are close to the latent (clean) class Y . When the noise level ρ of our injected noise is increased to
0.5, the modified label Ỹ ρ becomes more seriously corrupted and tends to deviate far away from the
observed label Ỹ . This results in a larger disagreement between Ỹ ρ and Y ′ .
It is also observed that the slope becomes flattered when the label-error is larger (e.g., Ins-30% and
Sym-30%). Under this circumstance, a large amount of original observable labels Ỹ are not identical
to the latent clean classs Y anymore. Then Ỹ will be closer to a random guess of the clean class.
Therefore the positive correlation between Ỹ and Y ′ becomes weak. However, in these extreme
settings, our estimator is still robust, because the slope of our regression line is still significantly
different from 0, and we can conclude that the dataset is anticausal.


                                                                                                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Table 3: Comparing with other baselines on synthetic and real-world datasets.
                  Method       Original                  Instance                                 Pair                                  Sym
                                 0%           10%          20%          30%          10%          20%          30%          10%          20%          30%
                    GES         causal       causal       causal     anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal
                    GIES        causal       causal       causal     anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal
                     PC         causal       causal     anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal
                    ICD       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
  SynCausal         RAI         causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal
   (causal)          FCI      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  LINGAM       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                    SAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                   CCDR         causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal
                               p=0.7886     p=0.3131     p=0.4466     p=0.6729     p=0.1399     p=0.8041     p=0.9772     p=0.1399     p=0.8041     p=0.9772
                 Our method
                                causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal
                    GES       anticausal   anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    GIES      anticausal   anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                     PC       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    ICD       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
    Secstr          RAI        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
   (causal)          FCI      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  LINGAM       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                    SAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                   CCDR         causal       causal     anticausal   anticausal     causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal
                               p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.1510     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                 Our method
                              anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    GES       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    GIES      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                     PC       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    ICD       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
 SynAnticausal      RAI         causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal
  (anticausal)       FCI      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  LINGAM       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                    SAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                   CCDR       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal     causal
                               p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                 Our method
                              anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    GES       anticausal    unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal    unknown
                    GIES      anticausal    unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal    unknown
                     PC       anticausal    unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal    unknown
                    ICD       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    unknown     anticausal   anticausal    unknown     anticausal   anticausal    unknown
 Breastcancer       RAI       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown
 (anticausal)        FCI      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    unknown     anticausal   anticausal    unknown     anticausal   anticausal    unknown
                  LINGAM       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                    SAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                   CCDR         causal       causal       causal     anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal
                               p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                 Our method
                              anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    GES       anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                    GIES      anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                     PC         causal      unknown       causal      unknown      unknown     anticausal     causal       causal      unknown      unknown
                    ICD        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
      Coil          RAI        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
  (anticausal)       FCI      anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    unknown     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  LINGAM       unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                    SAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                   CCDR         causal       causal      unknown      unknown       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal
                               p=0.0000     p=1.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                 Our method
                              anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal


E.6      M ORE E XPERIMENTS ON R EAL - WORLD DATASETS

In Table 3 and 4, we present the results of causal discovery obtained using our RoCA estimator
compared to other baseline methods. Our RoCA estimator outperforms the baseline methods in
accurately identifying the causal relationships.
Among the 14 of 16 datasets, our RoCA estimator correctly identified the causal relationship between
X and Y in the majority of cases. This holds even when the datasets contained different types of
label noise, such as instance-dependent, pair, and symmetric noise, with noise rates ranging from 0%
to 30%. On the other hand, the performance of the baseline methods was generally satisfactory for
anticausal datasets but lacked accuracy when dealing with causal datasets. This is because a causal
dataset requires no features in X to cause Y , which presents a challenge for these baseline methods.
They need to ensure that there is no edge from any vertex representing features in X pointing to
the vertex representing Y when recovering the causal diagram. Although these baseline methods
tend to perform well in general tasks, they may not be suitable for this particular task, leading to
misclassification of datasets as anticausal.
Furthermore, the time complexity of some baseline methods hinders their application to datasets with
a large number of features, such as image datasets or datasets with hundreds of features (e.g., G241C,
Coil, etc.). Completing the algorithm within a reasonable time frame becomes challenging for these
methods. In this case, we classify the results as unknown.


                                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Table 4: Comparing with other baselines on synthetic and real-world datasets (cont.).
                 Method       Original                  Instance                                 Pair                                  Sym
                                0%           10%          20%          30%          10%          20%          30%          10%          20%          30%
                  GES        anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     causal       causal       causal
                  GIES       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     causal       causal       causal
                   PC        anticausal   anticausal    unknown     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  ICD         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
   G241C          RAI         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
 (anticausal)      FCI       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                LINGAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                  SAM         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                 CCDR        anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal
                              p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                Our method
                             anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  GES        anticausal    unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                  GIES       anticausal    unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                   PC        anticausal    unknown     anticausal    unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal     causal      unknown
                  ICD        anticausal    unknown     anticausal    unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal   anticausal    unknown
     Iris         RAI        anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
 (anticausal)      FCI       anticausal    unknown     anticausal    unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal   anticausal    unknown
                LINGAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                  SAM         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                 CCDR        anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                              p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                Our method
                             anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  GES        anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  GIES       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                   PC          causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  ICD         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
 Mushroom         RAI         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                LINGAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                  SAM         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                 CCDR         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                              p=0.0000     p=0.2127     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0865     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0865
                Our method
                             anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal   anticausal     causal
                  GES         unknown     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  GIES        unknown     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                   PC         unknown     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  ICD        anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
   Segment        RAI         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
 (anticausal)      FCI       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                LINGAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                  SAM         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                 CCDR          causal       causal     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                              p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                Our method
                             anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  GES        anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal     causal     anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal     causal
                  GIES       anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal     causal     anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal     causal
                   PC          causal      unknown      unknown      unknown       causal     anticausal    unknown       causal     anticausal    unknown
                  ICD         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
    Usps          RAI         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
 (anticausal)      FCI       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal    unknown     anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                LINGAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                  SAM         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                 CCDR          causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal
                              p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                Our method
                             anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  GES        anticausal     causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal     anticausal     causal
                  GIES       anticausal     causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal     anticausal     causal
                   PC        anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  ICD        anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
  Waveform        RAI         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
 (anticausal)      FCI       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                LINGAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                  SAM         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                 CCDR          causal       causal       causal       causal       causal     anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal     causal
                              p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                Our method
                             anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                  GES        anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal     causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal
                  GIES       anticausal     causal       causal     anticausal     causal       causal       causal       causal       causal       causal
                   PC          causal     anticausal   anticausal     causal     anticausal    unknown      unknown     anticausal    unknown      unknown
                  ICD         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
    Digit1        RAI         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
 (anticausal)      FCI       anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                LINGAM        unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                  SAM         unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown      unknown
                 CCDR        anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal
                              p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000     p=0.0000
                Our method
                             anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal   anticausal


                                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     P SEDUOCODE OF O UR I NSTANCE -D EPENDENT N OISE G ENERATION

Algorithm 1 Generation of Instance-dependent Noisy Labels
Require: An average noise level ρ; A sample S = {(Xi , Ỹi )}m       i=0 , where contains C number of
    classes, and X ∈ Rd .
 1: Initialize an empty list A with length m.
 2: for each ith example (xi , ỹ) ∈ S: do
 3:    Let ai = ||Xi ||1 and add ai into A.
 4: end for
 5: Sort the values in A in ascending order.
 6: Sample a vector P ∈ Rm from a m-dimensional truncated normal distribution with mean ρ,
    upper limit 1, and lower limit 0.
 7: Sort the values in P in ascending order.
 8: for i in range (0, m): do
 9:    Let the individual flip rate of the ith example ρxi = (the ith element in P ).
10: end for
11: Generate the instance-dependent noisy label of the ith example Ỹ ρxi using the flip rate ρxi .



G     P ROOFS
In this section, we show all the proofs. We remind some notations first.

       • Let X be the instance space and C the set of all possible classes.
       • Let S = {(xi , ỹi )}m
                              t=0 be an sample set.
       • Let h : X → {1, . . . , C}, be a hypothesis that predicts pseudo labels of instances. Con-
         cretely, it can be a K-means algorithm together with the Hungarian algorithm which matches
         the cluster ID to the corresponding pseudo labels. Let H be the hypothesis space, where
         h ∈ H.
       • Let R̃ρ (h) = E(x,ỹρ )∼P (X,Ỹ ρ ) [1{h(x)̸=ỹρ } ]be the expected disagreement R̃(h) between
         pseudo labels and generated labels ỹ ρ with ρ-level noise injection.
              ˆ ρ (h) be the average disagreement (or empirical risk) of h on the set S after ρ-level
       • Let R̃S
         noise injection.

Firstly, we illustrate the Rademacher complexity bound.
Definition 3 (The Rademacher Complexity Bound (Mohri et al., 2018)). Let H be a family of
functions taking values in {−1, +1}, and let D be the distribution over the input space X . Then,
for any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ/2 over a sample S = (x1 , . . . , xm ) of size m drawn
according to D, for any function h ∈ H,
                                                           s
                                                             log 4δ
                             R̂S (h) − R(h) ≤ 2R̂S (H) + 3          ,                              (8)
                                                              2n
where R(h) is the expected risk of the function h, and R̂S (h) is the empirical risk of the function h
on the sample S (Mohri et al., 2018). Specifically, let c be a target concept, then,
                                                                 m
                                                             1 X
               R(h) = Ex∼D [1{h(xi )̸=c(xi )} ], R̂S (h) =         1{h(xi )̸=c(xi )} .
                                                             m i=1

G.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof. Under causal setting, h random guess the clean labels, i.e., ∀i, j ∈ C ∧ i ̸= j ∧ ∀t ∈
{0, 1, . . . , m}, P (Y ′ = y ′ |Y = y, X = x) = C1 . Then we will prove that if h can only random
guess the clean labels, then h can only random guess the observed labels that contain the label error,
i.e., R̃(h, x) = C−1C .


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By the assumption that for every instance and clean class pair (x, y), its observed label ỹ is obtained
                                                                ρx
by a noise rate ρx such that P (Ỹ = ỹ|Y = y, X = x) = C−1         for all ỹ ̸= y ∧ ỹ ∈ C, the risk
R̃(h, x) of h on x and its observed labels comes from two parts:

       • When h misclassifies the clean label, h also misclassifies the observed label, i.e., (y ̸= y ′
         and y ′ ̸= ỹ).
       • When h successfully classifies the clean label, h misclassifies the observed label, i.e., (y = y ′
         and y ′ ̸= ỹ).

Specifically, the expected risk of each example is as follows.

                                                 ρx
                         R̃(h, x) = R(h, x)(1 −      ) + (1 − R(h, x))ρx
                                               C −1
                                    C − 1 C − 1 − ρx    ρx
                                  =                  +
                                     C      C −1        C
                                    C − 1 − ρx   ρx
                                  =            +
                                        C         C
                                    C −1
                                  =       .                                                               (9)
                                     C
Because our noise is designed to also satisfy the assumption, after injecting our designed instance-
                           ˆ ρ1 (h) and R̃
dependent noise, the risk R̃             ˆ ρ2 (h) under two different (expected) noise levels ρ1 = E [ρ1 ]
                            S            S                                                           x    x
and ρ2 = Ex [ρ2x ] does not change under the anticausal setting.

                     1                       ρ1x                         C −1
                  R̃ρ (h, x) = R̃(h, x)(1 −      ) + (1 − R̃(h, x))ρ1x =      .                          (10)
                                            C −1                          C
                     2                       ρ2x                         C −1
                  R̃ρ (h, x) = R̃(h, x)(1 −      ) + (1 − R̃(h, x))ρ2x =      .                          (11)
                                            C −1                          C
The above equations show that after injecting two different levels of instance-dependent label noise,
the risks do not change. For completeness, we also illustrate the convergence rate of the difference
between two empirical risks with respect to sample size. By employing the Rademacher complexity
bound, with a probability 1 − δ/2,
                                                                    s
                                                                            4
                           ˆ ρ (h) ≤ E [R̃ρ1 (h, x)] + 2R̂ (H) + 3 log δ
                          R̃
                              1

                             S        x                     S
                                                                         2m
                                                  s
                              1                      log 4δ
                        =R̃ρ (h) + 2R̂S (H) + 3             ,
                                                      2m
similarly,
                                                                    s
                           ˆ ρ2             2                           log 4δ
                          R̃S (h) ≤ Ex [R̃ρ (h, x)] + 2R̂S (H) + 3
                                                                         2m
                                                    s
                                                       log 4δ
                        =R̃(h, ρ2 ) + 2R̂S (H) + 3            .
                                                        2m
By applying the symmetric property of the Rademacher complexity bound to the above two inequali-
ties, with a probability 1 − 2δ,
                                                                s
                                                                    4
                             ˆ ρ (h) − R̃ρ (h)| ≤ 2R̂ (H) + 3 log δ and
                           |R̃
                                1          1

                               S                        S
                                                                  2m
                                                                 s
                                                                      4
                             ˆ ρ2 (h) − R̃(h, ρ2 )| ≤ 2R̂ (H) + 3 log δ .
                           |R̃ S                          S
                                                                   2m


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining the above two inequalities, we get
                                                                                   s
                  ˆ ρ (h) − R̃ρ (h) − R̃
                    1          1       ˆ ρ (h) + R̃(h, ρ2 )| ≤ 4R̂ (H) + 6
                                          2                                            log 4δ
                |R̃ S                    S                        S                           .
                                                                                        2m

                                            1
                                                       h 1        i
By Eq. 10 and Eq. 11, the expected risk R̃ρ (h) = EX R̃ρ (h, x) = EX C−1

                                                                             C    and R̃(h, ρ2 ) =
   h 2        i
EX R̃ρ (h, x) = EX C−1        both equals to C−1

                         C                    C , then the above inequality becomes


                                                                    s
                              ˆ ρ1 (h) − R̃
                                          ˆ ρ2 (h)| ≤ 4R̂ (H) + 6       log 4δ
                            |R̃ S           S            S                     ,                  (12)
                                                                         2m
with a probability 1-2δ, which completes the proof.

G.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proof. The expected risk on the observed label for each instance x is that:
                                             ρx
                     R̃ρ (h, x) = R̃(h, x)(       ) + (1 − R̃(h, x))(1 − ρx )
                                            C −1
                                                                 ρx R̃(h, x)
                                = ρx + R̃(h, x) − ρx R̃(h, x) −              .
                                                                   C −1

Then the expected risk of the distribution of observed data is that:
                                h          i
                 R̃ρ (h) = EX R̃ρ (h, x)
                                "                                            #
                                                                 ρx R̃(h, x)
                         = EX ρx + R̃(h, x) − ρx R̃(h, x) −
                                                                    C −1
                                                  "                                 #
                                h         i                             ρx R̃(h, x)
                         = EX R̃(h, x) + EX ρx − ρx R̃(h, x) −
                                                                          C −1
                                         "                           ! #
                                                            R̃(h, x)
                         = R̃(h) + EX        1 − R̃(h, x) −            ρx
                                                             C −1
                                         "                  ! #
                                                 C R̃(h, x)
                         = R̃(h) + EX        1−               ρx .                                (13)
                                                   C −1

Moving R̃(h) to the LHS of the above equation completes the proof.
                                     h                  i
Note that the convergence rate of E 1 − C R̃(h,x)
                                                C−1     ρx can also be directly derived by replacing
the expected risks with the empirical risks in Eq. 13. This process employs Inequality 8 and shares a
similar conceptual foundation as the proof for the coverage rate presented in Theorem 1.

H     D ISCUSSION & L IMITATION
It is known that discovering causal relations without any assumptions is impossible (Glymour et al.,
2019a). Here, we discuss the assumptions required by our method. Except for the commonly
used causal faithfulness and acyclic graph assumption and independent causal mechanisms (Peters
et al., 2014) to guarantee that by employing RoCA under the causal setting, the disagreements (or
expected risks) under different noise levels do not change, an additional assumption is required
to constrain the label error types in datasets. Specifically, this assumption states that for every
instance and clean class pair (x, y), its observed label ỹ is obtained by a noise rate ρx such that
                                 ρx
P (Ỹ = ỹ|Y = y, X = x) = C−1       for all ỹ ̸= y ∧ ỹ ∈ C. This assumption holds not only when


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


data contains instance-dependent label errors but also when data is without label errors or contains
class-dependent errors (Patrini et al., 2017; Xia et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021).
To let our method successfully infer an anticausal dataset, another assumption is that the anticausal
dataset should contain information about the variables that are effects of the clean class Y . If the
information does not exist, then the distribution of instances P (X) will no longer contain information
about P (Y |X). In this case, RoCA will misclassify it as a causal dataset. It is important to note that
the effect feature itself can be latent, but its information has to be retained in the dataset. For example,
consider an image dataset, even though content and style features are latent, they are inherently
incorporated into the image itself (Von Kügelgen et al., 2021), ensuring that information on content
and style features is retained in the dataset.
Furthermore, to use Pθ (Ỹ |X) as a surrogate for P (Y |X), we assume that there is a dependence
between Pθ (Ỹ |X) and Pθ (Y |X). Note that this assumption usually holds, as otherwise the annota-
tion mechanism Pθ (Ỹ |X) would just be a random guess of P (Y |X), resulting in the observed label
Ỹ becoming meaningless. However, if the assumption does not hold, employing Pθ (Ỹ |X) as the
surrogate will lead to misclassification of causal and anticausal relation.


                                                    23
