Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ROM I MAGES TO C ONNECTIONS : C AN DQN WITH
GNN S LEARN THE S TRATEGIC G AME OF H EX ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The gameplay of strategic board games such as chess, Go and Hex is often charac-
         terized by combinatorial, relational structures—capturing distinct interactions and
         non-local patterns—and not just images. Nonetheless, most common self-play re-
         inforcement learning (RL) approaches simply approximate policy and value func-
         tions using convolutional neural networks (CNN). A key feature of CNNs is their
         relational inductive bias towards locality and translational invariance. In contrast,
         graph neural networks (GNN) can encode more complicated and distinct relational
         structures. Hence, we investigate the crucial question: Can GNNs, with their
         ability to encode complex connections, replace CNNs in self-play reinforcement
         learning? To this end, we do a comparison with Hex—an abstract yet strategically
         rich board game—serving as our experimental platform. Our findings reveal that
         GNNs excel at dealing with long range dependency situations in game states and
         are less prone to overfitting, but also showing a reduced proficiency in discern-
         ing local patterns. This suggests a potential paradigm shift, signaling the use of
         game-specific structures to reshape self-play reinforcement learning.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In 2016, AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016) became the first AI to beat professional Go players by combin-
ing Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) with neural network policy and value approximation and self-
play training. Its approach has since been transferred to various other board games: AlphaZero (Sil-
ver et al., 2017) achieved superhuman strength in Chess and Shogi while Mohex-3HNN (Gao et al.,
2018) has become one of the strongest AI for Hex. Behind these accomplishments lies a crucial
observation: Despite the diversity of the board games, all these programs use convolutional neu-
ral networks (CNN) as the foundational architecture to approximate policy and value functions.
CNNs excel at extracting spatial features from high-dimensional sensory inputs like images, en-
abling agents to effectively perceive and learn from their environment, a fundamental aspect in train-
ing RL agents. However they inherently exhibit relational inductive biases that favor spatial locality
and translational equivariance. These biases align harmoniously for most positions in the game of

          a                           b                              c
               B                                                         B                 A
           B


                                                       A
                              A

Figure 1: Non-local dependencies exist in many prominent board games. a, the bishop in the top-left
corner is more related to the long distance square marked A, than the directly adjactent ones marked
B. b, if there is a black stone at A, according to a typical Go pattern, white should not continue to
play the ladder. c, if the tile at A is red, playing at B wins the game according to the Hex rules. If A
is blue, playing at B is a wasted move.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Go where spatially local patterns dominate. As Figure 1 illustrates, non-local dependencies are very
prevalent in other board games such as Chess or Hex. In these cases, the information-processing
structure of CNNs does not align well with the structure of the game and learning becomes harder.
This fact has already been observed by Silver et al. (2017) who noticed that AlphaGo Zero has a
hard time understanding the “ladder” pattern which relates very distant areas of the Go board.
Good representation of the environment in Reinforcement Learning (RL) is crucial as it determines
how effectively an agent can perceive and understand it, directly impacting the agents ability to make
informed decisions and learn optimal policies. In contrast to CNNs, Graph Neural Networks (GNN)
operate on graph representations instead of grid representations/images and can model complicated
task-specific structure and relational inductive biases. In the case of Hex, cf. Figure 1c, a CNN using
a grid-based representation primarily takes the information of the tiles close to (B) into account when
predicting if (B) is a good move. A good graph representation on the other hand has edges closely
connecting related parts of the board, such as (A) and (B) making it more likely that (A) is taken
into account when predicting if the move at (B) is strong.
In this work, we use GNNs to overcome the mismatch between grid-based representation and the
inherent structure of the task at hand. We propose Graph Deep Q-Networks (GraphDQN)1 by in-
tegrating GNNs with RainbowDQN (Hessel et al., 2017) to capture non-local patterns and other
task-specific relationships accurately while enabling self-play RL. To demonstrate the transforma-
tive potential of GNNs we also integrate GNNs with a methodology inspired by AlphaZero. We
strategically choose the game Hex as a focal point study for this new approach. Hex serves as an
ideal case study since it’s a well known benchmark. Not only does Hex possess a classical grid-
based representation but it also stands out as a “Shannon vertex switching game” (Gardner, 1961).
This distinctive feature allows for an equivalent representation as a graph, adding a new level of
complexity and interest to our investigation.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

          • We introduce Graph Deep Q-Networks (GraphDQN), a combination of GNNs with DQN
            for use in self-play RL.
          • To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to exploit the graphical structure of the game
            of Hex to train a distinctive Graph Neural network to play it.
          • We empirically show that GNNs outperform CNNs trained similarly via DQN on game
            states with long range dependencies.

To this end, we proceed as follows: We start off by discussing related work. Then we introduce
the game of Hex and show how to learn to play it using GNNs. Finally we conclude and provide
avenues for future work.

2       R ELATED W ORK

The core contribution of this work is the combination of self-play reinforcement learning and graph
neural networks and its application to the board game Hex. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are
powerful tool for analyzing graph-structured data. They excel in tasks involving complex relation-
ships, such as social network analysis, recommendation systems, and bioinformatics. GNNs utilize
message-passing algorithms to capture intricate dependencies within graphs. Message-passing neu-
ral networks (MPNN), introduced by Gilmer et al. (2017), unify various previous graph neural net-
work and graph convolutional network (Kipf & Welling, 2016) approaches into a message-passing
framework on graphs. GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017) is an instantiation of a message-passing
neural network that aims to generate high quality node embedding. We found GraphSAGE par-
ticularly suitable for function approximation in Hex due to it’s straightforward message-passing
structure and easy applicability. Many recent works leverage GNNs to improve deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) methods (Almasan et al., 2022; Fathinezhad et al., 2023; Nie et al., 2023) and other
domains such as visual scene understanding (Raposo et al., 2017), reasoning in knowledge graphs
(Hamaguchi et al., 2017), quantum chemistry (Gilmer et al., 2017) or model-free reinforcement
learning (Zambaldi et al., 2018). In self-play DRL, GNNs are still an under-explored topic.
    1
        Our source code is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/GNN_Hex-D90E


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Self-play reinforcement learning, describe a technique where an agent learns by playing against it-
self. It has garnered significant attention in recent years and has been widely adopted in the domain
of artificial intelligence and reinforcement learning. One of the more prominent works in this area
is AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016) and its successor AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017), which achieved
groundbreaking successes in playing the board game Go and later Chess and Shogi. Building on this
success, subsequent studies have explored the application of self-play in various domains, including
other board games, video games, and robotics. A notable example is CrazyAra (Czech et al., 2020),
a framework based on AlphaZero that extends to the chess variants Crazyhouse and Horde, as well
as other games such as Hex and Darkhex (Blüml et al., 2023). Meanwhile, model-free approaches
like DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) have been adapted to self-play RL, e.g. Neural-fictitious self-play
(Heinrich & Silver, 2016). RainbowDQN (Hessel et al., 2017) combines several techniques, i.e.,
Prioritized Replay Buffers (Schaul et al., 2015), DoubleDQN (Van Hasselt et al., 2016) and Duel-
ingDQN (Wang et al., 2016) to improve the performance and stability of DQN making the approach
more applicable. Both CrazyAra and RainbowDQN have demonstrated remarkable performance in
previous studies and will therefore be used in this work.


3   G AMES ON G RAPHS

Graph structures offer mathematical advantages with their visual clarity, providing a tangible repre-
sentation for abstract concepts and aiding in theorem visualization. They find applications in graph
theory, combinatorial analysis, number theory, and computer science. Their crucial role in modeling
relationships between entities is vital for understanding various networks, from social interactions
to data systems and ML approaches. Graphs serve as efficient data structures, simplifying complex
relationships. In the context of games on graphs, they form a key component by combining com-
binatorics, game theory, and graph theory. A good overview on methods cab be found in the work
by Fijalkow et al. (2023). In this work, we focus on applying Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to
self-play RL using such graph representation of games Waradpande et al. (2021).
Shannon Vertex-Switching Games. Shannon’s Switching Game is a combinatorial game invented
by Shannon with the goal of breaking down the connectivity within a network. Given a connected
undirected graph G = (V, E) with two distinct vertices x and y, two players use join and cut actions
in the graph in alternating turns. The join action removes a node from the graph while joining all
neighbors of the removed node with a direct edge. The cut action removes a node without replace-
ment. The short Player has the goal to connect the nodes x and y with a direct edge while the cut
player wins by separating x and y into disconnected subgraphs making it impossible to connect them
(Lehman, 1964). Shannon’s Vertex-Switching Game is well known for being a generalization of Hex
and Gale (Gardner, 1961) as such these games can be translated into Shannon Vertex-Switching
Games unveiling logical equivalences between states, aiding strategic comprehension.
The Game of Hex. Hex is an abstract strategy board game invented by mathematician and philoso-
pher Piet Hein and independently by mathematician John Nash. The game is played on a hexagonal
grid of n × n, typically with n equals 11 or 13. Two players, each assigned a distinct color (often
red and blue), take turns placing their pieces on the board with the goal of connecting their sides
of the board with a continuous chain of pieces. The game offers a simple set of rules yet presents
deep strategic complexity, often requiring players to think several moves ahead to anticipate and
block their opponent’s attempts to form a winning connection. Hex has been widely studied in the
field of game theory and has served as an inspiration for various computer algorithms and artificial
intelligence research due to its challenging gameplay and mathematical properties. Two examples
of Hex boards are shown in Figure 1c and Figure 2a.
To represent a Hex board as a Shannon Vertex-Switching Game from the perspective of the red
player, each uncolored tile and each of the red borders is represented with a distinct vertex, with
edges connecting neighboring tiles. On alternating turns, red performs join actions, while blue
performs cut actions on the resulting graph. Red wins if he can connect the border vertices x and
y with a direct edge, while blue wins by cutting each connection between the two border vertices.
In line with their respective goals, the red player is now called the short player while blue is called
the cut player. Any Hex position can equivalently be represented from the perspective of the blue
player, so that each Hex board has two equivalent Shannon-Vertex Switching Game representations.
An example of a Hex graph with the corresponding board position is shown in Figure 2.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                a                                        b
                              1 3 6 8                        1       3       6       8
                               2 4 7
                                  5                              2       4       7

                                                                             5



Figure 2: Example of a hex graph and it’s corresponding board position. a A 5 × 5 Hex position. b
The corresponding (red) Hex graph. The T-nodes represent the red sides while the other nodes are
representing unclaimed tiles (The numbers indicate correspondence between tiles and nodes)


Transferable CNN methods for Hex. The most prominent existing Hex agents are the MoHex-
based agents. MoHex was introduced by Arneson et al. (2010) and used Monte-Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS, (Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006)) to plan its moves. Several updates were published later on
such as MoHex 2.0 (Huang et al., 2013), MoHex-CNN (Gao et al., 2017) and MoHex-3HNN (Gao
et al., 2018). The last two are especially interesting because they integrate CNNs into MCTS similar
to AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017). CNNs that are conventionally used to approximate policy/value
functions for board games are not fully convolutional. For instance, the AlphaGo Zero Silver et al.
(2017) network includes a fully connected final layer to reach the desired output size and can thus
only be designed for a specific input size. Gao et al. (2018) on the other hand only uses residual
layers without pooling to preserve the board size. Similar to GNNs that can process graphs of
any size and structure, Gao et al. (2018) architecture can deal with boards of any shape. Thus, it
is especially suitable for comparison with GNNs in the context of Hex. Another approach to fully
convolutional networks is the U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015a). It uses pooling layers together with
up sampling to ensure the correct output size. We will use both Gao et al. (2018) and Ronneberger
et al. (2015a) as baselines for comparison without GNN approach.

4   GNN S MEET SELF - PLAY RL
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) offer significant promise in Reinforcement Learning (RL) due to
their ability to model intricate relationships in non-Euclidean domains. In scenarios where agents
interact in complex, graph-structured environments or those that can be effectively represented as
such, GNNs exhibit prowess at capturing contextual information and propagating it across nodes.
This empowers agents to make adaptive decisions based on diverse state representations, making
GNNs a compelling approach for addressing the intricacies and dependencies inherent in RL prob-
lems. In this section, we propose two GNN based Self-play RL models: GraphDQN and GraphAra
that judiciously integrates GNNs with DQN and AlphaGo respectively, to catalyze a paradigm shift
in the domain of self-play RL.
GraphDQN. Deep Q-Networks (DQNs) (Mnih et al., 2015) was originally proposed as a single
agent reinforcement learning algorithm and is still mostly used in single-agent tasks. However,
a simple way to adapt DQN to self-play RL is by treating the opponent’s moves as part of the
environment. This means, that we compute the Q-target
                              Y t = rt − rt+1 + γ max Qθ′ (st+2 , a)                              (1)
                                                     a


from st+2 , the state after the agent and his opponent have made a move. For choosing the opponent’s
move, it has been proposed to keep separate agents and average over the agents past behaviour (e.g.
Neural Fictitious Self-Play (Heinrich & Silver, 2016)). However, for our purposes, comparing GNNs
and CNNs on a game without imperfect information, we found that it was enough to just use the
current version of the agent as the self-play opponent. To improve the stability and convergence
speed of our self-play DQN training, we make use of various RainbowDQN (Hessel et al., 2017)
techniques, mentioned in Section 2.
To test and evaluate the usability of GNNs in model-free self-play reinforcement learning, we de-
cided to combine GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017), a GNN-based message passing architecture,


                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            Advantage Head

                                                                               Value Head


      Input Graph         GraphSage Block       Node Embeddings                                Q-Values


Figure 3: Architecture of the graph neural network used during the GraphDQN and GraphAra ex-
periments. The network body uses a block of SAGEConv layers (Hamilton et al., 2017) to compute
embeddings for each graph node. The advantage and value head implement DuelingDQN (Wang
et al., 2016). Depending on if it is the short or the cut player’s move, different parameters are used
in the advantage head SAGEConv layers and the value head MLP. Advantages and values are added
to compute the Q-values.


with RainbowDQN. The main goal here was to maintain the features of DQNs, such as training via
self-play, but to take advantage of the graph representation.
For this, we replaced the convolutional layers with message-passing layers, within the DQN. The
networks body is realized with a GraphSAGE message passing block that computes node embedding
vectors for the input graph. These are passed to the two heads, the advantage head and value head.
In the advantage head, another GraphSAGE block is used with a final scaled tanh activation to
compute advantages A(s, ·) in the range [−2, 2]. To compute the position value V (s) in the value
head, the node embeddings are aggregated using symmetric aggregation operations. The mean, max,
min, and sum aggregated node embeddings are concatenated into a single vector and a multilayer
perceptron with final tanh activation is used to compute a position value in the range [−1, 1]. Finally,
position value and advantages minus maxa A(s, a) are summed to calculate the output action-values.
The overall architecture is shown in Figure 3, while an illustration of both heads can be found in
Appendix C.
GraphAra. While RainbowDQN is still a very popular approach, AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016)
and later AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017) have shown that model-based approaches are also well
suited for self-play RL. To show that transformative capabilities of GNNs extend far beyond their
synergy with RainbowDQN we combine GNNs with AlphaZero-inspired methodology, leveraging
the adaptable framework of CrazyAra (Czech et al., 2020) which supports a variety of other games
and chess variants, including the intricate terrains of Hex and its variants (Blüml et al., 2023). We
use a similar GNN architecture to the one in GraphDQN Figure 3, with the only difference that the
advantage head is replaced by a policy head and that the outputs of policy and value head are treated
independently. Our approach thus differs from AlphaZero in that we have replaced the ResNet in
AlphaZero with our GNN architecture. The algorithm is described in more detail in Appendix D.

5   E VALUATING G RAPH DQN AND G RAPH A RA
Experimental Setup. A Graph Neural Network, a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015a) and the
transferable CNN by Gao et al. (2018) which will be further referred to as Gao were trained to
play Hex using RainbowDQN. The GNN architecture is depicted in Figure 3 and constitutes 15
SageConv layers. The Gao network is a fully convolutional network consisting of ten residual blocks
each compromised of two 3x3 convolutional layers. We modify the original Gao architecture (Gao
et al., 2018) by removing policy and value head, as we only need the Q-head for RainbowDQN.
Additionally, we do not use batch-normalization to ensure comparability with our GNN model that
also does not use any normalization. The U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015a) has a total of three
pooling layers thus processing the input of four different scales. The U-Net archtecture is illustrated
in the Appendix B. All neural networks were implemented using pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019) with
the GNNs making additional use of pytorch geometric (Fey & Lenssen, 2019). We ensure a fair
comparison between the GNN and U-Net by choosing a similar amount of parameters (486974 vs
481329). The three networks were trained on 11x11 Hex boards for 110 hours on Nivida A100
40GB GPU. The GNNs process the Hex positions as graphs, receiving the set of edges and terminal
node locations as inputs. In contrast, the U-Net processes Hex positions as a three layered grid,
with two layers for red and blue stone locations and one layer indicating whose turn it is. The Gao


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          a         red negative red positive         b

              5x5



         13x13


Figure 4: a, Long range dependency problems in Hex. Depending on the color of the tile at the
top-left, red should (red positive) or should not (red negative) play at the bottom-left. Problems of
the same shape are constructed for varied Hex sizes to evaluate the ability of CNNs and GNNs to
solve long-range dependency problems. Results are shown in Table 1. b, Mistake made by the Gao
CNN on the 9 × 9 blue negative long range dependency problem. With blue to move, the Gao CNN
outputs the highest Q-value (.63) for the blue circled tile on the bottom right, which is a mistake.


Table 1: GNNs perform better at long range dependency problems. The GNN based GraphDQN
makes significantly fewer mistakes on long range dependency problems than their CNN counter-
parts. Four long range dependency problems (red positive, red negative, blue positive, blue neg-
ative) similar to Figure 4 were created for each Hex size. The models, were evaluated on all of
these problems by checking if they output the largest Q-value for the tile on the bottom left (or the
corresponding graph node for the GNNs). Our approach is highlighted in bold.

      Agent         8x8   9x9   10x10    11x11    12x12     13x13     14x14 - 25x25     Sum of Errors
    Gao              1     1       1       2          2        2            22                31
   U-Net             0     0       0       1          1        2            32                36
 GraphDQN            0     0       0       0          0        0             1                1



network uses one additional layer for the location of empty tiles. Also, it indicates the color of each
of the borders of the hex board by padding the input with red tiles on red borders and blue tiles on
blue borders.

5.1    C OMPARING G RAPH AND C ONVOLUTIONAL N EURAL N ETWORKS

Long range dependencies.           The primary reason to use GNNs in this work is to address the
inherent challenges CNNs have when dealing with long range dependencies. To make this apparent,
we make GNNs and CNNs solve specifically tailored Hex problems and evaluate their long range
dependency potential. As shown in Figure 4, we create long range dependency problems on various
Hex board sizes according to a predefined pattern. In red positive patterns, blue is threatening a
connection on the left side via a single move on the bottom left. Thus, red solves this problem by
playing bottom left himself. On the other hand, red negative patterns are similar, but the tile on the
top-left is white instead of blue. Blue is thus not threatening a connection and playing on bottom-
left is a mistake for red. This is a long-range dependency between the top-left and bottom-left tile.
We create such patterns (and similar blue positive and blue negative patterns) for Hex board sizes
from 8 × 8 to 25 × 25 and evaluate the GNN, as well as the two CNNs, Gao and U-Net, on these
problems. Results are shown in Table 1. We find that CNNs exhibit significantly higher rate of
errors. It’s also worth noting that the errors made by U-Net can’t solely be attributed to inability to
transfer knowledge across board sizes, as U-Net also makes mistakes on Hex 11 × 11, the size it was
trained on. In contrast, GNNs seem to have developed a general understanding of these long range
dependency patterns, which remains robust even when dealing with exceptionally large board sizes.
Board Size Transfer. We aimed to evaluate the ability of GNNs and CNNs to transfer knowledge
to Hex board sizes unseen during training. Thus, we take our models trained via RainbowDQN on
11 × 11 Hex and set up matches between them on board sizes 8 × 8 to 15 × 15. The network agents


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A                                                     B
        GNN
                                                            GNN
        Gao
                                                            U-Net


                       11                                                  11



                            C      GNN
                                   Gao-


                                                 11


Figure 5: Performance of the Hex agents when evaluated on board sizes different from the training
size. A, The Gao model is stronger than the GNN on smaller Hex sizes, but it becomes less effective
when scaling up to a much larger board size. B, The U-Net performs much worse than the GNN
when transferred to other board sizes. C, The Gao-network is trained and evaluated without padding
the borders with red/blue tiles. This has a large negative impact on model performance, suggesting
that border padding is key for training a strong CNN for Hex.


choose the moves with the highest predicted Q-values. To ensure diversity between the games we
fix the starting move of each of the games played. On each board size, the agents play matches with
each unique starting move and each player having the first move once. E.g. on 8×8 Hex there are 36
unique opening moves each of which is played by each of the agents in the first move for a total of
72 games played between the agents. Figure 5 shows the win rates of the agents on each board size.
We find that the Gao network beats the GNN on most board sizes, but has trouble when transferring
to much larger boards. The U-Net on the other hand only works well on the board size that it was
trained on and performs much worse when transferring to other board sizes. Finally, we tested the
impact of the border padding in the Gao model and thus trained a model Gao- that does not pad the
borders of each hex board with red and blue tiles. We find that it performs significantly worse than
model with border padding while showing the same trends for transfer between board sizes.
Supervised learning. In the next experiment, the GNN, the Gao model and the U-Net are trained to
learn the policy of Mohex 2.0 and to predict the outcome of it’s self-play games. The models were
thus modified with a policy and value head. For the GNN this just means repurposing the advantage
head as a policy head by replacing the final tanh activation with a softmax. For Gao, we use the
policy and value head as described in Gao et al. (2018) and for the U-Net we add a feedforward
value head and convolutional policy head similarly to the heads of the Gao model. All models are
trained for 3000 training epochs using Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimization with a learning rate
of 1 − e4 and weight decay of 1e − 4.
Figure 6 reveals that the U-Net overfits heavily on the 8000 Mohex 2.0 games in the training dataset,
achieving high accuracy on the training set and low performance on the validation set. Similarly,
the Gao model overfits heavily when predicting the games outcome (value sign accuracy), but still
achieves the best validation accuracy on for predicting the policy. Only the GNN is able to generalize
effectively to the validation dataset of 2000 Mohex 2.0 games achieving the highest validation value
sign accuracy while not overfitting the training policy dataset.

5.2   P LAYING STRENGTH OF G RAPH A RA

To test the learning ability and to compare with conventional hex agents, we used our GNN approach
in an AlphaGo-like framework as described in Section 4 and Appendix D. We first pre-trained
an agent using supervised learning, based on a dataset of Mohex 2.0 games. The resulting agent
GraphAra-SL was then further trained using self-play RL. The resulting model, GraphAra-SP, was
compared in a round-robin tournament with Mohex 2.0 and GraphAra-SL. Each pairing played on


                                                  7
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          Value sign accuracy
Policy accuracy

                                          Gao
                                          U-Net
                                          GNN
                                         Train
                                         Validation



                                Epoch                                                         Epoch


  Figure 6: GNNs are less prone to overfit in Hex. When trained to imitate MoHex, the Gao archi-
  tecture is best at predicting the MoHex policy (policy accuracy). In contrast, the U-Net architecture
  heavily overfits on the training dataset and achieves a low validation accuracy. The GNN converges
  significantly slower, but is the only model that does not overfit the MoHex policy. When predicting
  the outcome of each game (value sign accuracy), both CNN models heavily overfit on the training
  data which makes the GNN, which overfits less, the strongest model on the validation set.


  Table 2: GraphAra can play Hex competitively. The table shows the results of a round-robin
  tournament played on all unique 11 × 11 Hex openings. The numbers represent the win percentages
  of the model from the left column vs the model from the top row and win ratios over 50% are
  highlighted in bold. The agents used are Mohes 2.0, a supervised trained model GraphAra-SL and
  GraphAra-SP, which was improved via self-play RL.

                                Agent    GraphAra-SP            GraphAra-SL              Mohex-1k
                           GraphAra-SP         -                                79.55%   66.67%
                           GraphAra-SL      20.45%                                 -     52.27%
                            Mohex-1k        33.33%                              47.73%      -



  all unique 11 × 11 openings with each agent starting once, resulting in 132 games played between
  each other. The results are shown in Table 2. Notably, GraphAra-SL, which is the GNN agent trained
  to imitate Mohex only using supervised learning, was able to beat its teacher Mohex-1k when played
  with 800 nodes per turn, while Mohex-1k using 1000 nodes. GraphAra-SP clearly benefited from
  the continued training, beating both GraphAra-SL and Mohex-1k by a significant margin.

   6              D ISCUSSION

  The results in this paper suggest that given a suitable graph structure, there are several advantages of
  using GNNs over CNNs for function approximation in self-play reinforcement learning. In Hex, we
  identified long-range dependency problems that even sophisticated CNN based Hex agents struggle
  with (See Table 1). In contrast, the GNN was able to develop a general understanding of these long-
  range dependency problems through self-play reinforcement learning with zero prior knowledge.
  This understanding on a structural level is not broken even if the input at hand is very different from
  the training distribution (e.g. training on 11 × 11 Hex, testing on 24 × 24).
  Given the impressive performance of GNNs on long-range dependency problems, we compared the
  playing strength of CNNs with GNNs. The direct comparison shows that the Gao architecture (Gao
  et al., 2018) trained with RainbowDQN beats the GNN trained via the same methods (See Figure 5).
  We attribute this shortcoming of the GNN to local patterns being more important in Hex play than
  previously thought and to the proficiency of CNNs in this area.
  Isomorph Hex Positions and Overfitting. During the course of a Hex game, the initially uncolored
  Hex board becomes filled with red and blue tiles. If one were to treat the Hex board as an image,
                                 PK−1
  it’s entropy would be H = − k=0 pk log(pk ) with K = 3 and p0 , p1 , p2 being the proportion
  of uncolored, red and blue tiles respectively. With each move, the entropy of this image increases
  up to the point where there is an equal amount of red, blue and uncolored tiles. However, the
  Hex graph representation becomes one node smaller with each move played and at the point of


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Very differently looking Hex boards even on different board sizes can have the same
graph representation. On the left, there is a Hex position on the 7 × 7 board which is isomorph to the
Shannon-Vertex switching game in the middle. However, the left one is also the graph representation
of the very differently looking 11 × 11 board position on the right. Thus, the graph representation
reveals that both Hex boards actually show an isomorph Hex endgame.


highest image entropy of the board representation it is only a third of it’s original size. The reason
for this discrepancy can be found in isomorphic endgame position. Larger boards contain a lot of
information that is irrelevant for the evaluation of the position. The only thing that matters, in Hex, is
which of the remaining uncolored tiles is connected to which border or which other uncolored tiles.
An example of two positions with different board sizes, having the same graph representation, can be
found in Figure 7. When we trained our neural networks to predict the evaluation of a Hex position
based on a limited amount of data we found that the CNNs operating on the Hex board representation
overfit a lot more than the GNN (Figure 6). Given that we did not use explicit regularization, the fact
that the GNN overfits less has to be attributed to the different structure that the GNN is working on
(Hex graph vs grid) and to the differences in how GNNs and CNNs process input data. The CNNs
end up maximizing their training accuracy by learning the irrelevant layout of red and blue tiles in
irrelevant parts of the board (such as in Figure 7 on the right). The GNN however operates on the
graph structure which includes a lot less irrelevant information and can thus not easily overfit on the
training dataset.
Board Size Transfer. GNNs have the inherent advantage that any GNN architecture can process
graphs of any size, no matter the Hex board size they correspond to. In contrast, CNNs that include
a fully connected layer are fixed to one board size. Ben-Assayag & El-Yaniv (2021) thus concluded
that for the game Othello, GNNs are the best choice for board size transfer. Our experiments on
Hex, comparing GNNs with fully convolutional neural networks reveal that the choice of CNN
architecture plays a crucial part for it’s ability to transfer knowledge between board sizes. Both
the GNN as well as the Gao et al. (2018) CNN architecture turned out proficient at transferring
knowledge between board sizes. However, the playing strength of the U-Net agent breaks down as
soon as the domain changes to a Hex board size different from its training distribution.
Limitations. This work focused only on Hex and not without reason. Graph representations that
are similarly efficient to Hex graphs are not known to exist for many other board games such as
Go or Chess. Ben-Assayag & El-Yaniv (2021) have shown that one can even profit from the GNNs
generalization abilities when the graph representation is not as efficient, such as in Othello. How-
ever, to apply the findings of this paper to another board game, one first needs to find good graph
representations for this game, which is not always trivial, making this a limitation of our approach.

7    C ONCLUSION
This work underscores a fundamental truth: Good structural representation is important and not
every task is optimally represented by a stack of images. For some tasks and games, graphs can
model the task inherent relationships more accurately. In Hex, we demonstrate that CNNs are prone
to make mistakes related to non-local patterns due to the input representation. Similarly, unimportant
areas of the Hex board input representation also led to strong signs of overfitting when CNNs were
trained in a supervised manner. In contrast, GNN agents avoid mistakes on non-local patterns and
overfit less in supervised training. These advantages can be attributed to graph networks being more
accurate models of the relational structure of Hex, effectively capturing even non-local dependencies
in image representation. With this work we have shown that GNNs can reasonably be used in self-
play RL and how the resulting GraphDQN and GraphAra approach improve upon playing Hex. To
conclude, the main message of our paper is to move beyond the one-size-fits-all approach and to use
representations that fit the (game-)specific structures, problems and goals.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Paul Almasan, José Suárez-Varela, Krzysztof Rusek, Pere Barlet-Ros, and Albert Cabellos-Aparicio.
  Deep reinforcement learning meets graph neural networks: Exploring a routing optimization use
  case. Comput. Commun., 196:184–194, 2022.
Broderick Arneson, Ryan Hayward, and Philip Henderson. Mohex wins hex tournament. Icga
  Journal, 33(3):181–186, 2010.
Shai Ben-Assayag and Ran El-Yaniv. Train on small, play the large: Scaling up board games with
  alphazero and GNN. 2021.
Jannis Blüml, Johannes Czech, and Kristian Kersting. Alphaze**: Alphazero-like baselines for
  imperfect information games are surprisingly strong. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 6, 2023.
Johannes Czech, Moritz Willig, Alena Beyer, Kristian Kersting, and Johannes Fürnkranz. Learning
  to play the chess variant crazyhouse above world champion level with deep neural networks and
  human data. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 3, 2020.
Fatemeh Fathinezhad, Peyman Adibi, Bijan Shoushtarian, and Jocelyn Chanussot. Graph neural
  networks and reinforcement learning: A survey. In Deep Learning and Reinforcement Learning.
  IntechOpen, 2023.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
 ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Nathanaël Fijalkow, Nathalie Bertrand, Patricia Bouyer-Decitre, Romain Brenguier, Arnaud
  Carayol, John Fearnley, Hugo Gimbert, Florian Horn, Rasmus Ibsen-Jensen, Nicolas Markey,
  Benjamin Monmege, Petr Novotný, Mickael Randour, Ocan Sankur, Sylvain Schmitz, Olivier
  Serre, and Mateusz Skomra. Games on graphs, 2023.
Chao Gao, Ryan Hayward, and Martin Müller. Move prediction using deep convolutional neural
  networks in hex. IEEE Transactions on Games, 10(4):336–343, 2017.
Chao Gao, Siqi Yan, Ryan Hayward, and Martin Müller. A transferable neural network for hex.
  ICGA Journal, 40(3):224–233, 2018.
M. Gardner. The Second Scientific American Book of Mathematical Puzzles and Diversions. Simon
 and Schuster, 1961.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
  Machine Learning - Volume 70, pp. 1263–1272. JMLR.org, 2017.
Takuo Hamaguchi, Hidekazu Oiwa, Masashi Shimbo, and Yuji Matsumoto. Knowledge transfer
  for out-of-knowledge-base entities : A graph neural network approach. In Proceedings of the
  Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-17, pp. 1802–1808,
  2017.
William L. Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large
 graphs. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems, pp. 1025–1035. Curran Associates Inc., 2017.
Johannes Heinrich and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning from self-play in imperfect-
  information games, 2016.
Philip Henderson. Playing and solving the game of Hex. PhD thesis, University of Alberta, 2010.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney,
 Daniel Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining
 improvements in deep reinforcement learning. 2017.
Shih-Chieh Huang, Broderick Arneson, Ryan B. Hayward, Martin Müller, and Jakub Pawlewicz.
  Mohex 2.0: A pattern-based mcts hex player. In Computers and Games, 2013.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
  works. 2016.
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In European conference
  on machine learning, pp. 282–293. Springer, 2006.
Alfred Lehman. A solution of the shannon switching game. Journal of the Society for Industrial
  and Applied Mathematics, 12(4):687–725, 1964.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wier-
  stra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Mingshuo Nie, Dongming Chen, and Dongqi Wang. Reinforcement learning on graphs: A survey.
 IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. Intell., 7(4):1065–1082, 2023.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–8035.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
David Raposo, Adam Santoro, David Barrett, Razvan Pascanu, Timothy Lillicrap, and Peter
  Battaglia. Discovering objects and their relations from entangled scene representations. 02 2017.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015a.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015b.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman,
  Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine
  Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of go with
  deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, Karen Si-
  monyan, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering chess and shogi by self-play with a general reinforce-
  ment learning algorithm. 2017.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando Freitas. Dueling
  network architectures for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 1995–2003. PMLR, 2016.
Vikram Waradpande, Daniel Kudenko, and Megha Khosla. Graph-based state representation for
  deep reinforcement learning, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vinı́cius Flores Zambaldi, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Victor Bapst, Yujia Li, Igor Babuschkin,
  Karl Tuyls, David P. Reichert, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Edward Lockhart, Murray Shanahan, Vic-
  toria Langston, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew M. Botvinick, Oriol Vinyals, and Peter W. Battaglia.
  Relational deep reinforcement learning. 2018.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    P RUINING V ERTICES IN H EX
It is commonly known that in Hex, there are moves on the board that can be pruned a priori, because
they are irrelevant for the outcome of the game or strictly weaker than other moves (Henderson,
2010). Dead and captured cells can be colored immediately without changing the evaluation of a
Hex position. A cell c is dead if there exists no completion of the position (i.e. a filled Hex board that
can be reached from the current position) where changing the color of c changes the winner. A set
of cells C is captured by a player if he has a second player strategy on C, that renders all opponents
moves in C dead. Contemporary work such as Mohex 2.0 (Huang et al., 2013) precomputes local
Hex board patterns in which cells are dead or captured and exploits them during search. For Shannon
vertex-switching games, we can find general rules for finding dead or captured nodes based on
properties of the neighborhood of each node. While playing out a game, this can be done efficiently,
as only the neighbors of vertices removed in this turn have to be considered. Algorithm 1 finds and
removes dead and captured nodes in a Shannon vertex-switching game. If the average amount of
dead and captured nodes each turn is given by d, then Algorithm 1 will run in O(d · Ev∈G [|N (v)|])
time.

Algorithm 1: Removing dead and captured nodes in a Hex graph
Input: Nodes to consider C, undirected Graph G
Function deadAndCaptured(C, G):
   S←∅
   foreach v ∈ C do
       if N (v) fully connected then
           S ← S ∪ N (v)
           delete v from G ;                                                // v is dead
           continue
       foreach n ∈ {N (v)0 } ∪ N (N (v)0 ) do
           if N (v) − {n} = N (n) − {v} then
               S ← S ∪ (N (v) − {n})
               Add edges between neighbors of v
               delete v and n from G ;        // short player captures v and n
               break
       foreach n ∈ N (v) do
           if N (v) − {n} fully connected and N (n) − {v} fully connected then
               S ← S ∪ (N (v) − {n}) ∪ (N (n) − {v})
               delete v and n from G ;           // cut player captures v and n
   if S not empty then
       deadAndCaptured(S,G)


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    U-N ET


Figure 8: U-net architecture used to learn action-values for Hex positions. U-nets are fully convo-
lutional neural networks that use upsampling / conv-transpose layers to ensure the correct output
size, despite the use of pooling layers. Because they avoid fully connected layers, forward passes
are possible with various input/output sizes using the same network. The illustration is inspired by
Ronneberger et al. (2015b), Figure 1.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    A DVANTAGE AND VALUE H EAD



                          Player 1

                          Player 2


                                             GraphSage Block               Advantages

Figure 9: The Advantage Head in our pipeline (cf. Figure 3) is responsible for the estimation of
an additional value, showing the difference between the value of the current state and the value of
the next state. I measure the quality of improvement and quantifies the importance of each action
relative to the current state. The output of the advantage head is a set of values, here displayed as a
vector of values, one for each possible action in the current state. In our case, we use a number of
SAGEConv layers within our GraphSage Block to calculate the values.


                          Mean
                                               Player 1

                          Max

                          Min
                                               Player 2

                          Sum


              Aggregate                        Player MLPs                Position Value

Figure 10: The Value Head in our pipeline (cf. Figure 3) gives us an estimation of the intrinsic value
of being in a particular state. The output of the value head is a single value representing the quality
of the current state. It captures the expected cumulative rewards from the state onwards. In our case
we used aggregated features and specific MLPs for each player, given that each player has its own
goal, to estimate the cumulative reward.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    A LPHA Z ERO MEETS GNN
The following algorithm shows the training process of GraphAra, based on AlphaZero. The loss
function was taken from the original paper (Silver et al., 2016). In our experiments, a neural network
was trained on game data from Mohex 2.0 (Huang et al., 2013) before being improves via self-play.
Gere, we used the samples of 30,000 games per epoch (T = 30, 000). If the new model won more
then 50% of its games against the current best model, the updated model replaced the current best
model in the learning process. For our training we used Three Nvidia A100 GPUs, one for GNN
training and two for training data generation. We trained between 50 and 300 epochs, taking up 6
days of training. In the experimental section we used the model trained with the maximum number
of epochs (E = 300). For the MCTS we used a computational budget of 800 simulations (or nodes).
Our implementation is based on the work of Czech et al. (2020). Unlike classic AlphaZero, we use
GNN instead of ResNet as the neural network θ and used a model trained on Mohex to begin with.

Algorithm 2: AlphaZero’s Trainings Process (inspired by Blüml et al. (2023))
Function AlphaZero(T, E, ℓ, θ):
   Parameters: number of games per epoch T , number of epochs E, loss function ℓ, neural
                  network θ
   repeat E times
       t←0
       g←0
       while g ≤ T do
           st ← empty Hex board
           h ← {}
           while st ∈ / Z do
               πt ← MCTS(st ) using θ
               st+1 ← τ (st , argmaxπt )
               store (st , πt ) in h
               t←t+1
           g ←g+1
           z ← u(st )
           foreach (st , πt ) ∈ h do
               if player’s turn then
                    rt ← z
               else
                    rt ← −z
               add (st , πt , rt ) to stored data
       build training dataset M out of sampled data triplets
       θnew ← Update θ using SGD with ℓ on M
       evaluate θnew
       if θnew better than θ then
           replace θ with θnew
   return Updated neural network θ

Function MCTS(s, θ):
   Parameters: current state to evaluate s, neural network for simulation θ
   create root node root from s
   t ← root
   while computational budget left do
       l ← S ELECTA ND E XPAND(t)
       r ← S IMULATE(l, θ)
       t ← BACKPROPAGATE(t, r)
   return Create policy π from tree t


                                                 16
