Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ISCOURAGING POSTERIOR COLLAPSE IN HIERARCHI -
CAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODERS USING CONTEXT

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
           Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) are among the most popular
           likelihood-based generative models. There is a consensus that the top-down hi-
           erarchical VAEs allow effective learning of deep latent structures and avoid prob-
           lems like posterior collapse. Here, we show that this is not necessarily the case,
           and the problem of collapsing posteriors remains. To discourage this issue, we
           propose a deep hierarchical VAE with a context on top. Specifically, we use a
           Discrete Cosine Transform to obtain the last latent variable. In a series of ex-
           periments, we observe that the proposed modification allows us to achieve better
           utilization of the latent space and does not harm the model’s generative abilities.


1      I NTRODUCTION
Latent variable models (LVMs) parameterized with neural networks constitute a large group in
deep generative modeling (Tomczak, 2022). One class of LVMs, Variational Autoencoders (VAEs)
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), utilize amortized variational inference to efficiently
learn distributions over various data modalities, e.g., images (Kingma & Welling, 2014), audio (Van
Den Oord et al., 2017) or molecules (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018). One of the problems hin-
dering the performance of VAEs is the posterior collapse (Wang et al., 2021) when the variational
posterior (partially) matches the prior distribution (e.g., the standard Gaussian distribution). The
expressive power of VAEs could be improved by introducing a hierarchy of latent variables. The
resulting hierarchical VAEs like ResNET VAEs (Kingma et al., 2016), BIVA (Maaløe et al., 2019),
very deep VAE (VDVAE) (Child, 2021) or NVAE (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020) achieve state-of-the-art
performance on images in terms of the negative log-likelihood (NLL). Despite their successes, hier-
archical VAEs could still suffer from the posterior collapse effect. As a result, the modeling capacity
is lower, and some latent variables carry very little to no information about observed data.
In this paper, we take a closer look into the posterior collapse in the context of hierarchical VAEs.
It was claimed that introducing a specific top-down architecture of variational posteriors (Sønderby
et al., 2016; Maaløe et al., 2019; Child, 2021; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020) solves the problem and allows
learning powerful VAEs. However, we can still notice at least partial posterior collapse, where
some of the latent variables are completely ignored by the model. Here, we fill a few missing
gaps in comprehending this behavior. We analyze the connection between posterior collapse and
latent variable non-identifiability. By understanding the issue that lies in the optimization nature
of the Kullback-Leibler terms, we propose to utilize a non-trainable, discrete, and deterministic
transformation (e.g., Discrete Cosine Transform) to obtain informative top-level latent variables.
Making the top latent variables highly dependent on data, we alter the optimization process. The
resulting hierarchical VAE starts utilizing the latent variables differently. In the experiments, we
show that our proposition achieves a different landscape of latent space.
The contributions of the paper are the following:
    • We provide empirical evidence that the posterior collapse is present in top-down hierarchical
      VAEs (Section 3.2).
    • We extend the analysis of the posterior collapse phenomenon presented by (Wang et al., 2021)
      to hierarchical VAEs (Section 3.3).
    • We propose a way to discourage posterior collapse by introducing Discrete Cosine Transform
      (DCT) as a part of the variational posterior (Section 4).


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    • In the experiments, we show that the proposed approach leads to better latent space utilization
      (Section 5.2), more informative latent variables (Section 5.3) and does not harm the generative
      performance (Section 5.1).

2      BACKGROUND
2.1     VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODERS

Consider random variables x ∈ X D (e.g., X = R). We observe N x’s sampled from the em-
pirical distribution q(x). We assume that each x has L corresponding latent variables z1:L =
(z1 , . . . , zL ), zl ∈ RMl , where Ml is the dimensionality of each variable. We aim to find a la-
tent variable generative model with unknown parameters θ, pθ (x, z1:L ) = pθ (x|z1:L )pθ (z1:L ). In
general, optimizing latent-variable models with non-linear stochastic dependencies is troublesome.
A possible solution is an approximate inference in the form of variational inference (Jordan et al.,
1999) with a family of variational posteriors over the latent variables {qϕ (z1:L |x)}ϕ . This idea is
exploited in Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014),
in which variational posteriors are referred to as encoders. As a result, we optimize a tractable ob-
jective function, i.e., the Evidence Lower BOund (ELBO), over the parameters of the variational
posterior, ϕ, and a generative part, θ:

            Eq(x) [ln pθ (x)] ≥ Eq(x) Eqϕ (z1:L |x) ln pθ (x|z1:L ) − DKL [qϕ (z1:L |x)∥pθ (z1:L )] , (1)

where q(x) is an empirical data distribution. Further, we use q test (x) for the hold-out data.

2.2     T OP - DOWN HIERARCHICAL VAE S

We propose to factorize the distribution over the latent variables in an autoregressive manner:
                                QL−1
pθ (z1 , . . . , zL ) = pθ (zL ) l=1 pθ (zl |zl+1:L ), similarly to (Child, 2021; Maaløe et al., 2019; Vah-
dat & Kautz, 2020). Next, we follow the proposition of (Sønderby et al., 2016) with the top-down
                                                       QL−1
inference model: qϕ (z1 , . . . , zL |x) = qϕ (zL |x) l=1 qϕ (zl |zl+1:L , x). This factorization was used
previously by successful VAEs, among others, NVAE (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020) and Very Deep VAE
(VDVAE) (Child, 2021). It was shown empirically that such a formulation allows for achieving
state-of-the-art performance on several image datasets.

3      A N ANALYSIS OF THE posterior collapse IN HIERARCHICAL VAE S
The posterior collapse effect is a known problem of shallow VAEs when certain latent variables do
not carry any information about the observed data. There are various methods to deal with this issue
for VAEs, such as changing the parameterization (Dieng et al., 2019; He et al., 2019), changing the
optimization or the objective (Alemi et al., 2018; Bowman et al., 2016; Fu et al., 2019; Havrylov
& Titov, 2020; Razavi et al., 2019), or using hierarchical models (Child, 2021; Maaløe et al., 2017;
2019; Tomczak & Welling, 2018; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020). Here, we focus entirely on the hierarchical
VAEs since the posterior collapse problem is not fully analyzed in their context.
In practice, hierarchical VAEs usually require huge latent space with multiple latent layers to achieve
good performance (Sønderby et al., 2016; Maaløe et al., 2019; Child, 2021; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020).
However, as we show in our analysis, the actual number of used latent units in these models is
relatively small. Therefore, it is still an open question about how to reduce the gap between the total
size of the latent space and the actual number of latents used by these models.
Following definition 1 in Wang et al. (2021), we consider the posterior collapse as a situation where
the true posterior is equal to the prior for a given set of parameters θ. We can formulate this definition
for a single stochastic layer of top-down hierarchical VAE as follows:
                                   pθ (zl |zl+1:L , x) = pθ (zl |zl+1:L ).                             (2)
In practice, we deal with the variational posterior qϕ (zl |zl+1:L , x), which approximates the true
posterior. Furthermore, it is common to identify the posterior collapse based on this approxi-
mate distribution (Burda et al., 2015; Lucas et al., 2019; Sønderby et al., 2016; Van Den Oord


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                 1.0


                                                                         Prop. of latent units
Table 1: Posterior collapse metrics and NLL for                                                  0.9
the top-down hierarchical VAEs with various LATENT
SPACE sizes and with fixed model SIZE (the total num-                                                                    490 Latents
                                                                                                 0.8
ber of parameters).                                                                                                      735 Latents
                                                                                                 0.7                     980 Latents
                  L ATENT                                                                                                1225 Latents
   S IZE    L                   AU          KL        NLL↓
                  S PACE                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                    0.0   0.1   0.2     0.3   0.4       0.5
   676K     4     490          38.3%       0.047       79.6                                                      {klli}l,i
   624K     6     735          37.9%       0.031       78.8            Figure 1: The cumulative distribution
   657K     8     980          33.5%       0.022       78.3            function of the KL-divergence in VAEs
   651K     10    1225         33.6%       0.018       77.9            with varying latent space sizes.

et al., 2017). Both definitions are connected, yet not identical. We learn the posterior approxi-
mation by variational inference, and the ELBO (Eq. 1) is maximized when the approximate pos-
terior matches the true posterior, namely, DKL [qϕ (z1:L |x)∥pθ (z1:L |x)] = 0. Furthermore, the
KL-divergence can be further decomposed into the following sum: DKL [qϕ (z1:L |x)||pθ (z1:L |x)] =
                              PL−1
DKL [qϕ (zL |x)∥pθ (zL |x)] + l=1 Eqϕ (zl+1:L ,x) DKL [qϕ (zl |zl+1:L , x)∥pθ (zl |zl+1:L , x)] .
Therefore, a collapsed true posterior distribution for the latent variable at the stochastic layer l results
in a collapsed variational posterior for this latent variable at the optimum. However, the collapse of
the variational posterior distribution does not guarantee the collapse of the true posterior as it can
be caused by a poor choice of the family of the variational distributions. See Appendix A for an in-
depth discussion. To this end, we assume that the family of variational posterior distribution is rich
enough and use the variational posterior collapse as an indicator of true posterior collapse. Next, we
discuss the metrics of the posterior collapse in more detail.

3.1   M EASURING THE POSTERIOR COLLAPSE

We consider two metrics for assessing the posterior collapse in hierarchical VAEs. First, we compute
the KL-divergence for the i-th latent variable of the stochastic layer l:

               klil = Eqtest (x) Eqϕ (zl+1:L |x) DKL qϕ (zil |zl+1:L , x)∥pθ (zil |zl+1:L ) .

                                                                                                 (3)
This quantity can be approximately computed using Monte Carlo sampling and gives us an estimate
of the posterior collapse issue for each latent variable. Note that the KL-divergence term used in the
ELBO 1 equals the sum of these values over all latent variables i and stochastic layers l.
Second, we use active units. This is a metric introduced in (Burda et al., 2015), and it can be
calculated for a given stochastic layer and a threshold δ:
                             Al = Varqtest (x) Eqϕ (zl+1:L |x) Eqϕ (zl |zl+1:L ,x) [zl ] ,                                               (4)
                                  PL PMl
                                                   [Al,i > δ]
                            AU = l=1 Pi=1      L
                                                                ,                                                                        (5)
                                               l=1 Ml

where Ml is the dimensionality of the stochastic layer l, [P ] is Iverson bracket, which equals to 1 if
P is true and to 0 otherwise. Following (Burda et al., 2015), we use the threshold δ = 0.01. The
higher the share of active units, the more efficient the model is in using its latent space.

3.2   E MPIRICAL E VIDENCE OF P OSTERIOR C OLLAPSE

In the following, we carry out an experiment to observe the posterior collapse in hierarchical VAE.
We train four top-down hierarchical VAE models with different latent space sizes on the MNIST
dataset. At the same time, we make sure that all the models have a similar number of parameters
and try to keep the number of ResNet blocks the same. We vary the number of stochastic layers L
from 4 to 10. Note that the data space has a dimensionality of 784. We report the test NLL, Active
Unit, and KL-divergence per latent variable for this experiment in Table 1. We also plot an empirical
CDF of the latent variable’s KLs in Figure 1.


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The total number of latent units increases from 490 to 1225 in this experiment. However, all the
models have no more than 40% of active units. We also observe that AU and KL metrics decrease
with the number of stochastic layers increasing. The cumulative histogram of KL-divergence (Eq. 3)
depicted in Figure 1 shows that the models have close to 60% of the latent variable with almost zero
KL-divergence. This indicates that the deep hierarchical VAEs do not use the majority of the latent
units. As a result, the common claim that the top-down hierarchical VAEs alleviate the problem of
the posterior collapse (Maaløe et al., 2019) is not necessarily true as indicated by this experiment.
It is true, though, that increasing the number of latents improves the performance (NLL). However,
this is not an efficient way of utilizing the model since it disregards over 60% of its latents.

3.3   L ATENT VARIABLES NON - IDENTIFIABILITY AND THE POSTERIOR COLLAPSE IN
      HIERARCHICAL VAE S

Wang et al. (2021) prove that collapse of the true posterior in a one-level VAE takes place if and
only if latent variables are non-identifiable. A latent variable z is called non-identifiable (Raue
et al., 2009) if for a given set of parameter values θ∗ , the conditional likelihood does not depend
on this latent variable. Namely, pθ∗ (x|z) = pθ∗ (x). Similarly, we say that latent variable zl in
hierarchical VAE is non-identifiable when pθ∗ (x|z1:L ) = pθ∗ (x|z−l ).
We now establish the connection between posterior collapse (Eq. 2) and non-identifiability in the
following propositions. See Appendix B for the proofs.
Proposition 1 Consider a top-down hierarchical VAE introduced in Section 2.2. Then, for a given
set of parameter values θ∗ , the posterior of the latent variable zl collapses if and only if x and zl
are conditionally independent given (zl+1 , . . . , zL ).
Proposition 2 Consider a top-down hierarchical VAE introduced in Section 2.2. If x and zl are
conditionally independent given (zl+1 , . . . , zL ), then the latent variable zl is non-identifiable. How-
ever, if zl is non-identifiable, it does not imply that it is conditionally independent with x given
(zl+1 , . . . , zL ).
To simplify the notation, let us split the latent variables of hierarchical VAEs into three groups:
                                    z1 , . . . , zl−1 , zl , zl+1 , . . . , zL .                    (6)
                                    |       {z      }        |     {z        }
                                          zA                zC
We can do this for each l ∈ 1, . . . , L, assuming that in the corner case of l = 1, zA is an empty set,
and in the case of l = L, zC is an empty set. Then, the content of the propositions 1 and 2 can be
summarized in the following diagram:
pθ∗ (zl |zC , x) = pθ∗ (zl |zC ) ⇔ pθ∗ (x|zl , zC ) = pθ∗ (x|zC ) ⇒ pθ∗ (x|zA , z, zC ) = pθ∗ (x|zA , zC ) .
|              {z             }    |              {z            }    |                 {z               }
      Posterior Collapse             Conditional Independence                  Non-identifiability

That being said, as opposed to the one-level VAE considered by (Wang et al., 2021), the non-
identifiability of the latent variables in hierarchical VAEs does not necessarily cause the true pos-
terior to collapse. Therefore, the solution, in which we define the likelihood function in a way that
guarantees the latent variable identifiability might be too restrictive. One possible solution would be
to utilize the method from (Wang et al., 2021) to ensure that zl and x are not conditionally indepen-
dent given (zl+1 , . . . , zL ). However, one would need access to the distribution pθ∗ (x|zl , zl+1:L ),
which is intractable in the top-down hierarchical VAEs.
As a result, we employ an orthogonal approach by adding one more non-trainable latent variable
to a hierarchical VAE, which we call a context. We show in Section 4.3 that this method can break
the link between conditional independence and posterior collapse without any restriction on the
likelihood function.

4     H IERARCHICAL VAE S WITH NON - TRAINABLE CONTEXT
4.1   H IERARCHICAL VAE S WITH CONTEXT

In this work, we introduce a modified hierarchical VAE model, which is meant to increase the
number of latent variables used by a deep hierarchical VAE while not harming performance. As


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we discuss in Sec. 3.3, posterior collapse happens if and only if there is a conditional independence
between zl and x given z>l . If this is the case, then the posterior distribution is proportional to the
prior, namely, pθ (zl |zl+1:L , x) ∝ pθ (zl |zl+1:L ). As a result, the latent variable zl does not contain
any information about the input x. Note also that prior distribution is an object we can control since
this is the distribution we parametrize directly by the neural network. This motivates us to introduce
the context. We think of the context as a top-level latent variable that can be obtained from the input
via a fixed, non-trainable transformation.
Let us consider the top latent variable zL to be given by a non-                                   z3            z3
learnable transformation of the input x, namely, zL = f (x).
We require context zL to be a much simpler object than the ini-
tial object x. That is, we want the dimensionality of zL ∈ RML                          d2         z2            z2
to be smaller than the dimensionality of x ∈ X D , ML ≪ D.
At the same time, we want the context to be a reasonable rep-
resentation of x. We can think of the context as a compressed                                      z1            z1
                                                                                        d1
representation of the input data, e.g., in the simplest case, it
could be a downsampled version of an image (see Appendix F
for details). We discuss another way of constructing the con-                                                     x
                                                                                        x
text in Section 4.4.
The graphical model of the VAE with the context is de-
picted in Figure 2. We use the top-down VDVAE architec-                          Figure 2: Graphical model of the
ture (Child, 2021) and extend this model with a deterministic,                   top-down hierarchical VAE with
non-trainable function to create latent variable zL (the con-                    two latent variables and the context
text). Context zL is produced from the observation x and fur-                    z3 . The inference model (left) and
ther used to condition all other latent variables in both infer-                 the generative model (right) share
ence and generative models. We provide a mode details on the                     the top-down path (blue). The grey
architecture in Appendix E.1 (Figure 8)                                          arrow represents a non-trainable
                                                                                 transformation.
4.2   T RAINING VAE WITH THE CONTEXT

We assume that both x and zL are discrete random variables. Furthermore, we assume that the
variational posterior of the context is Kronecker’s delta function q(zL |x) = δ(zL − f (x)). As we
depict in Figure 2, the generative model is conditioned on the context latent variable zL at each
step. To sample unconditionally, we define a context prior distribution pγ (zL ), which is trained
simultaneously with the whole VAE model via the ELBO objective. Following (Vahdat et al., 2021;
Wehenkel & Louppe, 2021), we propose to use a diffusion-based generative model (Ho et al., 2020)
as the prior. Since the context is a less complex object, we assume that it is enough to use a model
much smaller compared to the VAE itself. We provide details on diffusion models in Appendix
C. The diffusion-based model provides a lower bound on the log density of the prior distribution
L(γ, zL ) ≤ ln pγ (zL ), which together with VAE objective 1 results in the following objective:

                                                          L−1
                                                          X
Eqϕ (z1:L |x) [ln pθ (x|z1:L )] + Eq(zL |x) L(γ, zL ) −         Eqϕ (zl+1:L |x) DKL [qϕ (zl |zl+1:L , x)∥pθ (zl |zl+1:L )] .
                                                          l=1


4.3   T HE POSTERIOR COLLAPSE FOR VAE S WITH THE CONTEXT

We claim that the introduction of the context changes the prior distributions, which results in the
posterior collapse having less effect on the model. First, since zL = f (x), we guarantee that the top
P variable will not collapse. We now need to fit the prior to the aggregated posterior q(zL ) =
latent
   x δ(zL − f (x))q(x), not the other way around. As a result, this prior contains information about
the data points x by definition. Second, let us assume that zl and x are conditionally independent
for given parameter values θ∗ : pθ (x|zl , zl+1:L ) = pθ (x|zl+1:L ). Then, from the Proposition 1 the
posterior is proportional to the prior: pθ (zl |zl+1:L , x) ∝ pθ (zl |zl+1:L ). However, since f (x) =
zL ∈ zl+1:L , we still have information about x preserved in the posterior:
                                 pθ (zl |zl+1:L , x) ∝ pθ (zl |zl+1:L−1 , f (x)).                                       (7)
This way, the presence of posterior collapse does not necessarily lead to uninformative latent codes.


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.4       A DCT- BASED CONTEXT

We suggest to think of the context as of compressed representation of the input data (Sec. 4.1). We
expect it to be lower-dimensional compared to the data itself while preserving crucial information.
In other words, we may say that context does not contain any high-frequency details of the signal
of interest while preserving a more general pattern. To this end, we propose to use the Discrete
Cosine Transform1 (DCT) to create the context. DCT(Ahmed et al., 1974) is widely used in signal
processing for image, video, and audio data, i.e., it is a part of the JPEG standard (Pennebaker
& Mitchell, 1992). DCT is a linear transformation that decomposes a discrete signal on a basis
consisting of cosine functions of different frequencies.
Let us consider a signal as a 3D tensor x ∈ X Ch×D×D . Then DCT for a single
                                                                      q      channel, xi , is defined
as follows: zDCT,i = Cxi C⊤ , where for all pairs (k = 0, n): Ck,n = D       1
                                                                               , and for all pairs (k, n)
                             q
                                 2       π       1

such that k > 0: Ck,n =          D cos D n + 2 k . A helpful property of the DCT is that it is an
invertible transformation. Therefore, it contains all the information about the input. However, for
our approach, we want the context to be lower-dimensional compared to the input dimensionality.
Therefore, we propose to remove high-frequency components from the signal. Assume that each
channel of x is D × D. We select the desired size of the context d < D and remove (crop) D − d
bottom rows and right-most columns for each channel in the frequency domain. Finally, we perform
normalization using matrix S, which contains the maximal absolute value of each frequency. We
calculate this matrix using all the training data: S = maxx∈Dtrain |DCT(x)|. As a result, we get latent
variables whose values are in [−1, 1]. In the last step, we round all values to a given precision such
that after multiplying the latents by S we get integers, thus, we get discrete variables. We call this
the quantization step. Algorithm 1 describes context computation from the given input x.

Algorithm 1 Create a DCT-based context                       Algorithm 2 Decode the DCT-based context.
Input: x, S, d                                               Input: zDCT , S, D
  zDCT = DCT(x)                                                zDCT = zDCT · S
  zDCT = Crop(zDCT , d)                                        zDCT = zero pad(zDCT , D − d)
  zDCT = zDCT
           S
                                                               x̃context = iDCT(zDCT )
  zDCT = quantize(zDCT )                                     Return: x̃context
Return: zDCT
Due to cropping and quantization operations, the context computation is not invertible anymore.
However, we can still go back from the frequency to the local domain. First, we start by multiplying
by the normalization matrix S. Afterwards, we pad each channel with zeros, so that the size increases
from d × d to D × D. Lastly, we apply the inverse of the Discrete Cosine Transform (iDCT). We
describe this procedure in Algorithm 2. We refer to our top-down hierarchical VAE with a DCT-
based context as DCT-VAE.


5       E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate DCT-VAE on several commonly used image datasets, namely, MNIST, OMNIGLOT,
and CIFAR10. We provide the full set of hyperparameters in Appendix E.2. We designed the
experiments to validate the following hypotheses:
1) Adding the DCT-based context into hierarchical VAE does not harm the performance (as mea-
sured by negative loglikelihood) (sec. 5.1).
2) DCT-VAE have more active units / higher KL values (sec. 5.2).
3) Latent variables of very deep DCT-VAE carry more information about the input data (sec. 5.3).
In all the experiments, we implement two models: A baseline Very Deep VAE model without any
context (denoted by VDVAE) (Child, 2021), and our approach (DCT-VAE) that is a VDVAE with a
DCT-based context on top. We keep both architectures almost identical, keeping the same number of
channels, resnet blocks, and latent space sizes. In other words, the only difference in the architecture
is the presence of the context in DCT-VAE.
    1
        In this work, we consider the most widely used type-II DCT.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                              84           VDVAE
Table 2: The test performance (NLL) on MNIST and OM-                                       DCT-VAE
                                                                              82
NIGLOT datasets and the number of stochastic layers (L).                                   Downsample-VAE


                                                                   Test NLL
                                                                              80
                                       MNIST     OMNIGLOT
  M ODEL                          L
                                           − log p(x) ≤ ↓                     78


  DCT-VAE (ours)                  8     76.62        86.11                    76

  Donwsample-VAE (ours)           8     77.52        87.69                          2.0%   3.2%   4.6%   6.2%   8.2%
                                                                                       Context size / Input size
  Small VDVAE
                                  8     78.27        88.14                                 (a) MNIST
  (our implementation)                                                        100
  Attentive VAE                                                                            VDVAE
                                  15    77.63        89.50                     98
  (Apostolopoulou et al., 2022)                                                            DCT-VAE
  CR-NVAE                                                                      95          Downsample-VAE


                                                                   Test NLL
                                  15    76.93          —
  (Sinha & Dieng, 2021)                                                        92
  OU-VAE                                                                       90
                                  5     81.10        96.08
  (Pervez & Gavves, 2021)
                                                                               88
  NVAE
                                  15    78.01          —                       85
  (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020)                                                            2.0%   3.2%   4.6%   6.2%   8.2%
  BIVA(Maaløe et al., 2019)       6     78.41        91.34                             Context size / Input size
  LVAE                                                                                (b) OMNIGLOT
                                  5     81.74        102.11
  (Sønderby et al., 2016)
  IAF-VAE                                                        Figure 3: NLL results for MNIST
                                  —     79.10          —         and OMIGLOT for different con-
  (Kingma et al., 2016)
                                                                 text types and sizes.


5.1   I MAGE GENERATION BENCHMARKS

Binary images We start with the experiments on binary images: MNIST and OMNIGLOT, for
which we use dynamic binarization. In Figure 3, we report the results of an ablation study where
we test various context sizes and two contexts: downsampling and DCT. We observe that DCT-
VAE (green) outperforms the VDVAE in all the experiments (the orange horizontal line). However,
if we choose downsampling as a context instead of the DCT, the performance of the model drops
significantly for larger context sizes (blue bars). The reason for that comes from the fact that it
becomes harder to fit the prior to the aggregated posterior. Interestingly, it seems there is a sweet
spot for the context size of the DCT-VAE at around 5%. Since DCT always performs better than
downsampling, we use it in all the experiments from now on. Comparing DCT-VAE to various
best-performing VAEs, it turns out that our approach not only does not harm performance but also
achieves state-of-the-art performance on both datasets, see Table 5. Importantly, the introduction of
the context gives a significant improvement over the same architecture of the VDVAE.

Natural Images We perform ex- Table 3: The test performance (BPD) on the CIFAR10
periments on natural images to test dataset, the total number of trainable parameters (Size), the
the method’s performance on a more number of stochastic layers (L).
challenging task. We use the CI-
FAR10 dataset, which is a common        M ODEL                        S IZE L    BITS / DIM ≤ ↓
benchmark in VAE literature.
                                        DCT-VAE (ours)                22M 29          3.26
We note that the best-performing        Small VDVAE
                                                                      21M 29          3.28
VAEs (e.g., VDVAE, NVAE) on this        (our implementation)
dataset are very large and require sub- OU-VAE
                                                                      10M 3           3.39
stantial computational resources to     (Pervez & Gavves, 2021)
train which we do not have access       Residual flows
                                                                      25M 1           3.28
to. Instead, we train a small-size VD-  (Perugachi-Diaz et al., 2021)
VAE and provide results of other gen-   i-DenseNet flows
                                                                      25M 1           3.25
erative models of comparable sizes in   (Perugachi-Diaz et al., 2021)
Table 5. We report the complete com-
parison (including large models) in
Appendix D.


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: The absolute and the relative number of active units for VAEs and DCT-VAEs evaluated on
the test datasets of MNIST, OMNIGLOT, and Cifar10.
                             L ATENT        C ONTEXT        AU↑              AU↑                 KL↑
                              S PACE           S IZE      (Absolute)     (% of latents)    (per latent unit)
                                                                                              ×10e − 3
                                                                MNIST
           VDVAE               980             0             336            34.4%             22.9 (1.4)
           DCT-VAE             967            36             405            41.9%             25.9 (0.8)
                                                            OMNIGLOT
           VDVAE               980             0             494            50.4%             35.1 (0.8)
           DCT-VAE             980            49             593            60.5%             36.5 (0.8)
                                                                CIFAR10
           VDVAE              105K             0             7.5K            7.1%             47.6 (2.1)
           DCT-VAE            105K            108           11.3K           10.8%             51.6 (2.0)


We observe that our approach works on par with the generative models that have comparable sizes
(OU-VAE, Residual Flows, GLOW), and, most importantly, it has a similar (in fact, slightly better)
BPD to our implementation of the VDVAE of a similar size.

5.2     P OSTERIOR COLLAPSE

In this section, we analyze the latent space of the DCT-VAE and VDVAE trained on different datasets
from the posterior collapse point of view. We report the number of active units and KL-divergence
on the test dataset in Table 4. We also show the total latent space size and context size.
We observe that the number of active units increases significantly when the context is introduced to
the model. Furthermore, this increase is much higher than the size of the context itself, meaning that
it helps to increase the latent space utilization in general. However, there are still a lot of unused
latent variables. For example, on the CIFAR10 dataset, the proportion of active units increases from
7% to 11%. It means that even though deeper models obtain better NLL, there is still a significant
waste of the model’s capacity. Similarly to the AU metric, the higher KL-divergence of the DCT-
VAE compared to the VDVAE with no context indicates that the DCT-based context helps to push
more information to other layers. In conclusion, we observe the improved utilization of latent space
in terms of both metrics.

5.3     DATA INFORMATION IN LATENT VARIABLES

Many of the state-of-the-art models have a lot of stochastic layers (e.g., 45 for CIFAR10 (Child,
2021)). Therefore, it is likely that the information about the x could be completely disregarded by
the latent variables further away from the input. In this section, we explore how much information
about the corresponding data points the top latent codes contain. For this purpose, we consider
the reconstruction performance and compression. We examine VDVAE and DCT-VAE with 29
stochastic layers trained and tested on the CIFAR10 dataset in both experiments.

5.3.1    R ECONSTRUCTION CAPABILITIES OF DCT-VAE
We compute Multi-Scale Structural Similarity Index Measure (MSSSIM) (Wang et al., 2003) for the
test data and its reconstruction obtained using only part of the latent variables from the variational
posterior. That is, for each m ∈ {1, . . . , L} we obtain a reconstruction x̃m using m latent variables
from the variational posterior and by sampling the rest L−m latent variables from the prior, namely:
                                            L−m
                                             Y                         L
                                                                       Y
                        m
                   x̃       ∼pθ (·|z1:L )         pθ (zl |zl+1:L )             qϕ (zl |zl+1:L , x).            (8)
                                            l=1                      l=L−m+1



                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         1.0
                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                26
         0.8
MSSSIM
                                                                24


                                                         PSNR


                                                                                                BPP
         0.6                                                                                          0.3
                                                                22
         0.4
                                    VDVAE                                                             0.2
                                                                20
         0.2                        DCT-VAE
               1   5    10   15    20    25                          JPEG   DCT-VAE   VDVAE*                JPEG   DCT-VAE   VDVAE*
                       Stohastic Layer
Figure 4: The reconstruction measured Figure 5: Compression result on KODAK dataset. We use
by the MSSSIM (↑) on the CIFAR10 discrete context only to compress images with DCT-VAE.
test set for a varying number of latent We report the BPP of JPEG and VDVAE that corresponds
variables sampled from the encoder. to the same reconstruction quality.

         PSNR = 15.2, MSSSIM = 0.38, BPP* = 0.05   PSNR = 25.1, MSSSIM = 0.84, BPP = 0.19   PSNR = 26.6, MSSSIM = 0.84, BPP = 0.32


          (a) VDVAE                       (b) DCT-VAE                     (c) JPEG
Figure 6: Examples of the decompressed images. We use (a) 2 top latent variables of VDVAE to
reconstruct the image, (b) only the context of DCT-VAE, and (c) we choose JPEG compression to
have a similar PSNR value to DCT-VAE.


We present the results of this experiment in Figure 4. We observe that in VDVAE the top latent
layers carry very little to no information about the real data point x, which continues up to the 5th
layer from the top. Then, the reconstructions become reasonable (between the 5th and the 10th layer
values of MSSSIM increases from 0.6 to 0.8). In the case of DCT-VAE, using only one layer (i.e.,
context) gives already reasonable reconstructions (MSSSIM above 0.8).

5.3.2              I MAGE COMPRESSION WITH DCT-VAE
To find out how much information about the data is preserved in the top latent variable, we conduct
an experiment in which we use the baseline VDVAE and the DCT-VAE pretrained on CIFAR10 for
compression. We use the KODAK dataset, which is a standard compression benchmark containing
24 images with resolution 512 × 768. Since CIFAR10 images are 32 × 32, we independently encode
patches of KODAK images. We then reconstruct each patch using only the context latent variable,
while the rest of the latent variables are sampled from the prior. We combine these patches to obtain
final reconstructions and measure reconstruction error (PSNR). We use JPEG as a baseline.
Results are provided in Figure 5. We select the compression rates that result in comparable PSNR
values. We report KL-divergence converted to bits-per-pixel as a theoretical compression rate. All
the latent variables (except for the context in DCT-VAE) are continuous. We provide an example
of the KODAK image after compression in Figure 6. We also plot examples of the reconstructed
images in the Appendix Figure 9. Interestingly, DCT-VAE is capable of obtaining much better BPP
than two other baselines while keeping the same PSNR. This indicates the usefulness of context.


6              C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we discuss the issue of posterior collapse in top-down hierarchical VAEs. We show
theoretically and empirically that this problem exists. As a solution, we propose to introduce deter-
ministic, discrete and non-trainable transformations to calculate the top latent variables, e.g., DCT.
The resulting model, DCT-VAE, seems to give more robust latent variables that carry more informa-
tion about data (e.g., the compression experiment).


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Nasir Ahmed, T Natarajan, and Kamisetty R Rao. Discrete cosine transform. IEEE Transactions on
  Computers, 100(1):90–93, 1974.
Alexander Alemi, Ben Poole, Ian Fischer, Joshua Dillon, Rif A Saurous, and Kevin Murphy. Fixing
  a broken elbo. In ICML, 2018.
Ifigeneia Apostolopoulou, Ian Char, Elan Rosenfeld, and Artur Dubrawski. Deep attentive varia-
   tional inference. In ICLR, 2022.
Samuel Bowman, Luke Vilnis, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Dai, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Samy Bengio.
  Generating sentences from a continuous space. In SIGNLL, 2016.
Yuri Burda, Roger Grosse, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Importance weighted autoencoders. arXiv,
  2015.
Rewon Child. Very deep vaes generalize autoregressive models and can outperform them on images.
  In ICLR, 2021.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. NeurIPS,
  2021.
Adji B Dieng, Yoon Kim, Alexander M Rush, and David M Blei. Avoiding latent variable collapse
  with generative skip models. In AISTATS, 2019.
Hao Fu, Chunyuan Li, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Lawrence Carin. Cyclical
  annealing schedule: A simple approach to mitigating kl vanishing. arXiv, 2019.
Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,
  Benjamı́n Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel,
  Ryan P Adams, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven contin-
  uous representation of molecules. ACS central science, 2018.
Serhii Havrylov and Ivan Titov. Preventing posterior collapse with levenshtein variational autoen-
  coder. arXiv, 2020.
Junxian He, Daniel Spokoyny, Graham Neubig, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Lagging inference
  networks and posterior collapse in variational autoencoders. In ICLR, 2019.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. NeurIPS,
  2020.
Chin-Wei Huang, Jae Hyun Lim, and Aaron C Courville. A variational perspective on diffusion-
  based generative models and score matching. NeurIPS, 2021.
Michael I Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Lawrence K Saul. An introduction
 to variational methods for graphical models. Machine learning, 37(2):183–233, 1999.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In ICLR, 2014.
Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. In
  NeurIPS, 2021.
Durk P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Rafal Jozefowicz, Xi Chen, Ilya Sutskever, and Max Welling. Im-
  proved variational inference with inverse autoregressive flow. NeurIPS, 2016.
Anna Kuzina, Max Welling, and Jakub Mikolaj Tomczak. Alleviating adversarial attacks on varia-
  tional autoencoders with mcmc. In NeurIPS, 2022.
James Lucas, George Tucker, Roger Grosse, and Mohammad Norouzi. Understanding posterior
  collapse in generative latent variable models. Deep Generative Models for Highly Structured
  DataICLR, 2019.
Lars Maaløe, Marco Fraccaro, and Ole Winther. Semi-supervised generation with cluster-aware
  generative models. arXiv, 2017.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lars Maaløe, Marco Fraccaro, Valentin Liévin, and Ole Winther. Biva: A very deep hierarchy of
  latent variables for generative modeling. NeurIPS, 2019.
Eric Nalisnick, Akihiro Matsukawa, Yee Whye Teh, Dilan Gorur, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Do
  deep generative models know what they don’t know? In ICLR, 2019.
William B Pennebaker and Joan L Mitchell. JPEG: Still image data compression standard. Springer
 Science & Business Media, 1992.
Yura Perugachi-Diaz, Jakub Tomczak, and Sandjai Bhulai. Invertible densenets with concatenated
  lipswish. NeurIPS, 2021.
Adeel Pervez and Efstratios Gavves. Spectral smoothing unveils phase transitions in hierarchical
  variational autoencoders. ICML, 2021.
Andreas Raue, Clemens Kreutz, Thomas Maiwald, Julie Bachmann, Marcel Schilling, Ursula
  Klingmüller, and Jens Timmer. Structural and practical identifiability analysis of partially ob-
  served dynamical models by exploiting the profile likelihood. Bioinformatics, 25(15):1923–1929,
  2009.
Ali Razavi, Aaron van den Oord, Ben Poole, and Oriol Vinyals. Preventing posterior collapse with
  delta-vaes. In ICLR, 2019.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and
  approximate inference in deep generative models. In ICML, 2014.
Samarth Sinha and Adji Bousso Dieng. Consistency regularization for variational auto-encoders.
  NeurIPS, 2021.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In ICML, 2015.
Casper Kaae Sønderby, Tapani Raiko, Lars Maaløe, Søren Kaae Sønderby, and Ole Winther. Ladder
  variational autoencoders. NeurIPS, 2016.
Jakub Tomczak and Max Welling. Vae with a vampprior. In AISTATS, 2018.
Jakub M. Tomczak. Deep Generative Modeling. Springer Cham, 2022.
Belinda Tzen and Maxim Raginsky. Neural stochastic differential equations: Deep latent gaussian
  models in the diffusion limit. arXiv, 2019.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. NeurIPS, 2020.
Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based generative modeling in latent space.
  NeurIPS, 2021.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. NeurIPS, 2017.
Yixin Wang, David Blei, and John P Cunningham. Posterior collapse and latent variable non-
  identifiability. NeurIPS, 2021.
Zhou Wang, Eero P Simoncelli, and Alan C Bovik. Multiscale structural similarity for image quality
  assessment. In IEEE Conf. on Signals, Systems & Computers, 2003.
Antoine Wehenkel and Gilles Louppe. Diffusion priors in variational autoencoders. In INNFICML,
  2021.


                                                11
