Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E NHANCING G ROUP FAIRNESS IN O NLINE S ETTINGS
U SING O BLIQUE D ECISION F ORESTS
 Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury∗,1 , Nicholas Monath2 , Ahmad Beirami3 , Rahul Kidambi3 ,
 Avinava Dubey3 , Amr Ahmed3 , Snigdha Chaturvedi1
 1
     UNC Chapel Hill, 2 Google DeepMind, 3 Google Research.
 {somnath, snigdha}@cs.unc.edu
 {nmonath, beirami, rahulkidambi, avinavadubey, amra}@google.com



                                                 A BSTRACT
              Fairness, especially group fairness, is an important consideration in the context of
              machine learning systems. The most commonly adopted group fairness-enhancing
              techniques are in-processing methods that rely on a mixture of a fairness objec-
              tive (e.g., demographic parity) and a task-specific objective (e.g., cross-entropy)
              during the training process. However, when data arrives in an online fashion –
              one instance at a time – optimizing such fairness objectives poses several chal-
              lenges. In particular, group fairness objectives are defined using expectations of
              predictions across different demographic groups. In the online setting, where the
              algorithm has access to a single instance at a time, estimating the group fairness
              objective requires additional storage and significantly more computation (e.g., for-
              ward/backward passes) than the task-specific objective at every time step. In this
              paper, we propose Aranyani, an ensemble of oblique decision trees, to make fair
              decisions in online settings. The hierarchical tree structure of Aranyani enables
              parameter isolation and allows us to efficiently compute the fairness gradients us-
              ing aggregate statistics of previous decisions, eliminating the need for additional
              storage and forward/backward passes. We also present an efficient framework to
              train Aranyani and theoretically analyze several of its properties. We conduct em-
              pirical evaluations on 5 publicly available benchmarks (including vision and lan-
              guage datasets) to show that Aranyani achieves a better accuracy-fairness trade-off
              compared to baseline approaches.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Critical applications of machine learning, such as hiring (Dastin, 2022) and criminal recidivism
(Larson et al., 2016), require special attention to avoid perpetuating biases present in training
data (Corbett-Davies et al., 2017; Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Raji & Buolamwini, 2019). Group
fairness, which is a well-studied paradigm for mitigating such biases in machine learning (Mehrabi
et al., 2021; Hort et al., 2023), tries to achieve statistical parity of a system’s predictions among dif-
ferent demographic (or protected) groups (e.g., gender or race). In general, group fairness-enhancing
techniques can be broadly categorized into three categories: pre-processing (Zemel et al., 2013; Cal-
mon et al., 2017), post-processing (Hardt et al., 2016; Pleiss et al., 2017; Alghamdi et al., 2022), and
in-processing (Quadrianto & Sharmanska, 2017; Agarwal et al., 2018; Lowy et al., 2022; Baharlouei
et al., 2024) techniques. Most of these approaches rely on group fairness objectives that are opti-
mized alongside task-specific objectives in an offline setting (Dwork et al., 2012). Group fairness
objectives (e.g., demographic parity) are defined using expectations of predictions across different
demographic groups, requiring access to labeled data from different groups. However, in many mod-
ern applications (e.g., output moderation using toxicity classifiers for chatbots, social media content,
etc.), data arrives in an online fashion. In such cases, the definition of safety is evolving, and new
unsafe data points are identified on the fly, making them prime candidates for online learning.
In the online setting, optimizing for group fairness poses several unique challenges. Central to this
paper, in-processing techniques require additional storage or computation since the system only has
     ∗
         Work done during an internship at Google Research.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


access to a single input instance at any given time. In online settings, naively training the model using
group fairness loss involves storing all (or at least a subset of) the input instances seen so far, and
performing forward/backward passes through the model using these instances at each step of online
learning, which can be computationally expensive. We also note that other techniques such as pre-
processing techniques are clearly impractical as they require prior access to data. Post-processing
techniques typically assume black-box access to a trained model and a held-out validation set (Hardt
et al., 2016), which can be impractical or expensive to acquire during online learning.
In this paper, we present a novel framework Aranyani, which consists of an ensemble of oblique de-
cision trees. Aranyani uses the structural properties of the tree to enhance group fairness in decisions
made during online learning. The final prediction in oblique trees is a combination of local deci-
sions at individual tree nodes. We show that imposing group fairness constraints on local node-level
decisions results in parameter isolation, which empirically leads to better and fairer solutions. In the
online setting, we show that maintaining the aggregate statistics of the local node-level decisions
allows us to efficiently estimate group fairness gradients, eliminating the need for additional storage
or forward/backward passes. We present an efficient framework to train Aranyani using state-of-
the-art autograd libraries and modern accelerators. We also theoretically study several properties of
Aranyani including the convergence of gradient estimates. Empirically, we observe that Aranyani
achieves the best accuracy-fairness trade-off on 5 different online learning setups.
Our paper is organized as follows: (a) We begin by introducing the fundamentals of oblique deci-
sion trees and provide the details of oblique decision forests used in Aranyani (Section 2), (b) We
describe the problem setup and discuss how to enforce group fairness in the simpler offline setting
(Section 3.1 & 3.2), (c) We describe the functioning of Aranyani in the online setting (Section 3.3),
(d) We describe an efficient training procedure for oblique decision forests that enables gradient
computation using back-propagation (Section 3.4), (e) We theoretically analyze several properties
of Aranyani (Section 4), and (f) We describe the experimental setup and results of Aranyani and
other baseline approaches on several datasets (Section 5). We observe that Aranyani achieves the
best accuracy-fairness tradeoff, and provides significant time and memory complexity gains com-
pared to naively storing input instances to compute the group fairness loss.

2   O BLIQUE D ECISION T REES
We introduce our proposed framework, Aranyani, an ensemble of oblique decision trees, for achiev-
ing group fairness in an online setting. In this section, we introduce the fundamentals of oblique
decision trees and discuss the details of the prediction function used in Aranyani. Similar to a con-
ventional decision tree, an oblique decision tree splits the input space to make predictions by routing
samples through different paths along the tree. However, unlike a decision tree, which only makes
axis-aligned splits, an oblique decision tree can make arbitrary oblique splits by using routing func-
tions that consider all input features. The routing functions in oblique decision tree nodes can be
parameterized using neural networks (Murthy et al., 1994; Jordan & Jacobs, 1994). This allows it
to potentially fit arbitrary boundary structures more effectively. We formally describe the details of
the oblique decision tree structure below:
Definition 1 (Oblique binary decision tree (Karthikeyan et al., 2022)). An oblique tree of height h
represents a function f (x; W, B, Θ) : Rd → Rc parameterized by wij ∈ Rd , bij ∈ R at (i, j)-th
                                                                 T
node (j-th node at depth i). Each node computes nij (x) = wij      x + bij > 0, which decides whether
x must traverse the left or right child. After traversing the tree, input x arrives at the l-th leaf that
outputs θl ∈ Rc (c > 1 for classification and c = 1 for regression).
The oblique tree parameters (W, B, Θ) can be learned using gradient descent (Karthikeyan et al.,
2022). However, the hard routing in oblique decision trees (x is routed either to the left or right
child) makes the learning process non-trivial. In our work, we consider a modified soft version of
oblique trees where an input x is routed to both left and right child at every tree node with certain
probabilities based on the node output, nij (x).
Definition 2 (Soft-Routed Oblique binary decision tree). Using the same parameterization in Def-
inition 1, soft-routed oblique trees route x to both children at each node with a certain probability.
At (i, j)-th node, the probability that x is routed to the left node p(↙) = nij (x), and the right node
                                                T
is p(↘) = 1 − nij (x),
                     P where nij (x) = g(wij x + bij ) and g(x) ∈ [0, 1] is an activation function.
The output f (x) = l pl (x)θl , where pl (x) is the probability with which x reaches the l-th leaf.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          x                                                     x

                                         (0, 0)
                           n(0,0)                   1 − n(0,0)                                              f 1(x)

                                                                   n(i,j) = g(wTij x + bij)                           1
                        (1, 0)                          (1, 1)                                      ⋮   ⟹ f(x) = | T | ∑ f t(x)
               n(1,0)            1 − n(1,0) n(1,1)               1 − n(1,1)                     x                         t


                θ0                  θ1             θ2               θ3
                                                                                                           f |T|(x)
f(x) = n(0,0)n(1,0)θ0 +n(0,0)(1 − n(1,0))θ1 +(1 − n(0,0))n(1,1)θ2 +(1 − n(0,0))(1 − n(1,1))θ3


Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the functioning of Oblique Decision Forests. (Left): We illustrate
the computation of a soft-routed oblique tree output f t (x) using individual tree node outputs. We
observe that the final tree decision is composed of individual node outputs. (Right): We showcase
how decisions from multiple oblique trees are combined to form f (x).

In soft-routed oblique decision trees, we observe that the prediction f (x) is a linear combination of
                                                   Qh
all the leaf parameters. The coefficients pl (x) = i=1 ni,A(i,l) (x) is the product of all probabilities
along the path from the root to the l-th leaf and A(i, l) is the l-th leaf’s ancestor at depth i. We
observe that learning the parameters of the soft-routed tree structure is much easier as we can easily
compute the gradients of parameters w.r.t. f (x) using backpropagation. We further improve the
efficiency by computing f (x) using matrix operations as described in Section 3.4. In our work,
we use a complete binary tree of height h to parameterize obliques trees. Note that the proposed
soft-routed oblique trees are reminiscent of the sigmoid tree decomposition (Yang et al., 2019) used
in alleviating the softmax bottleneck.
We use an ensemble of trees and the expected output as the final prediction to reduce the variance
and increase the predictive power of the outputs of soft-routed oblique decision trees. We call this
                                                                    P|T |
soft-routed oblique forest, which is computed as: f (x) = 1/|T | t=1 f t (x), where f t (x) is the
output of the t-th soft-routed oblique decision tree. The schematic diagram is shown in Figure 1.

3     A RANYANI : FAIR O BLIQUE D ECISION F ORESTS

In this section, we present Aranyani, a framework to enhance group fairness in decisions made
during online learning. In this work, we focus on the group fairness notion of statistical or de-
mographic parity. Our framework can be easily extended to other notions of group fairness, such
as equalized odds (Hardt et al., 2016), equal opportunity (Hardt et al., 2016), and representation
parity (Hashimoto et al., 2018) as described in Appendix C.1.

3.1    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We describe the online learning setup where input instances arrive incrementally {x1 , x2 , . . .}, with
xt arriving at time step t. The goal of the oblique decision forest f is to make accurate decisions
w.r.t. the task, y (e.g., hiring decisions) while being fair w.r.t. the protected attribute, a (e.g.,
gender). At time step t, f outputs a prediction ŷt based on f (xt ), where ŷt = f (xt ) for regression
and ŷt = arg max f (x) for classification. With a slight abuse of notation, we denote decisions
made for an instance x with protected attribute a = k as f (x|a = k) (forest output) or n(x|a = k)
(node output), where k = {0, 1}. Following prior work (Zhang & Ntoutsi, 2019), we consider the
setup where the model receives both the true label yt and demographic label at of an instance xt
after predicting ŷt . The model can then use this feedback to update its parameters. In this work, we
consider the scenario where the model is not allowed to store previous samples. Note that storing
previous instances may pose additional challenges in applications that need to adhere to privacy
guidelines (Voigt & Von dem Bussche, 2017) or involve distributed infrastructure, such as federated
learning (Konečný et al., 2016). In this work, we focus on demographic parity notion of fairness:
                                                  DP = |E[f (x|a = 0)] − E[f (x|a = 1)]|.                                     (1)


                                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that in the above definition, we consider a slightly modified version of demographic parity
to handle scenarios where the preferred outcome (or target label) is not explicitly defined. For
simplicity, we describe our system using a binary protected attribute a ∈ {0, 1}, however, it can
handle protected attributes with multiple classes (>2) as well (see more details in Appendix C.2).

3.2        O FFLINE S ETTING
We begin by describing the simpler offline setting, in which all the training data is accessible prior to
making predictions. In this setting, f is optimized using stochastic gradient descent in a batch-wise
manner. The constrained objective function is shown below:
                    min L(f (x), y), subject to |E[f (x|a = 0)] − E[f (x|a = 1)]| < ϵ,                  (2)
                     f

where L(·, ·) is the task loss function1 (e.g., cross entropy loss) and y is the true task label. The non-
convex and non-smooth nature of the fairness objective (L1-norm in the DP term) makes it difficult
to optimize the group fairness loss.
When f is an oblique decision forest, we leverage its hierarchical prediction structure to impose
group fairness constraints on the local node-level outputs, nij (x) (j-th node at depth i) of the tree.
The rationale behind applying constraints at the node outputs stems from the observation that if
instances from different groups receive similar decisions at every node, then the final decision (which
is an aggregation of the local decisions, Definition 2) is expected to be similar. We can formulate
the node-level fairness constraints (Fij ) as shown below:
      min L(f (x), y), s.t. ∀(i, j) |Fij | < ϵ, where Fij = E[nij (x|a = 0)] − E[nij (x|a = 1)].        (3)
       f

The node constraints |Fij | are applied to all nodes (indexed by (i, j)) in the tree. We discuss the rela-
tion between node-level constraints and group fairness in Section 4. We note that Fij is a function of
the parameters of the (i, j)-th node only. In practice, we observe that this parameter isolation (Rusu
et al., 2016) achieved by imposing fairness constraints on the local node-level outputs makes it easier
to optimize f . We would like to emphasize that Aranyani can be extended to other notions of group
fairness by modifying the formulation of Fij (see Appendix C.1).
However, the optimization procedure in Equation 3 is hard to solve. We relax it by using a smooth
surrogate for the L1-norm and turning the constraint into a regularizer. In particular, we use Huber
loss function (Huber, 1992) (with hyperparameter δ > 0) and the relaxed optimization objective is:
                                     
                                                                 2
                                                                 Fij /2,          if |Fij | < δ
                        X            
   min L(f (x), y) + λ       Hδ (Fij ) , where Hδ (Fij ) :=                                     , (4)
     f                                                         δ|Fij − δ/2|, otherwise
                               i,j

with λ being a hyperparameter. In the offline setting, the expectations over input instances in Fij
(Equation 3) are computed using samples within a training batch. In the online setup, computing
these expectations is challenging as we only have access to individual instances at a time and not
to a batch. Therefore, naively optimizing Equation 3 or 4 in the online setup requires storing all
(or at least a subset) of the input instances. Moreover, we need to perform additional forward and
backward passes for all stored instances to compute the group fairness gradients. In practice, this
can be quite expensive in the online setting. In the following section, we discuss how to efficiently
compute these group fairness gradients in the online setting.

3.3        O NLINE S ETTING
In this section, we describe the training process for Aranyani in the online setting. As noted in the
previous section, computing the expectations in group fairness terms is challenging due to storage
and computational costs. However, we do not need to compute the loss exactly using previous input
instances as we only need the gradients of the loss function to update the model. We show that
it is possible to estimate the fairness gradients by maintaining aggregate statistics of the node-level
outputs in the tree. Taking the derivative of Equation 4, with respect to node parameters Θ ∈ [W, B]
    1
      We assume that the task loss can be defined using a single instance. This holds for most commonly used
loss functions like cross entropy and mean squared error.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of model f , we get the following gradients:
                                 X
    G(Θ) = ∇Θ L(f (x), y) + λ        ∇Θ Hδ (Fij ),
                                  ∀i,j

                                                           Fij ∇Θ Fij ,              if |Fij | < δ   (5)
                             where ∇Θ Hδ (Fij ) =
                                                           δsgn (Fij − δ/2) ∇Θ Fij , otherwise
                             and ∇Θ Fij = E[∇Θ nij (x|a = 0)] − E[∇Θ nij (x|a = 1)].
In the above equation, we have an unbiased estimate of the task gradient: ∇Θ L(f (x), y) for an i.i.d.
sample x. The fairness gradient ∇Θ Hδ (Fij ) can be estimated by maintaining a number of aggregate
statistics at each decision tree node. Specifically, we need to store the following aggregate statistics:
(a) E[nij (x|a = k)] and (b) E[∇Θ nij (x|a = k)], ∀k, where k ∈ {0, 1} denotes different protected
attribute labels. In practice, for every incoming sample xt we compute nij (xt ) and ∇Θ nij (xt ), and
update the aggregate statistics based on the protected label at . We denote the node constraints and
gradients estimated using aggregate statistics as Fbij and G(Θ)
                                                            b      respectively.
Note that in this setup, we do not need to store the previous input instances or query f multiple times.
Furthermore, computing nij (x) and ∇Θ nij (x) is relatively inexpensive. For sigmoid functions,
both nij (x) and ∇Θ nij (x) can be obtained using a forward pass as: ∇Θ nij (x) = nij (x)(1 −
nij (x)). We discuss several properties of the estimated gradient G(Θ)
                                                                     b     in Section 4.

3.4    T RAINING P ROCEDURE

In this section, we present an efficient training strategy for Aranyani. In general, tree-based architec-
tures are slow to train using gradient descent as gradients need to propagate from leaf nodes to other
nodes in a sequential fashion. We introduce a parameterization that enables us to compute oblique
tree outputs only using matrix operations. This enables training on modern accelerators (like GPUs
or TPUs) and helps us to efficiently compute task gradients (Equation 5) by using state-of-the-art
autograd libraries. We begin by noting that all tree node outputs are independent of each other given
the input x. Therefore, the node outputs can be computed in parallel as shown below:
                      N = g(WT x + B) ∈ Rm , where W ∈ Rm×d , B ∈ Rm
and m = 2h − 1 is the number of internal nodes (for a complete binary tree). Subsequently, these
node outputs are utilized to calculate the probabilities required to reach individual leaf nodes. The
path probabilities are computed by creating 2h (number of leaf nodes) copies of the node outputs,
                                        h
N = (N, N, · · · , N) ∈ Rm×2 , and applying a mask, A, that selects the ancestors for each
leaf node. Each element of the mask Aij ∈ {−1, 0, 1} selects whether the leaf path from a selected
node is left (1), right (-1), or doesn’t exist (0). The exact probabilities are then stored in P. This
sequence of operations is shown below:
      f (x) = exp (11×m log P)Θ, where P = ReLU(N ⊙ A) + (1m×2h − ReLU(−N ⊙ A))
              h
and Θ ∈ R2 ×c . The selected probabilities can be utilized to compute the final output as f (x).
More details about the construction of mask A is reported in Appendix D.3.

4     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we theoretically analyze several properties of Aranyani. In our proofs, we make
assumptions that are standard in the optimization literature such as compact parameter set, Lips-
chitz task loss, bounded input x, and bounded gradient noise (see Appendix A.1 for more details).
First, we discuss the conditions of the node-level decisions and how they relate to group fairness
constraints. Second, we analyze the properties of the gradient estimates (Equation 5) and show that
the expected gradient norm converges for small step size and large enough time steps.
Lemma 1 (Demographic Parity Bound). Let f (x) be a soft-routed oblique decision tree of height h
with ∥θl ∥ = 1 and assume an equal number of input instances x for each group of a binary protected
attribute a ∈ {0, 1}. Then, if all the node-level decisions satisfy the following condition:
                           E[|nij (x|a = 0) − nij (x|a = 1)|] ≤ ϵ, ∀(i, j).                          (6)
                                                                             h
Then, the overall demographic parity of f (x) is bounded as: DP ≤ h2 ϵ, for ϵ > 0.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The above lemma (proof in Appendix A.2) provides the node-level constraint (Equation 6) that upper
bounds the demographic parity. We note that the node constraint |Fij | (Equation 4) is a weaker
constraint than the one derived above. The rationale behind using Fij over the derived constraint
is based on two key considerations: First, the expectation is computed using sample pairs from
complementary groups (in Equation 6), which is challenging to compute in both offline and online
settings. Second, optimizing this constraint can severely limit the task performance as it encourages
the trivial solution of having the same node outputs for all instances.
Next, we derive the Rademacher complexity of soft-routed decision trees. Empirical Rademacher
complexity, R̂n (H), measures the ability of function class H to fit random noise indicating its ex-
pressivity (formal definition and proof in Appendix A.3).
Lemma 2 (Rademacher Complexity). Empirical Rademacher complexity, R̂n (H), for soft-routed
                                                                                                  √
decision tree (of height h) function class, f (x) ∈ H, and ∥θl ∥ = 1 is bounded as: R̂n (H) ≤ 2h / n.
We observe that the bound exponentially increases with the height of the tree, h. Interestingly,
according to the DP bound in Equation 6, it appears that we can easily improve group fairness
by using a shallower tree (smaller h). This illustrates the trade-off between fairness and accuracy,
highlighting that it is not feasible to enhance group fairness without a substantial impact on accuracy.
Next, we derive the estimation error bound for the gradients (in Equation 5), which stems from
the fact that we use aggregate statistics of node outputs from previous time steps where the model
parameters were different. First, we derive the estimation error bounds for the aggregate statistics
Fbij and ∇Fbij (Lemma 4). Using these results, we bound the estimation error of fairness gradients
∇Θ Hδ (Fbij ) in the following lemma (proof in Appendix A.4).
Lemma 3 (Fairness Gradient Estimation Error). For a soft-routed oblique decision tree f (x) with
Lg -smooth activation function g(·), bounded i.i.d. input instances ∥xt ∥ ≤ B, and compact param-
eter set Θt ∈ BF (0, R) (Frobenius norm ball of radius R), the estimation error can be bounded:
                              ∥∇Θ Hδ (Fij ) − ∇Θ Hδ (Fbij )∥ ≤ δB/2,                                (7)
where δ is the Huber loss parameter (Equation 4).

Next, we use the above bound to derive the convergence of biased gradients building on the results
from Ajalloeian & Stich (2020) to obtain the following result (proof in Appendix A.5):
Theorem 1 (Gradient Norm Convergence). Using the assumptions in Lemma 3, the expected  gra-
                       PT −1       b t )∥2 ] can be bounded as: ΨT ≤ ϵ + 22h−2 λ2 δ 2 B 2 , for
dient norm ΨT = 1/T t=0 E[∥ G(Θ
                                                       2
large enough time step T ≥ max 4F L(M   ϵ
                                          +1) 4F Lσ
                                             , ϵ2          , small step size γ ≤ min      1        ϵ
                                                                                       (M +1)L , 2Lσ 2
and ϵ > 0 (see definitions in Appendix A.5).

The above bound demonstrates that the expected norm of the gradients estimated using the aggregate
statistics of decisions from previous time steps converges over time (see Appendix A.5). In the
following sections, we perform experiments to empirically verify the theoretical results.

5   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we present the details of our experimental setup and results to evaluate Aranyani.
Our implementation is available at: https://github.com/brcsomnath/Aranyani/.
Baselines. We compare Aranyani with the following online learning algorithms: Hoeffding
Trees (HT) (Domingos & Hulten, 2000) performs decision tree learning for online data streams by
leveraging the Hoeffding bound (Hoeffding, 1994),             Adaptive Hoeffding Trees (AHT) (Bifet &
Gavalda, 2009) improves upon HTs by detecting changes in the input data stream and updating the
learning process accordingly, FAHT (Zhang & Ntoutsi, 2019) modifies the HT splitting algorithm
by introducing group fairness constraints while computing the Hoeffding bound, MLP Aranyani,
(MLP), uses an MLP as f (x) and the same online learning updates described in Section 3.3 (more
details about the architecture in Appendix D), Leaf Aranyani (Leaf) stores the aggregate gradient
statistics w.r.t. leaf-level predictions or the final output instead of the node predictions, Majority
is a post-processing baseline considers the output of f (x) with probability p and outputs the majority


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Majority   Hoeffding Tree (HT)   Adaptive HT   FAHT   MLP   Leaf   Aranyani


Figure 2: We report the group fairness (demographic parity) vs. task performance (accuracy) trade-
off plots for different systems in (left) Adult, (center) Census, and (right) COMPAS datasets. Ideally,
a fair online system should achieve low demographic parity along with high accuracy scores. Con-
sidering the inverted x-axis, the performance of a fair system should lie in the top right quadrant
of each plot. We report Aranyani’s performance for different λ’s and observe that it achieves better
accuracy-fairness trade-off compared to baseline systems.
label with (1 − p) probability. We report the results for different values of p. The majority baseline
can provide a fairness improvement by simply decreasing the task performance, but it requires prior
access to target label information. In practice, outperforming the majority baseline is not easy. As
pointed out by (Lowy et al., 2022), many offline techniques fall short of the majority’s performance
when batch sizes are small, which is consistent with the online learning setup.
Online Setup & Evaluation. We use the online learning setup described in Section 3.1. For each
algorithm, we retain predictions ŷt from every step and report the average task performance (accu-
racy) and demographic parity. In all experiments (unless otherwise stated), we use oblique forests
with 3 trees and each tree has a height of 4 (based on a hyperparameter grid search). We provide
further details in Appendix D. Next, we present the evaluation results of fair online learning using
Aranyani and other baselines on 3 tabular datasets, a vision, and a language-based dataset.

5.1   TABULAR DATASETS
We conducted our experiments on the following tabular datasets: (a) UCI Adult (Becker & Kohavi,
1996), (b) Census (Dua et al., 2017), and (c) ProPublica COMPAS (Angwin et al., 2016). Adult
dataset contains 14 features of ∼48K individuals. The task involves predicting whether the annual
income of an individual is more than $50K or not and the protected attribute is gender. Census
dataset has the same task description but contains 41 attributes for each individual and 299K in-
stances. Propublica COMPAS considers the binary classification task of whether a defendant will
re-offend with the protected attribute being race. COMPAS has ∼7K instances.
Figure 2 demonstrates the fairness-accuracy trade-off, where x and y-axis show the average demo-
graphic parity (DP) and accuracy scores respectively. Ideally, we want an online system to achieve
low DP and high accuracy, making the top-right quadrant the desired outcome (x-axis is inverted).
We report Aranyani’s performance for different λ values (Equation 5), which controls the trade-off.
We observe that Aranyani’s results lie in the top-right portion, showcasing that it can achieve the
best trade-off. We also observe that the variance in the results of Aranyani is high in COMPAS.
This could be because COMPAS has fewer instances than other datasets, potentially affecting con-
vergence. We also compare with FERMI Lowy et al. (2022), the only stochastic algorithm known
to us that can be applied in online settings, and observe significant gains (Appendix E, Figure 11).
We also assess the significance of the tree structure in Aranyani by examining the Aranyani MLP
baseline that employs the same gradient accumulation method discussed in Section 3.3, but without
the tree structure. In all datasets, we observe that the MLP baseline is unable to improve the fairness
scores beyond a certain point. Upon further investigation, we found that this phenomenon happens
due to the vanishing fairness gradients in the layers further from the output. We also observe the
same phenomenon for Leaf baseline, where the fairness gradients for nodes away from the leaves
become very small and they cannot be trained effectively. This showcases the importance of parame-
ter isolation in Aranyani and the application of group fairness constraints on local decisions. We also
note that the conventional Hoeffding tree-based baselines (HT , AHT , and FAHT ) achieve
poor fairness scores, often falling behind majority post-processing, which shows that HT based ap-


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Majority   Hoeffding Tree (HT)   Adaptive HT   MLP   Leaf   Aranyani
Figure 3: We report the group fairness vs. accuracy trade-off plots for different systems in (left)
CivilComments and (right) CelebA datasets. We observe that Aranyani achieves significantly better
accuracy-fairness trade-off than baseline systems.
proaches are unable to robustly improve the group fairness. Overall, we observe that Aranyani can
achieve a better accuracy-fairness trade-off than baseline approaches across all datasets.

5.2   V ISION & L ANGUAGE DATASETS

We also conduct experiments on (a) CivilComments (Do, 2019) toxicity classification and (b)
CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) image classification datasets. CivilComments is a natural language dataset
where the task involves classifying whether an online comment is toxic or not. We use religion as
the protected attribute and consider instances of religion labels: “Muslim” and “Christian”, as they
showcase the maximum discrepancy in toxicity. For CivilComments, we obtain text representations
from the instruction-tuned model, Instructor (Su et al., 2023) by using the prompt “Represent a toxic-
ity comment for classifying its toxicity as toxic or non-toxic: [comment]”. CelebA dataset contains
200K images of celebrity faces with 40 categorical attributes. Following previous works (Jung et al.,
2022b; Qiao & Peng, 2022; Jung et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2021), we select “blond hair” as the task
label and “gender” as the protected attribute. For CelebA, we retrieve the image representations
from the CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021).
In Figure 3, we report the fairness-accuracy trade-off plots, where we observe that Aranyani
achieves the best accuracy-fairness trade-off on both datasets. Similar to tabular datasets, we observe
that the MLP      and Leaf baselines are unable to improve the fairness scores at all. Hoeffding
tree (HT) baseline achieves decent fairness scores but is unable to converge on the task. This
highlights the limitations of traditional decision trees when dealing with non-axis-aligned data.

5.3   A NALYSIS

In this section, we perform empirical evaluations to analyze the functioning of Aranyani.
Reservoir Variant. We compare the performance of Aranyani with a variant (using oblique forests)
that stores all samples in the online stream to compute the fairness loss. We refer to this variant
as “Reservoir”. In Figure 4 (left), we observe that Aranyani achieves a similar accuracy-fairness
tradeoff compared to the reservoir variant on the Adult dataset. As Aranyani does not need to store
previous input samples, it is quite efficient – achieving a ∼3x improvement in computation time and
∼23% reduction in memory utilization.
Gradient Convergence. We investigate the convergence of the gradients used to update the oblique
tree. We conduct our experiment on CivilComments dataset using Aranyani with a single tree and
report the norm of the total gradients and fairness gradients used to update W (weight parameter
of each node). In Figure 4 (center), we observe that the norm of both task and fairness gradients
converge over time during the online learning process. This corroborates our theoretical guarantees
in Lemma 1. We found this behavior to be consistent across different parameters (Appendix E).
Tree Height Ablations. We study the effect of varying the tree height in oblique forests on the
fairness-accuracy tradeoff. In Figure 4 (right), we report Aranyani’s performance on the Adult
dataset with a fixed parameter λ = 0.1. We observe that the accuracy increases with height and
the demographic parity worsens (y-axis is inverted) with increasing height. This is consistent with
our theoretical results (Lemma 1 & 2). However, we have observed a slight decrease in accuracy
when using large tree heights (height=8). This observation suggests that oblique trees may overfit


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      10 1
           83                                                                                   Task Gradient     83.5
                                                                                                Fairness Gradient 83.0                                   0.08
           82


                                                          Gradient Norm
Accuracy (%)
           81                                                                                                     82.5                                   0.10
           80                                                         10 2                                        82.0
           79                                                                                                     81.5                                   0.12
           78         Aranyani (t=1x, mem=1x)                                                                     81.0
                      Reservoir (t=3x, mem=1.3x)
                                                                                                                             Accuracy               DP 0.14
           77                                                                                                     80.5
                0.18 0.15 0.13 0.10 0.08 0.05 0.03 0.00                      0   5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000      2   3   4      5   6   7    8
                               DP                                                          Iterations                            Tree Depth
Figure 4: (left) We compare Aranyani with the reservoir variant that stores all input instances, (cen-
ter) we investigate the gradient convergence, and (right) the impact of tree height on performance.
the training data when reaching a certain height, and choosing a shallower tree could be beneficial.
We perform additional experiments to investigate the performance of Aranyani (see Appendix E).

6               R ELATED W ORKS
Fairness. Existing work on promoting group fairness can be classified into three categories: pre-
processing (Zemel et al., 2013; Calmon et al., 2017), post-processing (Hardt et al., 2016; Pleiss et al.,
2017; Alghamdi et al., 2022), and in-processing (Quadrianto & Sharmanska, 2017; Agarwal et al.,
2018; Mary et al., 2019; Prost et al., 2019; Baharlouei et al., 2019; Lahoti et al., 2020; Lowy et al.,
2022; Basu Roy Chowdhury et al., 2021; Chowdhury & Chaturvedi, 2022; Chowdhury et al., 2023;
Baharlouei et al., 2024) techniques. These are trained and tested on a static dataset, and there is a
growing concern that they fail to remain fair under distribution shifts (Barrett et al., 2019; Mishler &
Dalmasso, 2022; Rezaei et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023). This calls for fairness-aware systems that
can adapt to distribution changes and update themselves in an online manner. However, an online
learning setting, where input instances arrive one at a time, presents several challenges that make it
difficult to apply existing techniques: (a) pre-processing techniques are not feasible as they require
prior access to input instances; (b) post-processing techniques often require access to a held-out set,
which may be impractical; and (c) in-processing techniques need a batch of samples to estimate the
group fairness loss, which may not always be feasible due to privacy reasons (Voigt & Von dem
Bussche, 2017) or distributed infrastructure (Konečný et al., 2016). FERMI (Lowy et al., 2022) is
the only in-processing approach that can work with a batch size of 1. Although several works (Gillen
et al., 2018; Bechavod et al., 2020) have studied individual fairness in online settings, only a few
recent works (Chowdhury & Chaturvedi, 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2024;
Truong et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024) considered group fairness in settings where the underlying
task or data distribution changes over time. However, these systems are incrementally trained on
sub-tasks, requiring access to task labels, which is not available in online data streams.
Gradient-based learning of trees. Similar to Aranyani that leveraged a gradient-based objective,
(Karthikeyan et al., 2022) uses gradient-based methods to discover the structure of oblique decision
tree classifiers. Discovering tree structures with gradient-based methods has been also considered in
works on autoencoders (Nagano et al., 2019; Shin et al., 2016), on discovering structure (e.g., parses)
in natural language (Yin et al., 2018; Drozdov et al., 2019), hierarchical clustering (Monath et al.,
2017; 2019; Zhao et al., 2020; Chami et al., 2020), phylogenetics (Macaulay & Fourment, 2023;
Penn et al., 2023), and extreme classification (Yu et al., 2022; Jernite et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019;
Jasinska-Kobus et al., 2021). We discuss more prior works related to decision trees in Appendix B.

7               C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose Aranyani, a framework to achieve group fairness in online learning.
Aranyani uses an ensemble of oblique decision trees and leverages its hierarchical prediction struc-
ture to store aggregate statistics of local decisions. These aggregate statistics help in the efficient
computation of group fairness gradients in the online setting, eliminating the need to store previ-
ous input instances. Empirically, we observe that Aranyani achieves significantly better accuracy-
fairness trade-off compared to baselines on a wide range of tabular, image, and text classification
datasets. Through extensive analysis, we showcase the utility of our proposed tree-based prediction
structure and fairness gradient approximation. While we investigated binary oblique tree structures,
their ability to fit complex functions can be limited when compared to fully connected networks. Fu-
ture research can explore other parameterizations (e.g., graph-based structures) that enable effective
gradient computation to impose group fairness in online settings with superior prediction power.


                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We have submitted the implementation of Aranyani in the supplementary materials. We have exten-
sively discussed the details of our experimental setup, datasets, baselines, and hyperparameters in
Section 5 and Appendix E. We have also provided the details of our training procedure in Section 3.4
and Appendix D.3. We will make our implementation public once the paper is published.

E THICS S TATEMENT

In this paper, we introduce an online learning framework, Aranyani, to enhance group fairness while
making decisions for an online data stream. Aranyani has been developed with the intention of
mitigating biases of machine learning systems when they are deployed in the wild. However, it is
crucial to thoroughly assess the data’s quality and the accuracy of the demographic labels used for
training Aranyani, as otherwise, it may still encode negative biases. In our experiments, we use
publicly available datasets and obtain data representations from open-sourced models. We do not
obtain any demographic labels through data annotation or any private sources.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors are thankful to James Atwood, Anneliese Brei, Shounak Chattopadhyay, Haoyuan Li,
and Anvesh Rao Vijjini for helpful feedback and discussions. The work began when Somnath Basu
Roy Chowdhury was a student researcher at Google. Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury and Snigdha
Chaturvedi were partly supported by Amazon Research Awards and the National Science Founda-
tion under award DRL-2112635.


R EFERENCES

Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S.
 Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew
 Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath
 Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris
 Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker,
 Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wat-
 tenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learn-
 ing on heterogeneous systems, 2015. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/. Software
 available from tensorflow.org.

Alekh Agarwal, Alina Beygelzimer, Miroslav Dudı́k, John Langford, and Hanna Wallach. A reduc-
  tions approach to fair classification. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 60–69.
  PMLR, 2018.

Sina Aghaei, Mohammad Javad Azizi, and Phebe Vayanos. Learning optimal and fair decision
  trees for non-discriminative decision-making. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 33, pp. 1418–1426, 2019.

Ahmad Ajalloeian and Sebastian U Stich. On the convergence of sgd with biased gradients. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2008.00051, 2020.

Wael Alghamdi, Hsiang Hsu, Haewon Jeong, Hao Wang, Peter Michalak, Shahab Asoodeh, and
 Flavio Calmon. Beyond adult and compas: Fair multi-class prediction via information projection.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38747–38760, 2022.

Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. Machine bias. In Ethics of data and
  analytics, pp. 254–264. Auerbach Publications, 2016.

Sina Baharlouei, Maher Nouiehed, Ahmad Beirami, and Meisam Razaviyayn. Rényi fair inference.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sina Baharlouei, Shivam Patel, and Meisam Razaviyayn. f-FERM: A scalable framework for robust
  fair empirical risk minimization. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=s90VIdza2K.
Maria Barrett, Yova Kementchedjhieva, Yanai Elazar, Desmond Elliott, and Anders Søgaard. Ad-
 versarial removal of demographic attributes revisited. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
 Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
 on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 6330–6335, 2019.
Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury, Sayan Ghosh, Yiyuan Li, Junier Oliva, Shashank Srivastava,
  and Snigdha Chaturvedi. Adversarial scrubbing of demographic information for text classifi-
  cation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 550–562, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.43. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.43.
Yahav Bechavod, Christopher Jung, and Steven Z Wu. Metric-free individual fairness in online
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:11214–11225, 2020.
Barry Becker and Ronny Kohavi. Adult.          UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1996.         DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5XW20.
Lukas Biewald. Experiment tracking with weights and biases, 2020. URL https://www.
  wandb.com/. Software available from wandb.com.
Albert Bifet and Ricard Gavalda. Adaptive learning from evolving data streams. In Advances in
  Intelligent Data Analysis VIII: 8th International Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis, IDA
  2009, Lyon, France, August 31-September 2, 2009. Proceedings 8, pp. 249–260. Springer, 2009.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commer-
  cial gender classification. In Conference on fairness, accountability and transparency, pp. 77–91.
  PMLR, 2018.
Flavio Calmon, Dennis Wei, Bhanukiran Vinzamuri, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and Kush R
  Varshney. Optimized pre-processing for discrimination prevention. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ines Chami, Albert Gu, Vaggos Chatziafratis, and Christopher Ré. From trees to continuous embed-
  dings and back: Hyperbolic hierarchical clustering. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:15065–15076, 2020.
Qinyi Chen, Jason Cheuk Nam Liang, Negin Golrezaei, and Djallel Bouneffouf. Interpolating item
  and user fairness in recommendation systems. Available at SSRN 4476512, 2023.
Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury and Snigdha Chaturvedi. Learning fair representations via rate-
  distortion maximization. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:
  1159–1174, 2022.
Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury and Snigdha Chaturvedi. Sustaining fairness via incremental learn-
  ing. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 6797–6805,
  2023.
Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury, Nicholas Monath, Kumar Avinava Dubey, Amr Ahmed, and
  Snigdha Chaturvedi. Robust concept erasure via kernelized rate-distortion maximization. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. Algorithmic decision
  making and the cost of fairness. In Proceedings of the 23rd acm sigkdd international conference
  on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 797–806, 2017.
Jeffrey Dastin. Amazon scraps secret AI recruiting tool that showed bias against women. In Ethics
   of data and analytics, pp. 296–299. Auerbach Publications, 2022.
Quan Do. Jigsaw unintended bias in toxicity classification. 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pedro Domingos and Geoff Hulten. Mining high-speed data streams. In Proceedings of the sixth
  ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 71–80,
  2000.

Andrew Drozdov, Pat Verga, Mohit Yadav, Mohit Iyyer, and Andrew McCallum. Unsuper-
  vised latent tree induction with deep inside-outside recursive autoencoders. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.02142, 2019.

Dheeru Dua, Casey Graff, et al. Uci machine learning repository. 2017.

Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science confer-
  ence, pp. 214–226, 2012.

Stephen Gillen, Christopher Jung, Michael Kearns, and Aaron Roth. Online learning with an un-
  known fairness metric. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Swati Gupta and Vijay Kamble. Individual fairness in hindsight. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 22(144):1–35, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/19-658.html.

Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.

Tatsunori Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok Namkoong, and Percy Liang. Fairness without
  demographics in repeated loss minimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1929–1938. PMLR, 2018.

Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. The collected
 works of Wassily Hoeffding, pp. 409–426, 1994.

Max Hort, Zhenpeng Chen, Jie M. Zhang, Mark Harman, and Federica Sarro. Bias mitigation for
 machine learning classifiers: A comprehensive survey. ACM J. Responsib. Comput., nov 2023.
 doi: 10.1145/3631326. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3631326. Just Accepted.

Peter J Huber. Robust estimation of a location parameter. In Breakthroughs in statistics: Methodol-
  ogy and distribution, pp. 492–518. Springer, 1992.

Kalina Jasinska-Kobus, Marek Wydmuch, Devanathan Thiruvenkatachari, and Krzysztof Dem-
  bczynski. Online probabilistic label trees. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 1801–1809. PMLR, 2021.

Yacine Jernite, Anna Choromanska, and David Sontag. Simultaneous learning of trees and represen-
  tations for extreme classification and density estimation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1665–1674. PMLR, 2017.

Zhimeng Stephen Jiang, Xiaotian Han, Hongye Jin, Guanchu Wang, Rui Chen, Na Zou, and Xia
  Hu. Chasing fairness under distribution shift: A model weight perturbation approach. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Michael I Jordan and Robert A Jacobs. Hierarchical mixtures of experts and the em algorithm.
 Neural computation, 6(2):181–214, 1994.

Sangwon Jung, Sanghyuk Chun, and Taesup Moon. Learning fair classifiers with partially annotated
  group labels. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 10348–10357, 2022a.

Sangwon Jung, Taeeon Park, Sanghyuk Chun, and Taesup Moon. Re-weighting based group fairness
  regularization via classwise robust optimization. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022b.

Faisal Kamiran, Toon Calders, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Discrimination aware decision tree learn-
  ing. In 2010 IEEE international conference on data mining, pp. 869–874. IEEE, 2010.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ajaykrishna Karthikeyan, Naman Jain, Nagarajan Natarajan, and Prateek Jain. Learning accurate
  decision trees with bandit feedback via quantized gradient descent. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research, 2022.

Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), San Diega, CA, USA, 2015.

James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.

Jakub Konečný, H. Brendan McMahan, Felix X. Yu, Peter Richtarik, Ananda Theertha Suresh,
  and Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. In
  NIPS Workshop on Private Multi-Party Machine Learning, 2016. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1610.05492.

Preethi Lahoti, Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Kang Lee, Flavien Prost, Nithum Thain, Xuezhi Wang, and
  Ed Chi. Fairness without demographics through adversarially reweighted learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:728–740, 2020.

Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, Lauren Kirchner, and Julia Angwin. How we analyzed the compas recidi-
   vism algorithm. ProPublica (5 2016), 9(1):3–3, 2016.

Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6781–6792. PMLR,
  2021.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.

Andrew Lowy, Sina Baharlouei, Rakesh Pavan, Meisam Razaviyayn, and Ahmad Beirami. A
  stochastic optimization framework for fair risk minimization. Transactions on Machine Learning
  Research, 2022.

Matthew Macaulay and Mathieu Fourment. Differentiable phylogenetics via hyperbolic embeddings
 with dodonaphy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11732, 2023.

Jérémie Mary, Clément Calauzenes, and Noureddine El Karoui. Fairness-aware learning for contin-
    uous attributes and treatments. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4382–4391.
    PMLR, 2019.

Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey
  on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–35, 2021.

Alan Mishler and Niccolò Dalmasso. Fair when trained, unfair when deployed: Observable fair-
  ness measures are unstable in performative prediction settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05049,
  2022.

Nicholas Monath, Ari Kobren, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Andrew McCallum. Gradient-based hi-
  erarchical clustering. In 31st Conference on neural information processing systems (NIPS 2017),
  Long Beach, CA, USA, volume 1, pp. 6, 2017.

Nicholas Monath, Manzil Zaheer, Daniel Silva, Andrew McCallum, and Amr Ahmed. Gradient-
  based hierarchical clustering using continuous representations of trees in hyperbolic space. In
  Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery &
  Data Mining, pp. 714–722, 2019.

Sreerama K Murthy, Simon Kasif, and Steven Salzberg. A system for induction of oblique decision
  trees. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 2:1–32, 1994.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yoshihiro Nagano, Shoichiro Yamaguchi, Yasuhiro Fujita, and Masanori Koyama. A wrapped nor-
  mal distribution on hyperbolic space for gradient-based learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 4693–4702. PMLR, 2019.
Matthew J Penn, Neil Scheidwasser, Joseph Penn, Christl A Donnelly, David A Duchêne, and Samir
 Bhatt. Leaping through tree space: continuous phylogenetic inference for rooted and unrooted
 trees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05739, 2023.
Geoff Pleiss, Manish Raghavan, Felix Wu, Jon Kleinberg, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On fairness
  and calibration. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Flavien Prost, Hai Qian, Ed H. Chi, Jilin Chen, and Alex Beutel. Toward a better trade-off be-
  tween performance and fairness with kernel-based distribution matching. 2019. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/pdf/1910.11779.pdf.
Fengchun Qiao and Xi Peng. Graph-relational distributionally robust optimization. In NeurIPS 2022
  Workshop on Distribution Shifts: Connecting Methods and Applications, 2022.
Novi Quadrianto and Viktoriia Sharmanska. Recycling privileged learning and distribution matching
  for fairness. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Edward Raff, Jared Sylvester, and Steven Mills. Fair forests: Regularized tree induction to minimize
  model bias. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp.
  243–250, 2018.
Inioluwa Deborah Raji and Joy Buolamwini. Actionable auditing: Investigating the impact of pub-
   licly naming biased performance results of commercial ai products. In Proceedings of the 2019
   AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 429–435, 2019.
Ashkan Rezaei, Anqi Liu, Omid Memarrast, and Brian D Ziebart. Robust fairness under covariate
  shift. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 9419–
  9427, 2021.
Andrei A Rusu, Neil C Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. 2016.
Richard Shin, Alexander A Alemi, Geoffrey Irving, and Oriol Vinyals. Tree-structured variational
  autoencoder. 2016.
Hongjin Su, Weijia Shi, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Yushi Hu, Mari Ostendorf, Wen-tau Yih,
  Noah A. Smith, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Tao Yu. One embedder, any task: Instruction-finetuned
  text embeddings. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 1102–1121, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.71. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.71.
Wen Sun, Alina Beygelzimer, Hal Daumé Iii, John Langford, and Paul Mineiro. Contextual memory
 trees. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6026–6035. PMLR, 2019.
Thanh-Dat Truong, Hoang-Quan Nguyen, Bhiksha Raj, and Khoa Luu. Fairness continual learn-
  ing approach to semantic scene understanding in open-world environments. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Paul Voigt and Axel Von dem Bussche. The eu general data protection regulation (gdpr). A Practical
  Guide, 1st Ed., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 10(3152676):10–5555, 2017.
Haotao Wang, Junyuan Hong, Jiayu Zhou, and Zhangyang Wang. How robust is your fairness?
  evaluating and sustaining fairness under unseen distribution shifts. Transactions on machine
  learning research, 2023, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In Qun Liu and David Schlangen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-
  ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–
  45, Online, October 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
  emnlp-demos.6. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Zhilin Yang, Thang Luong, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le. Mixtape: Breaking the softmax
  bottleneck efficiently. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Pengcheng Yin, Chunting Zhou, Junxian He, and Graham Neubig. StructVAE: Tree-structured
  latent variable models for semi-supervised semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 754–765,
  Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  P18-1070. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1070.
Tongxin Yin, Reilly Raab, Mingyan Liu, and Yang Liu. Long-term fairness with unknown dynamics.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Hsiang-Fu Yu, Kai Zhong, Jiong Zhang, Wei-Cheng Chang, and Inderjit S Dhillon. PECOS: Pre-
  diction for enormous and correlated output spaces. the Journal of machine Learning research, 23
  (1):4233–4264, 2022.
Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair representations.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 325–333. PMLR, 2013.
Wenbin Zhang and Eirini Ntoutsi. FAHT: An adaptive fairness-aware decision tree classifier. 2019.
Chen Zhao, Feng Mi, Xintao Wu, Kai Jiang, Latifur Khan, Christan Grant, and Feng Chen. Towards
  fair disentangled online learning for changing environments. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM
  SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 3480–3491, 2023.
Jinyu Zhao, Yi Hao, and Cyrus Rashtchian. Unsupervised embedding of hierarchical structure in
   euclidean space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.16055, 2020.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     T HEORETICAL P ROOFS

C ONTENTS

    A.1 Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         16
    A.2 Proof of Lemma 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        16
    A.3 Proof of Lemma 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
    A.4 Proof of Lemma 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18
    A.5 Proof of Theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
    A.6 Additional Theoretical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         20

A.1    A SSUMPTIONS

In this section, we will present standard regularity assumptions utilized in deriving the theoretical
results. We derive the results for a soft-routed oblique decision forest, f (x), with a single tree,
|T | = 1. However, these can be easily extended to a setup with multiple trees. Specifically, we
derive the estimation errors in gradients leveraging the framework of Ajalloeian & Stich (2020), i.e.,
we assume our stochastic gradient estimation for the objective has the following form: G(Θ,
                                                                                          b    ξ) =
G(Θ) + b(Θ) + n(ξ), where b(Θ) and n(ξ) denotes the bias and noise involved in the estimation.
We present an exact description of all the assumptions used in our setup and optimization process:
    (A1) The input instances xt arrive in an i.i.d. fashion and are bounded: ∥xt ∥ < B.
    (A2) The parameter set is compact and lies within a Frobenius ball Θ ∈ BF (0, R) of radius R.
    (A3) f (x) denotes a soft-routed binary oblique forest with a single tree (|T | = 1), activation
         function, g(·), and leaf parameters ∥θl ∥ = 1.
    (A4) The activation function g(·) used in oblique trees is Lg smooth.
    (A5) The noise in gradient estimation n(ξ) has zero mean Eξ [n(ξ)] = 0 and is (M, σ 2 ) bounded:

                               Eξ [∥n(ξ)∥2 ] ≤ M ∥G(Θ) + b(Θ)∥2 + σ 2 , ∀Θ.                           (8)
    (A6) The task loss function L(·, ·) is Kt -Lipschitz.

A.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

First, we present a proposition that would be helpful in proving Lemma 1.
Proposition 1. Let pi and qi be samples from a random variable P that is bounded between [0, 1].
Then, the following inequality holds:
                                    Y              Y              X
                                            pi −           qi ≤           |qi − pi |.                 (9)
                                        i              i            i



Proof. The proof is presented below:
                        Y           Y            Y                               Y
                             pi −       qi ≤               max{pi , qi } −            min{pi , qi }
                         i          i              i                              i
                                                 X                      Y
                                             ≤             |qi − pi |          max{pj , qj }
                                                   i                    j̸=i
                                                 X
                                             ≤             |qi − pi |.
                                                   i


Next, we proceed to the main proof of Lemma 1.


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma 1. The proof is completed using the following steps:

       DP = |E[f (x|a = 0)] − E[f (x|a = 1)]|
               "                   #    "                    #
                 X                        X
          = E        pl (x|a = 0)θl − E       pl (x|a = 1)θl
                          l                                l
                X
            =           (E [pl (x|a = 0)] − E [pl (x|a = 1)]) θl
                    l
                X
            ≤           |E [pl (x|a = 0)] − E [pl (x|a = 1)]| |θl |
                l
                              "                        #            "                            #
                X                 Y                                  Y
            =           E             ni,A(i,l) (x|a = 0) − E               ni,A(i,l) (x|a = 1)
                l                 i                                     i
                                             "                      #                          "                     #
              X 1                     X          Y                   1              X           Y
            =                                      ni,A(i,l) (x0 ) −                                  ni,A(i,l) (x1 )
                m                                i
                                                                     m                            i
                l             x0 ∼p(x|a=0)                                      x1 ∼p(x|a=1)
                                                                                                                 !
              X 1                          X                   Y                        Y
            =                                                       ni,A(i,l) (x0 ) −          ni,A(i,l) (x1 )
                m                                               i                         i
                l             x0 ∼p(x|a=0),x1 ∼p(x|a=1)
                X 1 X X
            ≤            ni,A(i,l) (x0 ) − ni,A(i,l) (x1 )                                                               (10)
               m x ,x i
                l 0  1
              XX
            =     E ni,A(i,l) (x0 ) − ni,A(i,l) (x1 )                                                                    (11)
                l        i
                XX
            ≤                 ϵ
                l        i

            = h2h ϵ.


In the above proof, the first few steps use the linearity of expectation. We derive Equation 10 by
using the result in Proposition 1. Finally, plugging the bound from Equation 6 in Equation 11 we
obtain the final result.


A.3   P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

First, we present the definition of empirical Rademacher complexity, R̂n (H), for function class, H.

                                                       "     n
                                                                          #
                                                    1       X
                                          R̂n (H) := Eϵ sup     ϵt f (xt ) .                                             (12)
                                                    n   h∈H t=1



Intuitively, the above definition measures the expressivity of a function class H by measuring the
ability to fit random noise. In the above equation, for a given set S = {x1 , . . . , xn } and Rademacher
vector ϵ, the supremum quantifies the maximum correlation between f (xt ) and randomly generated
samples ϵt ∈ {−1, 1} ∀f ∈ H.


Proof. In Equation 12, we plug in the soft-routed binary oblique decision tree formulation, f (x) =
P2h Qh          T
  l=1   i=1 g(wi,A(i,l) x + bi,A(i,l) )θl , in the above equation to obtain:


                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               h
                                                                                    
                                        n     2 Y
                                                h
                           1           X     X
                                                          T
                 R̂n (H) =   Eϵ sup      ϵt           g(wi,A(i,l) xt + bi,A(i,l) )θl 
                           n     h∈H t=1
                                            l=1 i=1
                                "            n       h
                                                                                       #
                           2h               X       Y
                                                            T
                         ≤    Eϵ sup max         ϵt     g(wi,A(i,l) xt + bi,A(i,l) )θl
                           n      h∈H l t=1         i=1
                                "      n             h
                                                                                       #
                           2h         X             Y
                                                            T
                         ≤    Eϵ sup      ϵt max        g(wi,A(i,l) xt + bi,A(i,l) )θl .
                           n      h∈H t=1      l
                                                    i=1
                                                         Qh      T
Next, we continue the proof by using F (xt ) = maxl       i=1 g(wi,A(i,l) xt +bi,A(i,l) )θl and ∥θl ∥ = 1.

                               "     n
                                                    #
                          2h        X
                R̂n (H) ≤    Eϵ sup     ϵt F (xt ))
                          n     h∈H t=1
                             v                           
                             u
                                          n             2
                           hu
                          2 u           X
                        ≤    tsup Eϵ        ϵt F (xt ) 
                          n h∈H         t=1
                             v                                                        
                             u       " n              #
                          2h u
                             u        X                       X
                        =    tsup Eϵ      ϵ2t F (xt )2 + Eϵ     ϵ′t ϵt F (xt )F (x′t )
                          n h∈H       t=1                      ′  t̸=t
                             v "         #
                             u     n
                          2h u    X
                                       2
                        =    t Eϵ     ϵt
                           n      t=1
                              √
                        ≤ 2h / n.


A.4     P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

The proof of Lemma 3 builds on the intermediate results that we present in the sequel. First, we
derive the bound on the estimation error in ∇Fbij . Using this result, we can bound the estimation in
the fairness gradients derived in Equation 5.
For simplicity of notation, in the subsequent proof, we denote input instances from different demo-
graphic groups as xi ∼ p(x|a = 0) and xj ∼ p(x|a = 1). With a slight abuse of notation, we also
use the indices i, j to indicate the time step at which the instance xi arrives.
Lemma 4 (Estimation error in ∇Fij ). Under assumptions (A1), (A2), (A3), (A4), the estimation
error of ∇Fij is bounded as: |∇Fij − ∇Fbij | ≤ min {B/4, 2Lg R}.

Proof. Next, we focus on approximating the estimation error in ∇Fbij .


      ∇Fij = Ei [∇n(Θt , xi )] − Ej [∇n(Θt , xj )], ∇Fbij = Ei [∇n(Θi , xi )] − Ej [∇n(Θj , xj )].
Similarly, we can estimate the approximation error as:
  |∇Fij − ∇Fbij | = |Ei [∇n(Θt , xi )] − Ei [∇n(Θi , xi )] − Ej [∇n(Θt , xj )] + Ej [∇n(Θj , xj )]|
                     = |Ei [∇n(Θt , xi ) − ∇n(Θi , xi )] − Ej [∇n(Θt , xj ) − ∇n(Θj , xj )]|
                     ≤ |Ei [∇n(Θt , xi ) − ∇n(Θi , xi )]| + |Ej [∇n(Θt , xj ) − ∇n(Θj , xj )]|
                     = Lg Ei [∥Θt − Θi ∥] + Lg Ej [∥Θt − Θj ∥]
                     = Lg Ei [∥Θt − Θi ∥]
                     ≤ 2Lg R,


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Lg is the smoothness constant of the activation function. Note that this error bound doesn’t
increase in an unrestricted manner as the node gradients are bounded as:
                                  |∇n(Θt , x)| ≤ ∥x∥/4 ≤ B/4.
Therefore, we can derive a tighter bound as:

                                                            B
                               |∇Fij − ∇Fbij | ≤ min          , 2Lg R .
                                                            4
                                               √
                                               3−3
For sigmoid activation, we can plug in Lg = 2 18   in the above equation to get the exact bound.

Using the bounds derived in the above lemmas, we proceed towards the proof of Lemma 3.

Proof of Lemma 3. We begin by noting that the task loss gradients are unbiased as the input instance
xt is sampled in an i.i.d. fashion making the gradient estimate unbiased on expectation.


      ∥∇Θ Hδ (Fij ) − ∇Θ Hδ (Fbij )∥ =
                    (
                     ∥Fij .∇Θ Fij − Fbij ∇Θ Fbij ∥,                        if |Fbij | < δ
                                                                                          .
                      δ∥sgn (Fij − δ/2) ∇Θ Fij − sgn Fbij − δ/2 ∇Θ Fbij ∥, otherwise

Therefore, the approximation error arises from the fairness gradient terms. First, we consider the
approximation error in the gradients when |Fbij | ≤ δ. It can be written as:


                       |Fij ∇Fij − Fbij ∇Fbij | ≤ δ|∇Fij − ∇Fbij | ≤ δB/4.

Note that in the above equation, we consider the weaker upper bound for the estimation error of
∇Fij of B/4. As the bound on the input ∥x∥ ≤ B is easier to work with. Next, we consider the
case where |Fij | > δ:


              δ|sgn(Fij − δ/2)∇Fij − sgn(Fbij − δ/2)∇Fbij | ≤ δ|2∇Fij | ≤ δB/2.

Therefore, we observe that the overall error can be bounded as:

                              ∥∇Θ Hδ (Fij ) − ∇Θ Hδ (Fbij )∥ ≤ δB/2.                               (13)


A.5    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Theorem 2 (Precise Statement of Theorem 1). Using the assumptions (A1), (A2), (A3), (A4), (A5),
                                               PT −1      b t )∥2 ] can be bounded as ΨT ≤
for ϵ > 0 the expected
                       gradient norm ΨT = 1/T t=0 E[∥G(Θ
      2h−2 2 2 2
 ϵ+2       λ δ B for

                       4F L(M + 1) 4F Lσ 2

                                                                 1         ϵ
           T ≥ max                  ,         and γ ≤  min              ,         .        (14)
                             ϵ         ϵ2                    (M + 1)L 2Lσ 2
where F = E[Lo (θt )] − L∗o with Lo denoting the overall loss function (Equation 4).

Proof. Due to estimation errors in the online setting, the gradients we use are biased and can be
written as:
                                G(Θ,
                                 b    ξ) = G(Θ) + b(Θ) + n(ξ)                                (15)


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where G(Θ) is the exact gradient (computed using all the input instances seen so far), b(Θ) is the
bias or estimation error, and n(ξ) is the noise coming from the i.i.d. estimate of the loss function.
From Lemma 3, we can bound the overall estimation bias as:
                                X
                   ∥b(Θ)∥ ≤ λ          ∥∇Θ Hδ (Fij ) − ∇Θ Hδ (Fbij )∥ ≤ 2h−1 λδB.                (16)
                                ∀i,j


and n(ξ) has zero mean. We assume that the noise n(ξ) is (M, σ 2 ) bounded as defined by Ajalloeian
& Stich (2020). Note that M depends on the task loss function L(·, ·) and is not a function of t. We
use the result from Lemma 2 in (Ajalloeian & Stich, 2020) to obtain:


                                         2F
                                ΨT ≤        + 22h−2 λ2 δ 2 B 2 + γLσ 2                           (17)
                                         Tγ

                                                        PT −1
where we denote the average gradient norm as: ΨT = T1 t=0 E[∥G(Θ    b t )∥2 ], F = E[Lo (Θ0 )] −
 ∗
Lo with Lo denoting the overall loss function, and γ is the step size. We assume that Lo has a
smoothness constant of L.
Then, for ϵ > 0 we can show that the expected gradient norm converges as follows:
                               ϵ  ϵ
                       ΨT ≤      + + 22h−2 λ2 δ 2 B 2 = ϵ + 22h−2 λ2 δ 2 B 2 .                   (18)
                               2 2
for large enough time step (or input samples) and small enough step size:

                          4F L(M + 1) 4F Lσ 2

                                                                           1       ϵ
            T ≥ max                  ,                and γ ≤ min               ,            ,   (19)
                               ϵ        ϵ2                              (M + 1)L 2Lσ 2

which completes the proof.



Discussion. Theorem 2 shows that the convergence of the gradient norms depends exponentially on
the tree depth, O(22h ). However, we used shallow trees (h ≤ 10) and observed that shallow trees
can provide a good accuracy-fairness tradeoff. In Appendix E, we empirically study the gradient
norm at the end of online training and how it varies with the tree height. Surprisingly, we observe a
linear correlation between the gradient norm and the tree height for small h ≤ 10. The experiment
yielded consistently small gradient norms that had no discernible impact on the final accuracy or DP
results, which shows that the gradient estimation process works in practice. Theoretically explaining
this phenomenon for small h is non-trivial and we leave it for future works to explore this result.


A.6   A DDITIONAL T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS

In this section, we provide additional theoretical results analyzing the properties of Aranyani.
Specifically, we derive the gradient bound for G(Θ) (Equation 5) and show the oblique decision
trees are Kf -Lipschitz continuous and Lf -smooth.
Lemma 5 (Bounded gradients). Under assumptions (A1), (A3), (A6), and activation function g(·)
is a sigmoid function the gradients are bounded as:

                                       ∥G(Θ)∥ ≤ Kt + 2h−2 λδB,                                   (20)

where δ is the Huber parameter and λ is a hyperparameter (Equation 5).



Proof. Using Equation 5, the gradient bound can be written as:


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                
                                                          X
              ∥G(Θ)∥ ≤ max ∥∇L(f (x), y)∥ + λ                   ∥∇Hδ (Fij )∥, 
                                                          ∀i,j
                                   X
                       ≤ Kt + λ           max(∥Fij ∥∥∇Fij ∥, δ∥∇Fij ∥)                        (21)
                                   ∀i,j
                                    X
                       ≤ Kt + λδ           max ∥∇Fij ∥
                                    ∀i,j

                       ≤ Kt + λδ2h max ∥E[∇nij (x|a = 0)] − E[∇nij (x|a = 1)]∥
                       ≤ Kt + λδ2h max ∥E[∇nij (x|a = 0)]∥
                       = Kt + λδ2h max ∥E[nij (x|a = 0)(1 − nij (x|a = 0))x]∥                 (22)
                                     h
                       ≤ Kt + λδ2 max ∥nij (x|a = 0)(1 − nij (x|a = 0))∥∥x∥
                       = Kt + 2h−2 λδB.

In Equation 21, the first term is upper bounded by δ∥∇Fij ∥ because the gradient is selected only
when |Fij | ≤ δ. The maxima in Equation 22 is achieved when nij (x)
                                                                  √ = 0.5. For cross-entropy loss
with softmax, the upper bound can be derived by plugging in Kt = 2:
                                              √
                                    ∥G(Θ)∥ ≤ 2 + 2h−2 λδB.                                   (23)
Note that even though the gradient bound has an exponential term (2h−2 ), in practice due to param-
eter isolation the gradients for individual node parameters have a much lower bound as each tree
node is only associated with a single Fij constraint.
Lemma 6 (Lipschitz Continuity & Smoothness). Under assumptions (A1), (A3), f (x) is Kf -
Lipschitz and Lf -smooth, where Kf = 2h−2 hB and Lf = 2h−4 h(h + 1)B 2 .

Proof. Using the mean value theorem, the Lipschitz constant of a function f (x) is bounded by
max ∥∇f (x)∥. Therefore, finding the upper bound on the derivative is sufficient.

                                    h
                                   2 Y
                                   X h
                      f (x, Θ) =             nij (x)θi
                                   i=1 j=1
                                    h
                                   2 X
                                   X h                                 h
                                                                       Y
                  ∇Θ f (x, Θ) =              nik (x)(1 − nik (x))               nij (x)θi x
                                   i=1 k=1                           j=1,j̸=k
                                    h
                                     h
                                   2 X
                                   X   θi x
                               ≤
                                   i=1 k=1
                                              4
                                    h
                                   2 X
                                   X h
                               ≤             ∥θ∥∥x∥/4
                                   i=1 k=1
                                    h−2
                               =2          h∥θ∥∥x∥

where ∥θ∥ and ∥x∥ denote the maximum norm of parameters θi and input x respectively. Next,
plugging in the assumptions about the norm we get the following:

                                   ∇Θ f (x, Θ) ≤ 2h−2 Bh = Kf .

Similarly, we can derive the expression for the smoothness constant Lf . Using the mean value
theorem, we know that ∥∇2Θ f (x, Θ)∥ ≤ Lf . Therefore, we derive an upper bound for the former:


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  h
                 2 X
                 X h                                               h
                                                                   Y
∇2Θ f (x, Θ) =             nik (x)(1 − nik (x))(1 − 2nik (x))               nij (x)θi x2
                 i=1 k=1                                         j=1,j̸=k
                  h
                 2 X
                 X h                                h
                                                    X                                      h
                                                                                           Y
            +              nik (x)(1 − nik (x))              nim (x)(1 − nim (x))                   nij (x)θi x2
                 i=1 k=1                          m=1,m̸=k                           j=1,j̸={k,m}
                  h
              2 h
            ≤ √ ∥θ∥∥x∥2 + h(h − 1)2h−4 ∥θ∥∥x∥2
              6 3
            ≤ 2h−4 h(h + 1)∥θ∥∥x∥2
            = 2h−4 h(h + 1)B 2 = Lf .
This completes the proof.


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK

Aranyani2 uses a gradient-based approach to learn the parameters of an oblique decision tree. In this
section, we discuss prior works that utilized decision trees in the online learning setting.
Decision Trees. Decision trees have been studied for the online setting where data arrives in a
stream over time, particularly to mitigate catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Initial
works (Kamiran et al., 2010; Raff et al., 2018; Aghaei et al., 2019) explored various formulations
of the splitting criterion to improve fairness in decision trees within the offline setting. More recent
work (Zhang & Ntoutsi, 2019) in fair online learning leveraged Hoeffding trees (Domingos & Hul-
ten, 2000) to process online data streams, and introduced group fairness constraints in its splitting
criteria. However, this approach has several drawbacks: (a) conventional decision trees can only
function with axis-aligned data making it unsuitable for more complex data domains like text or im-
ages, (b) it cannot be trained using gradient descent making it difficult to plug in additional modules
like a text or image encoder. In contrast to these approaches, Aranyani leverages oblique decision
trees parameterized by neural networks improving its expressiveness while making it amenable to
gradient-based updates using modern accelerators. Aranyani exploits its tree structure to store ag-
gregate statistics of the local node outputs to compute the fairness gradients without requiring it to
store additional samples.


    2
      The name of our approach was inspired by the Hindu goddess of forests and wild animals, Aranyani. She
fearlessly navigated the wilderness, treating humans and animals equally. These characteristics bear resem-
blance to the desired traits of our system, which must be fair and functional in the wild (online settings).


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     E XTENSIONS OF Aranyani

In this section, we discuss several ways to extend Aranyani to handle non-binary protected attribute
labels or different notions of group fairness objectives.

C.1   H ANDLING D IFFERENT N OTIONS OF G ROUP FAIRNESS

In this section, we show that Aranyani can be used to impose different notions of group fairness.
Specifically, we derive the fairness constraints in Aranyani for the group fairness notion of equalized
odds (Hardt et al., 2016). However, note that Aranyani can be extended to handle any conditional
moment-based group fairness loss. For equalized odds, the node-level constraints can be shown as:

                       c
                      Fij = E[nij (x|y = c, a = 0)] − E[nij (x|y = c, a = 1)],

where c denotes different task labels. The objective in the offline setup is formulated as:
                                                        XX
                                                                       c
                                min L(f (x), y) + λ               Hδ (Fij ).
                                  f
                                                        i,j   c

The gradient estimation in the online setting requires the storage of the following aggregate esti-
mates: (a) E[nij (x|y = l, a = 0)], (b) E[∇Θ nij (x|y = c, a = 0)], (c) E[nij (x|y = c, a = 1)], and
(d) E[∇Θ nij (x|y = c, a = 1)], ∀l ∈ {0, . . . , C − 1}. This would result in an overall storage cost
of O(2h Cd), where d is the dimension of the input x and C is the number of task labels. Similarly,
Aranyani can be extended to handle other group fairness notions like equality of opportunity (Hardt
et al., 2016), and representation parity (Hashimoto et al., 2018) as well. We report initial results with
the equality of opportunity fairness notion in Appendix E.

C.2   H ANDLING N ON -B INARY P ROTECTED ATTRIBUTES

In this section, we show how Aranyani can be extended to process protected attributes with more
than two labels. Let us assume the protected label k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}. In this case, the fairness
loss is defined as the difference between the expected overall output and the expected output for a
specific protected group as shown below:

                                 k
                                Fij = E[nij (x)] − E[nij (x|a = k)].

The modified objective in the offline setup needs to consider the difference for every protected label
a = k. It is shown below:
                                                        XX
                                                                       k
                                min L(f (x), y) + λ               Hδ (Fij ).                        (24)
                                  f
                                                        i,j   k

To extend this to an online setting, where aggregate statistics are maintained, we need to main-
tain the following expectations: (a) E[nij (x)], (b) E[∇Θ nij (x)], (c) E[nij (x|a = k)], and (d)
E[∇Θ nij (x|a = k)], ∀k. This would result in an overall storage cost of O(2h Kd), where d is the
dimension of the input x and K is the number of protected classes.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section, we describe the implementation details of the experimental setup, baselines, and
training procedure.

                         Dataset              Size      Split (y)    Split (a)
                         Adult                32.5K     75.9/24.1    66.9/33.1
                         Census              199.5K      93.8/6.2    52.1/47.9
                         COMPAS                7.2K     52.0/48.0    66.0/34.0
                         CelebA              202.6K     85.2/14.8    58.3/41.7
                         CivilComments        33.9K      93.4/6.6    76.6/23.4

Table 1: Dataset Statistics. We report the number of samples (size) used during online training and
the percentage splits of the binary task (y) and protected attribute (a) respectively.



D.1   S ETUP

We perform our experiments using the TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2015) framework. We select the
hyperparameters of the different models by performing a grid search using Weights & Biases li-
brary (Biewald, 2020). To compute the accuracy-fairness tradeoff, we run Aranyani on a wide range
of λ’s and report the performance of all runs in the trade-off plots. We retrieve the text and image
representations from Instructor and CLIP models respectively using the HuggingFace library (Wolf
et al., 2020). All experiments involving Aranyani were optimized using an Adam (Kingma & Ba,
2015) optimizer with a learning rate of 2 × 10−3 and Huber parameter δ = 0.01. As the primary
task was classification in all datasets, we use cross-entropy loss as the task loss, L(·, ·). For on-
line learning, the model is evaluated with every incoming input instance. Therefore, we perform
our evaluation on the training set of each dataset, except for COMPAS and CelebA, where both the
training and test set were used for online learning. We report the dataset statistics in Table 1. We
report the percentage of the majority label versus the minority label (Split) in the table for all of our
datasets as they have a binary task and protected label.

D.2   BASELINES

We describe the details of the baseline approaches used in our experiments.
    Aranyani MLP. This is a variant of Aranyani, where the model f (x) is replaced by an MLP
network. We use a two-layer neural network with ReLU non-linearity to parameterize the MLP.
The parameters of the MLP are: W1 ∈ Rd×m , B1 ∈ Rm , W2 ∈ Rm×c , B2 ∈ Rc , where d is
the input dimension, m is the hidden dimension, and c is the number of output class labels (c = 1
for regression). To compute the gradient estimates in the online setting, the following aggregate
statistics are maintained: (a) E[∇W1 f (x|a = k)], (b) E[∇B1 f (x|a = k)], (c) E[∇W2 f (x|a = k)],
(d) E[∇B2 f (x|a = k)], and (e) E[f (x|a = k)] for all k ∈ {0, 1}. Note that the derivates are
computed w.r.t. the final decisions of the MLP network f (x), as there are no local decisions. These
aggregate statistics are used to compute the gradients of the form shown below:


      G(Θ) = ∇Θ L(f (x), y) + λ∇Θ Hδ (F), where F = E[f (x|a = 0)] − E[f (x|a = 1)].

In the above equation, we note that there is a single fairness term as the group fairness constraint
can only be defined on the final prediction, f (x).
   Aranyani Leaf. This is a similar variant of Aranyani as described above, where we use the pro-
posed oblique forests and apply fairness constraints to the final prediction. Therefore, the group
                                                                      Qh
fairness constraint can be applied at the leaf probabilities, pl (x) = i=1 ni,A(i,l) (x), as the predic-
tion takes the following form:


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           X
        |f (x|a = 0) − f (x|a = 1)| =              (pl (x|a = 0) − pl (x|a = 1))θl )
                                               l
                                             h
                                                                                                        !
                                           X Y
                                       =                   ni,A(i,l) (x|a = 0) − ni,A(i,l) (x|a = 1) θl
                                               l     i=1
                                             h
                                           X Y                                   h
                                                                                 Y
                                       ≤                 ni,A(i,l) (x|a = 0) −         ni,A(i,l) (x|a = 1) ∥θl ∥.
                                           l       i=1                           i=1


The above expression provides an upper bound that allows us to define leaf-level fairness constraints:
                                h
                                Y                                 h
                                                                  Y
                         Fl =         ni,A(i,l) (x|a = 0) −            ni,A(i,l) (x|a = 1) .
                                i=1                              i=1


This can be used to define the fairness gradient formulation in the online setting:
                                                        X
                          G(Θ) = ∇Θ L(f (x), y) + λ         ∇Θ Hδ (Fl )
                                                                     l

Similar to MLP gradients, the above gradients can be computed in the online setting by maintaining
aggregate statistics of derivates of parameters w.r.t. the leaf-level probabilities.
   Hoeffding Tree-based Methods. In general, simple HT or               AHT-based baselines do not
obtain good accuracy-fairness tradeoffs as they do not consider fairness at all. Note that we directly
report the FAHT results for Adult and Census presented in the original paper, as we could not run
the public implementation3 and replicate the results. Since the original paper reports results only on
tabular data, we could not report the results on CivilComments or CelebA. However, as HTs are not
able to fit the data properly (or all) on CivilComments or CelebA datasets, incorporating additional
fairness constraints would not have improved the results.

D.3      T RAINING P ROCEDURE

In this section, we provide more details about the training process presented in Section 3.4. First, we
discuss the formulation of the mask used to select the node probabilities for a leaf. We have access
                h
to N ∈ Rm×2 , which stores a copy of the node decisions (as a column) for each leaf. There are
2h leaves and m = 2h − 1 node decisions. Using the mask A, we wish to select the node decisions
needed to compute each leaf probability. For example, consider the mask for a tree with height 2,
which has 4 leaves (number of columns) and 3 internal nodes (number of rows):

                                              1             1 −1         −1
                                             "                              #
                                           A= 1            −1  0          0
                                              0             0  1         −1

Now let us consider the probability of reaching the second leaf of the tree involves node decisions
of the root (index 0) and leftmost node of the first level (index 1). The highlighted column in the
above equation selects the desired nodes. Note the mask entry takes the value 1 when the leaf can
be reached by choosing the left path from the node, −1 when the leaf is reachable from the right,
and 0 when the leaf is unreachable from the node. For trees with different height h, the entries of A
can be derived using the following general form:

                          (h−l)
                                (i + 1) ≤ 2h + j < 2(h−l) (i + 1) + 2(h−l−1)
                 
                  1, if 2
                          (h−l)
            Aij = −1, if 2      (i + 1) + 2(h−l−1) ≤ 2h + j < 2(h−l) (i + 1) + 2(h−l)
                 
                   0, otherwise.
   3
       https://github.com/vanbanTruong/FAHT/


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Aranyani Online Learning Algorithm
 1: Input: Oblique tree with parameters W, B, Θ.
 2: for a ∈ {0, 1} do
 3:     ca = 0 // set the sample count for label a
 4:     // aggregate node outputs and their gradients for label a
 5:     Na = 0m , ∇W Na = 0m×d , ∇B Na = 0m // where m = 2h−1
 6: end for
 7: // Begin online learning
 8: for xt ∈ X do
 9:     // Get the prediction as described in Section 3.4.
10:     N = g(WT xt + B)
11:     ŷ = exp (11×m log P)Θ
12:     Access true labels (y, a) after prediction
13:     ca = ca + 1 // Update the counts
14:     // Update the aggregate statistics
15:     Na = Na (1 − 1/ca ) + N/ca
16:     ∇W Na = ∇W Na (1 − 1/ca ) + ∇W N/ca
17:     ∇B Na = ∇B Na (1 − 1/ca ) + ∇B N/ca
18:     // Update the aggregate statistics
19:     F̂ = N0 − N1 ∈ Rm
20:     ∇W F̂W = ∇W N0 − ∇W N1 ∈ Rm×d
21:     ∇B F̂B = ∇B N0 − ∇B N1 ∈ Rm
22:     // Update the tree
                       h parameters using gradientsi from Equation 5
23:     W = W − η ∇W L(ŷ, y) + λ∇W Hδ (F̂)
                     h                            i
24:     B = B − η ∇B L(ŷ, y) + λ∇B Hδ (F̂)
25:    Θ = Θ − η∇Θ L(ŷ, y)
26: end for


where l = ⌊log2 (i + 1)⌋. Using the above mask A, we can compute f (x) efficiently and train it
using autograd libraries via backpropagation.
We also provide an outline of Aranyani’s online training algorithm in Algorithm 1. This algorithm
showcases how Aranyani can be trained efficiently. The fairness gradients for all nodes are computed
simultaneously using matrices of aggregate statistics (Na , ∇Na ). The task gradients ∇L(·, ·) are
efficiently using standard autograd libraries.


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we provide the details of additional experiments we perform to analyze the perfor-
mance of Aranyani.
Ablations with λ. In this experiment, we perform ablations by varying the λ parameter (Equation 5),
which allows us to control the accuracy-fairness trade-off. In Figure 5, we report the accuracy and
DP scores on the Adult dataset during online learning. We observe that increasing λ results in lower
accuracy and improved DP consistently throughout the training process. This shows that Aranyani
presents a general framework that allows the user to control accuracy-fairness trade-offs using λ.
                               0.90                                              0.5
                                                                                                                     = 0.0
                               0.85                                              0.4                                 = 0.5
                               0.80                                                                                  = 1.0
                                                                                                                     = 5.0
               Accuracy


                                                                                 0.3
                               0.75                                                                                  = 10.0


                                                                            DP
                                                                                 0.2
                               0.70
                               0.65                                              0.1

                               0.600   5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000        0.00    5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
                                                 Iterations                                         Iterations

Figure 5: Ablations with different λ. We observe that increasing λ results in lower accuracy and
improved DP scores consistently throughout the online learning process.

Tree Ablations. In this experiment, we perform ablation experiments to investigate the impact of
the number of trees in the oblique forest on the accuracy-fairness trade-off. In Figure 6, we report
the change in average accuracy and demographic parity achieved during the online learning process
in Adult dataset, when the number of trees in Aranyani is increased. In this experiment, we set the
hyperparameter λ = 0.1. We observe a gradual decrease in accuracy (Figure 6 (left)) when the
number of trees is increased, which can potentially result from overfitting. In a similar trend, we
observe an improvement in the demographic parity (Figure 6 (right)), which is caused by the drop
in accuracy due to overfitting. We report the results over 5 different runs for each setting. The error
bars in the plots illustrate the standard deviation within each of the settings. We observe that the
standard deviation (in Accuracy and DP) gradually decreases with an increased tree count.

                           83.2                                                  0.130
                           83.0                                                  0.125
                           82.8                                                  0.120
                Accuracy (%)


                           82.6                                                  0.115
                                                                            DP


                           82.4                                                  0.110
                           82.2                                                  0.105
                           82.0                                                  0.100
                           81.8                                                  0.095
                                       2   4     6   8    10 12 14                        2    4     6   8 10 12 14
                                               Number of Trees                                     Number of Trees

Figure 6: Ablation experiment with a varying number of trees, |T |, in the oblique forest of Aranyani.
We observe a slight drop in accuracy and a consistent drop in demographic parity when the number
of trees used in Aranyani is increased.

Gradient Convergence. In this experiment, we investigate the convergence of fairness gradients
(derived in Equation 5). We perform experiments on CivilComments dataset and report the gradient
norms for all node parameters (W, B) in Figure 7 (left & center). The y-axis in the figure is in log-
scale for better visibility. We observe that the fairness gradients for both parameters converge over
time and it is well correlated with the demographic parity of the decisions during online learning.
In Figure 7 (right), we study the gradient convergence bounds predicted by Theorem 2. Specifically,
we try to understand how the fairness gradient norm varies as a function of the tree height. We
observe a linear correlation between the magnitude of the fairness gradient norm and the height of
the tree. However, in general, for small tree heights (h ≤ 10), we observe that the gradient bound is
quite slow and doesn’t impact the final demographic parity scores (which lie between ∼ 0.05-0.07).


                                                                            28
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                        0.005
                  10 1                                                                                         10 1                                                                     0.004

      Gradient Norm


                                                                                                   Gradient Norm


                                                                                                                                                                            Gradient Norm
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.003
                  10 2                                                                                         10 2
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.002
                  10 3                                                                                         10 3
                                                   DP                                                                                    DP                                             0.001
                                                   Fairness Gradient (W)                                                                 Fairness Gradient (B)
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.000
                         0      5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000                                                    0    5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000                                   2   3     4     5   6   7   8   9 10
                                            Iterations                                                                                Iterations                                                              Tree Height

  Figure 7: Convergence of gradients on CivilComments dataset: (left & center) We show the evolu-
  tion of the gradient norms of the oblique tree parameters (W, B) and the demographic parity during
  the online training process. We observe that the fairness gradients converge along with demographic
  parity. (right) We report the norm of the fairness gradients (for W) at the end of online training with
  different tree heights. We observe that the gradient magnitude is very small and there appears to be
  a linear correlation with tree height.

                                                      80                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                           Accuracy (%)


                                                      60                                                                                  0.4
                                                      40
                                                                                                                                     DP
                                                                                                                                          0.3
                                                      20                                                                                  0.2
                                                          0                                                                               0.1
                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                          100          101           102                           103       104                   101      102                         103         104
                                                                                    Iterations                                                                   Iterations
  Figure 8: Variation in the Accuracy and DP scores during online learning using Aranyani on the
  Adult dataset. The x-axis is shown in log-scale. We observe that most of the variance is concentrated
  in the initial parts of the training process.


  Performance Variance. In this experiment, we investigate the variance in performance during the
  training process. We perform online learning using Aranyani on Adult dataset using 5 different
  seeds. In Figure 8, we report the average Accuracy and DP scores during online learning. The
  standard deviation for each metric is highlighted in light red. Note that the x-axis is shown in log
  scale to observe the variance in performance clearly. We observe that most of the variation in metric
  is concentrated in the initial parts of the training process. We observe a minimal variance in the
  scores after a small number of around 1000 iterations. This showcases the robustness of Aranyani
  during the online learning process.

            90                                                     Aranyani                    100                                                                          100
            88                                                     Majority                     95                                                                           95
                                                                                                90                                                                           90
                                                                                    Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                 Accuracy (%)


            86
Accuracy (%)


            84
                                                                                                85                                                                           85
                                                                                                80                           = 0.1                                           80                                   = 0.1
            82
                                                                                                75                           = 0.3                                           75                                   = 0.3
            80                                                                                                               = 0.5                                                                                = 0.5
                                                                                                70                           =1                                              70                                   =1
            78                                                                                  65                                                                           65
                                                                                                                             = 10                                                                                 = 10
            76                                                                                  60                        5K 10K 15K 20K 25K 30K                             60                 5K 10K 15K 20K 25K 30K
                         0.20       0.15          0.10          0.05         0.00
                                           DP                                                                                      Iterations                                                                 Iterations

  Figure 9: Performance of Aranyani with an adversarial stream of data on the Adult dataset. Left: We
  report the Accuracy vs. DP tradeoff for Adult dataset with an adversarial stream. Right: We report
  the accuracy of Aranyani during the online learning process for different λ. We observe a significant
  dip in accuracy when the minority class is introduced.

  Adversarial Stream. In this experiment, we investigate the robustness of Aranyani in the advent of
  an adversarial stream of samples. We experiment on the Adult dataset and construct an adversarial
  online stream in two different ways: (a) In the first stream, we present Aranyani with 90% of the
  majority class samples, followed by all samples of the minority class, and then the remaining 10%
  of the majority class samples. In Figure 9 (left), we report accuracy vs DP tradeoff and observe that


                                                                                                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             64
                                                                       83
                                                                                                                            82
             62
                                                                       82                                                   81
             60

  Accuracy (%)


                                                            Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                 Accuracy (%)
             58                                                                                                             80
                                                                       81                                                               Majority
             56                                                                                                             79
                                                                                                                                        Aranyani
             54                                                        80                                                   78          Leaf
                                                                                                                                        MLP
             52       Aranyani                                                    Aranyani                                  77          HT
                      Aranyani (Update at y=1)                         79         Majority                                              AHT
                                                                                                                            76
                  0.18 0.15 0.13 0.10 0.08 0.05 0.03 0.00                   0.40 0.35 0.30 0.25 0.20 0.15 0.10                   0.20     0.15      0.10   0.05   0.00
                                DP                                                           EO                                                    DP

Figure 10: (Left) Performance of Aranyani under limited feedback where the model is updated only
when the prediction ŷ = 1. (Center) Performance of Aranyani under the equality of opportunity
fairness constraint. (Right) Performance of Aranyani in the batch setting where 10 instances are
encountered at each time step.


Aranyani performs significantly better than the strong majority baseline. In Figure 9 (Center), we
report the accuracy achieved by Aranyani during the online learning process. We observe a sharp
dip in accuracy when the minority class is introduced, which is expected. The accuracy improves
towards the end and results using different λ values show that the accuracy can be controlled using
it. (b) In the second stream, we follow the same procedure as in the first one but replace the majority
class samples with the minority ones. In Figure 9 (Right), we observe a similar dip in accuracy when
the majority class is introduced but the performance gradually improves over time.
Overall, this experiment shows that Aranyani is susceptible to adversarial data streams like any other
ML system. However, our results show that even in such cases the user can control the fairness-
accuracy tradeoff.
Limited Feedback. In this experiment, we explore scenarios where Aranyani conditionally receives
feedback. Specifically, during online training Aranyani receives feedback from the environment
only when its prediction, ŷ = 1. In Figure 10 (left), we report the performance of Aranyani on
the COMPAS dataset. We observe that Aranyani achieves similar tradeoff curves but it is unable to
achieve high accuracies for a similar set of λ’s compared to when full feedback is provided. This is
expected as the system is unable to get feedback for many of the input samples.
Equality of Opportunity. In this experiment, we evaluate the efficacy of Aranyani for the fairness
notion of equality of opportunity (EO). For equality of opportunity, the node-level constraint is:
                                      c
                                     Fij = E[nij (x|y = 1, a = 0)] − E[nij (x|y = 1, a = 1)].
We report the accuracy vs EO results in Figure 10 (center). We observe that Aranyani achieves a
much better trade-off than the strong majority baseline. This showcases the efficacy of Aranyani
while using different fairness measures.
Batch Learning. In this experiment, we analyze the performance of Aranyani in the batch setting
where we present the system with 10 input instances at each time step. We report the results in
Figure 10 (right). We observe trends similar to the online learning setting with Aranyani achieving
the best fairness-utility tradeoffs. This shows the efficacy of Aranyani even when input instances are
introduced in a batch-wise manner.
Runtime Analysis. We empirically analyze the runtime              Method           Runtime (min)
of Aranyani and other baseline approaches on the Adult            HT                    5.07
dataset. We report the total time to process an input             AHT                   5.67
stream of 32K samples in Table 2. We observe that Ho-             Aranyani             32.97
effding tree-based approaches are the fastest as they do          Aranyani (MLP)       14.65
not require any gradient propagation. Among the variants          Aranyani (Leaf)      37.12
of Aranyani, Aranyani (MLP) achieves the fastest runtime
as it requires fairness gradient computation only w.r.t. the Table 2: Runtime of different online
final network output.                                        fairness mitigation approaches.
Regularizer Ablation. We investigate the performance of Aranyani with regularizers different from
the Huber function. Specifically, we focus on the L2 norm as a regularizer. For using L2-norm in


                                                                                             30
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                Majority                64
                                                                                                                                                  82.5
                          83                                    Aranyani                62
                                                                L2 Loss                                                                           80.0
                                                                                        60
                          82                                                                                                                      77.5
               Accuracy (%)


                                                                             Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                       Accuracy (%)
                                                                                        58
                                                                                                                                                  75.0
                          81                                                            56
                                                                                                                                                  72.5
                                                                                        54       100% Data
                          80                                                                     80% Data                                         70.0
                                                                                        52       60% Data                                         67.5
                          79                                                            50       40% Data                                                             FERMI
                                                                                                 20% Data                                         65.0                Aranyani
                                                                                        48
                              0.20 0.18 0.16 0.14 0.12 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.04                   0.18 0.15 0.13 0.10 0.08 0.05 0.03 0.00                             0.20 0.18 0.15 0.12 0.10 0.08 0.05 0.03
                                                 DP                                                         DP                                                                   DP

 Figure 11: (Left) Performance of Aranyani using a L2 regularization for the node constraints Fij
 in Adult. (Center) Ablation experiment to investigate the performance of Aranyani under a limited
 data regime on the COMPAS dataset. (Right) Comparison of Aranyani with stochastic batch fair
 learning technique, FERMI.


           100                       = 0.1          =1            = 10                              = 0.1          =1           = 10                         85
                                                                                       0.4                                                                   80                                            25K
                90                                                                                                                                           75
Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                           20K
                                                                                       0.3


                                                                                                                                                  Accuracy (%)
                80                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                             DP


                                                                                                                                                             65                                            15K
                70                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                             60                                            10K
                60                                                                     0.1                                                                   55
                                                                                                                                                                      Aranyani                             5K
                                                                                                                                                             50
                50                                                                     0.0                                                                            Majority
                                 5K 10K 15K 20K 25K 30K                                          5K 10K 15K 20K 25K 30K                                      45
                                                                                                                                                              0.30 0.25 0.20 0.15 0.10 0.05 0.00
                                             Iterations                                                     Iterations                                                           DP


 Figure 12: (Left & Center) Evaluation of Aranyani on an unseen held-out validation set during
 online learning. We observe that the accuracy score improves consistently while there is variance in
 the DP scores. (Right) Convergence of the tradeoff curve over training iterations (shown in colors)
 during online learning.


 the online setup, the fairness gradient can be written as ∇Θ L2 (Fij ) = Fij ∇Θ Fij . In Figure 11
 (left), we report the results of this setup on the Adult dataset. We observe that Aranyani using L2
 regularization achieves similar fairness-accuracy tradeoffs. However, it is unable to reduce the DP
 scores beyond a certain extent. We hypothesize that this phenomenon happens as the approximation
 error for L2 gradients is large, which eventually hinders the convergence of fairness gradients.
 Dataset Size Ablation. In this experiment, we aim to investigate the impact on the performance of
 Aranyani when exposed to varying fractions of data during online learning. In Figure 11 (center), we
 report the results of this experiment on the COMPAS dataset. We observe that the fairness-accuracy
 tradeoff gradually deteriorates with a decreasing amount of data. In particular, we note that Aranyani
 fails to attain higher accuracies, as anticipated due to the reduced size of the training data.
 Comparison with Batch Techniques. In this experiment, we compare Aranyani’s performance
 with the stochastic batch-based fair learning method, FERMI (Lowy et al., 2022), which is the only
 fairness algorithm we are aware of that can be applied with a batch size of 1. In Figure 11, we report
 the fairness-accuracy tradeoff for Aranyani and FERMI. We observe that Aranyani achieves a much
 better fairness-accuracy tradeoff than FERMI in the online setting with a batch size of 1. Aranyani
 can consistently beat FERMI across different values of λ. Contemporary work (Baharlouei et al.,
 2024) proposed algorithms to make stochastic versions of offline algorithms amenable to small batch
 sizes. Future works can investigate the performance of such algorithms in online settings.
 Temporal Analysis. Inspired by the notion of fairness in hindsight (Gupta & Kamble, 2021), we
 try to evaluate how the fairness of Aranyani varies over time. In the online setting (described in
 Section 3.1), the system is evaluated on each incoming new sample. To evaluate the fairness of
 Aranyani in a more absolute setting, we select 10% of Adult’s data as a held-out validation set. We
 measure the fairness (DP) and utility (Accuracy) over time. In Figure 12 (left & center), we observe
 a gradual improvement in accuracy scores over time and there is a slightly higher variance in the DP
 scores. However, we find that there it is still possible to control the fairness-utility tradeoff using λ.


                                                                                                            31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tradeoff Convergence. In this experiment, we investigate the convergence of the fairness-utility
tradeoff achieved by Aranyani during the online learning process. Specifically, we plot the DP and
accuracy scores on a held-out validation set attained by Aranyani at each iteration. In Figure 12
(right) we observe that gradually improves over time and the performance leans slightly more to-
wards the accuracy at the end. The color of each point indicates the iteration when that tradeoff was
achieved. We also plot the convergence curve for the Majority baseline and observe that Aranyani
consistently outperforms it during the training process.


                                                 32
