Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C AUSAL R EPRESENTATION L EARNING IN T EMPORAL
DATA VIA S INGLE -PARENT D ECODING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT

         Scientific research often seeks to understand the causal structure underlying high-
         level variables in a system. For example, climate scientists study how phenomena,
         such as El Niño, affect other climate processes at remote locations across the
         globe. However, scientists typically collect low-level measurements, such as
         geographically distributed temperature readings. From these, one needs to learn both
         a mapping to causally-relevant latent variables, such as a high-level representation
         of the El Niño phenomenon and other processes, as well as the causal model over
         them. The challenge is that this task, called causal representation learning, is highly
         underdetermined from observational data alone, requiring other constraints during
         learning to resolve the indeterminacies. In this work, we consider a temporal model
         with a sparsity assumption, namely single-parent decoding: each observed low-level
         variable is only affected by a single latent variable. Such an assumption is reasonable
         in many scientific applications that require finding groups of low-level variables,
         such as extracting regions from geographically gridded measurement data in climate
         research or capturing brain regions from neural activity data. We demonstrate the
         identifiability of the resulting model and propose a differentiable method, Causal
         Discovery with Single-parent Decoding (CDSD), that simultaneously learns the
         underlying latents and a causal graph over them. We assess the validity of our
         theoretical results using simulated data and showcase the practical validity of our
         method in an application to real-world data from the climate science field.


1    I NTRODUCTION

In scientific domains, we often seek to learn causal relationships between high-level variables. For ex-
ample, climate scientists want to understand how major modes of climate variability, such as the El Niño
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) affect weather patterns worldwide (76; 77; 62). Neuroscientists want
to uncover how different brain regions may be defined and influence one another (69). Identifying true
causal links in a network of correlations is challenging in itself, but to compound the difficulty, scientists
typically collect low-level and noisy measurements in place of causally relevant high-level variables.
For example, instead of recording the presence or absence of ENSO and its global impact, climate
scientists measure sea-surface temperatures at many locations. Instead of measuring overall communi-
cation between brain regions, neuroscientists must work with proxy information such as blood flow or
electrical activity in specific locations. Thus, scientific discovery requires causal representation learn-
ing: the coupled tasks of learning latent variables that represent semantically meaningful abstractions
of the observed measurements and the quantification of causal relationships among these latents (81).
What makes causal representation learning particularly challenging from a theoretical perspective is
the non-identifiability of the models: there are typically many solutions – mappings from observations
to latents – that fit the observed measurements equally well. Of these many alternatives, only some
disentangled solutions capture the semantics of the true latents while the other solutions entangle
the latents, changing their semantics and making it impossible to then infer the causal relationships
among the latents. As such, a key focus of causal representation learning is identifying the latents
up to disentangled solutions using various inductive biases.
In this paper, we introduce a causal representation learning method for temporal observations, Causal
Discovery with Single-parent Decoding (CDSD), a fully differentiable method that not only recovers
disentangled latents, but also the causal graph over these latents. The assumption underlying CDSD,


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that is crucial for identifiability, involves highly sparse mappings from latents to observations: each
observed variable e.g., sea-level pressure at a given grid location on Earth, is a nonlinear function
of a single latent variable. We call this single-parent decoding. While this condition is strong, such
assumptions have given rise to interpretable latent variables models for gene expression (7), text (4),
and brain imaging data (56). Although single-parent decoding may not fit the needs of some analyses
(e.g., images), it leads to scientifically-meaningful groupings of observed variables for many scientific
applications. For example, in climate science, the sparse mapping corresponds to latent spatial zones,
each exhibiting similar weather patterns or trends in their climate.
A key innovation of this paper is that, with our sparse mapping assumption, we can identify the latents up
to some benign indeterminacies (e.g., permutations) as well as the temporal causal graph over the latents.
We prove these identifiability results theoretically, and verify empirically that they hold in simulated data.
Furthermore, we demonstrate the practical relevance of our method and assumptions via an application
to a real-world climate science task. Our results indicate that CDSD successfully partitions climate
variables into geographical regions and proposes plausible teleconnections between them – remote inter-
actions between distant climate or weather states (97) that have long been a target for climate scientists.
Contributions.

      1. We propose a differentiable causal discovery approach that simultaneously learns both latent
         variables and a causal graph over the latents, based on time-series data. (Section 3)
      2. We prove that the single-parent decoding assumption leads to the identifiability of both the
         latent representation and its causal graph. (Section 3.4, Proposition 2)
      3. We evaluate our method both on synthetic data and a real-world climate science dataset in
         which relevant latents must be uncovered from measurements of sea-level pressure. (Section 4)

2    R ELATED W ORK
Causal discovery from time-series data. Many causal discovery methods have been proposed
for time-series data (77; 79). Constraint-based approaches, such as tsFCI (16), PCMCI+ (75)
and TS-ICD (72), learn an equivalence class of directed acyclic graphs by iterative conditional
independence testing. The proposed method is part of a line of work of score-based causal discovery
methods that require a likelihood function to score each graph given the data. While standard
score-based methods operate on a discrete search space of acyclic graphs (or Markov equivalence
classes) that grows exponentially with the number of variables, continuous score-based methods
enforce acyclicity only through a continuous acyclicity constraint, proposed by Zheng et al. (95). Some
variants of these methods have been proposed specifically to handle time-series data with instantaneous
connections (63; 86; 17). However, in contrast with CDSD, all the methods mentioned above do not
address the problem of learning a latent representation.
Causal representation learning. Recently, the field of causal representation learning (81) has emerged
with the goal of learning, from low-level data, representations that correspond to actionable quantities in
a causal structure.1 Since disentangling latent variables is impossible from independent and identically
distributed samples (27; 51), existing works learn causal representations with weak supervision from
paired samples (2; 8; 52; 89; 19), auxiliary labels (39; 40; 47; 26; 28; 25), and temporal observations
(46; 50; 43; 92), or by imposing constraints on the map from latents to observations (57; 71; 96).
This paper fits into the last category of work on sparse decoding, which constrains each observed
variable to be related to a sparse set of latent parents, either linearly (14; 56; 6; 44) or nonlinearly
(57; 96; 71). In comparison, the single-parent decoding assumption that we use imposes a stronger form
of sparsity, similar to some work on factor analysis (84; 56; 91; 45). In contrast, this paper develops
an identifiable single-parent decoding model that is nonlinear and scales well with high-dimensional
observations. The line of work on independent mechanism analysis (20; 70; 11) is also related to our
identifiability result. The class of single-parent decoders we propose in this work is a subset of the class
of decoders with Jacobians consisting of orthogonal columns. This work contributes to identification
results in this category of research, a task which has proven to be challenging.
   1
     As a side note, the general idea of aggregating several low-level observations in order to only consider
causal relationships at a high level is somewhat reminiscent of causal discovery with typed variables (10), causal
abstractions (73; 5) and causal feature learning (13) which was also applied to climate science (12).


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: In the proposed generative model, the variables z are latent and x are observable variables.
Gk represents the connections between the latent variables, and F the connections between the latents
and the observables (dashed lines). The colors represent the different groups. For clarity, we illustrate
here connections only up to G1 , but our method also leverages connections of higher order.


Finally, this paper also relates to Varimax-PCMCI (87), a method that, unlike causal representation
learning, learns the latent variables and their causal graph in two separate stages. This method first
applies Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and a Varimax rotation (33) to learn latent variables, as
demonstrated in (62; 76), and then applies PCMCI (78), a temporal constraint-based causal discovery
method, to recover the causal graph between the latents. In contrast, CDSD learns the latents and
their temporal causal graph simultaneously via score-based structure learning, admitting nonlinearity
in the relationships between latents as well as the mapping from latents to observations. Although
Mapped-PCMCI supports nonlinear relationships between the latents, it does this via nonlinear
conditional independence tests, which do not scale well (93; 85; 83). Nevertheless, we directly
compare CDSD with Varimax-PCMCI in the experiments in Section 4.

3     C AUSAL D ISCOVERY WITH S INGLE -PARENT D ECODING
We consider the time series model illustrated in Fig. 1. We observe dx -dimensional variables {xt }Tt=1
at T time steps. The observed variables xt are a function of dz -dimensional latent variables z t . For
example, the observations xt might represent temperature measurements at dx grid locations on Earth
while the latents z t might correspond to unknown region-level temperature measurements.
We consider a stationary time series of order τ (i.e., τ is the maximum number of past observations
that can affect the present observation) over the latent variables z 1 , . . . , z T . Thus, we model the
relationship
            between  the latents at time t, z t , and those at each of the τ previous time steps using binary
             k τ
matrices G k=0 that represent causal graphs between the latent variables and their past states. That
is, each matrix Gk ∈ {0, 1}dz ×dz encodes the presence of lagged relations between the timestep t − k
and the present timestep t, i.e., Gkij = 1 if and only if zjt−k is a causal parent of zit . In what follows,
we assume that there are no instantaneous causal relationships, i.e., the latents at time t have no edges
between one another in G0 (see Appendix H.2 for a relaxation).
Finally, F is the adjacency matrix of the bipartite causal graph with directed arrows from the latents
z to the variables x. We assume that F has a specific structure: the single-parent decoding structure,
where each variable xi has at most one latent parent. That is, the set of latent parents zpaFi of each
xi , where paF                                                                    F
              i is the set of indices of the parents in graph F , is such that |pai | ≤ 1.


3.1   G ENERATIVE M ODEL

We now describe the model in detail that can be used to generate synthetic data.
Transition model. The transition model defines the relations between the latent variables z. We
suppose that, at any given time step t, the latents are independent given their past:
                                                            dz
                                                            Y
                                           t    <t
                                      p(z | z        ) :=         p(zjt | z <t ),                        (1)
                                                            j=1

where the notation z <t is equivalent to z t−1 , . . . , z t−τ . Each conditional is parameterized by a
nonlinear function that depends on its parents:
                      p(zjt | z <t ) := h(zjt ; gj ([G1j: ⊙ z t−1 , . . . , Gτj: ⊙ z t−τ ]) ),           (2)


                                                            3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the bracket notation denotes the concatenation of vectors, gj denotes transition functions, Gj: is
the j-th row of the graph G, ⊙ is the element-wise product, and h is a density function of a continuous
variable with support R parameterized by the outputs of gj . In our experiments, h is a Gaussian density
although our identifiability result (Proposition 1) requires only that h has full support.
Observation model. The observation model defines the relationship between the latent variables
z and the observable variables x. We assume conditional independence of the xtj :
                                  dx
                                  Y
                p(xt | z t ) :=         p(xtj | zpa
                                                 t
                                                    F );     p(xtj | zpa
                                                                      t            t        t       2
                                                                        F ) := N (xj ; fj (zpaF ), σj ),          (3)
                                                      j                     j                   j
                                  j=1


where fj : R → R, and σ 2 ∈ Rd>0   x
                                     are decoding functions. As previously mentioned, we assume a
specific structure of F , namely that |paF
                                         j | ≤ 1 for all nodes xj . In the next section, we will present
a way to enforce this structure.
Joint distribution. The complete density of the model is thus given by:
                                                           T
                                                           Y
                                  p(x≤T , z ≤T ) :=              p(z t | z <t )p(xt | z t ) .                     (4)
                                                           t=1


3.2    E VIDENCE L OWER B OUND

The model can be fit by maximizing p(x≤T ) = p(x≤T , z ≤T ) dz ≤T , which unfortunately involves
                                                   R
an intractable integral. Instead, we rely on variational inference and optimize an evidence lower bound
(ELBO) for p(x≤T ), as is common to many instantiations of temporal variational auto-encoders
(VAEs) (see Girin et al. (18) for a review).
We use q(z ≤T | x≤T ) as the variational approximation of the posterior p(z ≤T | x≤T ):
                                        T
                                        Y
               q(z ≤T | x≤T ) :=              q(z t | xt ); q(z t | xt ) := N (z t ; f˜(xt ), diag(σ̃ 2 )),       (5)
                                        t=1

where f˜ : Rdx → Rdz and σ̃ 2 ∈ Rd>0
                                   z
                                     are the encoding functions.
Using the approximate posterior and the generative model from Section 3.1, we get the ELBO:
                    T h
          ≤T
                    X                                                                                            i
                          Ezt ∼q(zt |xt ) log p(xt | z t ) −Ez<t ∼q(z<t |x<t ) KL q(z t | xt ) || p(z t | z <t ) ,

log p(x        )≥
                    t=1
                                                                                                 (6)
where KL stands for the Kullback-Leibler divergence. We show explicitly the derivation of this ELBO
in Appendix A.

3.3    I NFERENCE

We now present some implementation choices and our optimization problem of interest, namely maxi-
mizing the ELBO defined in Equation 6 with respect to the different parameters of our generative model.
Latent-to-observable graph. We parameterize F , the graph between the latent z and the observable
                                                  x ×dz
x, using a weighted adjacency matrix W ∈ Rd≥0           . Put formally, Wij > 0 if and only if xi is a child
of zj . In order to enforce the single-parent decoding assumption for F , we follow Monti and Hyvärinen
(56) and constrain W to be non-negative and have columns that are orthonormal vectors.2 From these
constraints our single-parent decoding assumption follows: at most one entry per row of W can be non-
zero, i.e., a given xi can have at most one parent. As stated earlier, these constraints on W are essential
since they ensure that W is identifiable up to permutation (we elaborate on identifiability in Section 3.4).
Encoding/decoding functions. We parameterize the decoding functions fj in Equation 3 with a
                                                                  t                t
neural network rj whose input is filtered using W as a mask: fj (zpaF ) = rj (Wj: z ). In Appendix E
                                                                                       j

   2
     Note that, to simplify, we will sometimes say that W is orthogonal even if it is not a square matrix; by that, we
specifically mean that its columns are orthonormal vectors.


                                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we show an architecture for the functions rj that leverages parameter sharing using only one neural
network. For all experiments in the linear setting, we take rj to be the identity function as in Monti
and Hyvärinen (56). The encoding function f˜ (Equation 5) and the functions gj from the transition
model (Equation 2) are also parameterized using neural networks.
Continuous optimization. We use ϕ to denote the parameters of all neural networks (rj , gj , f˜) and
the learnable variance terms at Equations 3 and 5. To learn the graphs Gk via continuous optimization,
we use a similar approach to Ke et al. (36); Brouillard et al. (9); Ng et al. (59), where the graphs are
sampled from distributions parameterized by Γk ∈ Rdz ×dz that are learnable parameters. Specifically,
we use Gkij ∼ Bernoulli(σ(Γkij )), where σ(·) is the sigmoid function. To simplify the notation, we
use G and Γ as the sets {G1 , . . . , Gτ } and {Γ1 , . . . , Γτ } in the remainder of the presentation. This
results in the following constrained optimization problem:

                           max EG∼σ(Γ) Ex [Lx (W, Γ, ϕ)] − λs ||σ(Γ)||1
                           W,Γ,ϕ
                                                                                                         (7)
                          s.t. W is orthogonal and non-negative,

where Lx is the ELBO corresponding to the right-hand side term in Equation 6 and λs > 0 is a
coefficient for the regularisation of the graph sparsity. To enforce the non-negativity of W , we use
the projected gradient on R≥0 (see Appendix C.2). As for the orthogonality of W , we enforce it using
the following constraint:
                                        h(W ) := W T W − Idz .

We relax the constrained optimization problem by using the augmented Lagrangian method (ALM),
which amounts to adding a penalty term to the objective and incrementally increasing its weight during
training ((60); see Appendix C.1). Hence, the final optimization problem is:
                                                                             µW
        max EG∼σ(Γ) Ex [Lx (W, Γ, ϕ)] − λs ||σ(Γ)||1 − Tr λTW h(W ) −              ||h(W )||22 ,

                                                                                                    (8)
        W,Γ,ϕ                                                                   2

where λW ∈ Rdz ×dz and µW ∈ R>0 are the coefficients of the ALM.
We use stochastic gradient descent to optimize this objective. To estimate the gradients w.r.t. the
parameters Γ, we use the Straight-Through Gumbel estimator (53; 30). In the forward pass, we
sample G from the Bernoulli distributions, while in the backward pass, we use the Gumbel-Softmax
samples. This estimator was successfully used in several causal discovery methods (34; 9; 59). For
the ELBO optimization, we follow the classical VAE models (41) by using the reparametrization trick
and a closed-form expression for the KL divergence term since both q(z t | xt ) and p(z t | z <t ) are
multivariate Gaussians. Using these tricks we can learn the graphs G and the matrix W end-to-end.
For a more detailed exposition of the implementation, such as the neural network’s architecture, see
Appendix E. For an extension of this approach to support instantaneous relations, see Appendix H.2.

3.4   I DENTIFIABILITY A NALYSIS

In this section, we discuss the identifiability of the model specified in Section 3.1. Put informally, we
show that any solution that fits the ground-truth exactly recovers the true latents z t up to permutation
and coordinate-wise transformations, i.e., transformations that preserve the semantics of the latents
and admit valid causal discovery.
To formalize identifiability, we first state an important result that allows to show that two models
expressing the same distribution over observations must have i) the same decoder image and ii) the
relationship between latent representations must be a diffeomorphism. Similar results have been show
in previous literature (38; 46; 42; 1), and for completeness’ sake we state it and its proof in Appendix B.
For conciseness, we use f , g as the concatenations of functions [f1 , . . . , fdx ] and [g1 , . . . , gdz ].
Proposition 1 (Identifiability of f and p(z ≤T ) up to diffeomorphism). Assume we have two
models p(x≤T , z ≤T ) and p̂(x≤T , ẑ ≤T ) as specified in Section 3.1 with parameters (g, f , G, σ 2 )
and (ĝ, fˆ, Ĝ, σ̂ 2 ), respectively. Assume further that f and fˆ are diffeomorphisms onto their
respective  images and that dRz < dx (we do not assume single-parent decoding). Therefore, whenever
  p(x≤T , z ≤T )dz ≤T =           p̂(x≤T , ẑ ≤T )dẑ ≤T for all x≤T , we have f (Rdz ) = fˆ(Rdz ) and
R


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


v := f −1 ◦ fˆ is a diffeomorphism. Moreover, the density of the ground-truth latents p(z ≤T ) and
the density of the learned latents p̂(ẑ ≤T ) are related via
                                    T
                                    Y
                     p(v(ẑ ≤T ))         | det Dv(ẑ t )| = p̂(ẑ ≤T ), ∀ẑ ≤T ∈ Rdz ×T .
                                    t=1


The following paragraphs discuss how the structure in F can be leveraged to show that v must be a
trivial indeterminacy like a permutation composed with element-wise transformations.
Identifiability via the single-parent structure of F . The following proposition can be combined with
Proposition 1 to show that the model specified in Section 3.1 with the single-parent decoding structure
has a representation that is identifiable up to permutation and element-wise invertible transformations.
The proof of this result can be found in Appendix B.
Proposition 2 (Identifying latents of f ). Let f : Rdz → Rdx and fˆ : Rdz → Rdx be two
diffeomorphisms onto their image f (Rdz ) = fˆ(Rdz ). Assume both f and fˆ have a single-parent
decoding structure, i.e. |paF | ≤ 1 and |paF̂ | ≤ 1. Then, the map v := f −1 ◦ fˆ has the following
                             j                    j
property: there exists a permutation π such that, for all i, the function vi (z) depends only on zπ(i) .

Can we identify the causal graph G over latent variables? The above result, combined with Proposition 1,
shows that we can identify the distribution p(z ≤T ) up to permutation and trivial reparameterizations.
The question then reduces to “can we identify the causal graph G from p(z ≤T )?”, which is the central
question of causal discovery. It is well-known that, in the absence of instantaneous causal connections,
a temporal causal graph can be identified from the observational distribution (65, Theorem 10.1). It
is thus possible, without instantaneous connections, to identify G (up to permutation) from p(x≤T ).

4     E XPERIMENTS
We empirically study the performance of CDSD on a number of linear and nonlinear settings using
synthetic datasets. First, we compare CDSD to Varimax-PCMCI (87), an alternate method that has
a closely similar application. The results, reported at Section 4.1, emphasize the advantages of CDSD
over Varimax-PCMCI, especially in nonlinear settings. Next, we show that CDSD also compares
favorably to identifiable representation methods (iVAE (39) and DMS (46)) on synthetic data that
respect the single-parent decoding assumption. Finally, we apply CDSD to a real-world climate
science task and show that it recovers spatial aggregations related to known climate phenomena, such
as the El Niño Southern Oscillation (Section 4.2).
An implementation of CDSD is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/d4ty-F58B. For
Varimax-PCMCI, we follow the implementation of Tibau et al. (87), where dimensionality reduction is
done by combining PCA with a Varimax rotation (33), the causal graph is learned with PCMCI+ (75),
and conditional independence is tested using a partial correlation test when latent dynamics are linear
or the CMI-knn test (74) otherwise. Note that while PCMCI+ supports instantaneous connections,
we always restrict the minimum time lag considered to 1. For further implementation details on both
methods, refer to Appendix E.

4.1   S YNTHETIC DATA B ENCHMARK

The first task is to compare CDSD and Varimax-PCMCI. The key modeling components to evaluate
in the two compared methods are: linear versus nonlinear dynamics in the learned causal graphs over
latents, and linear versus nonlinear decoding functions from latents to observations. CDSD can flexibly
handle all these settings, whereas Varimax-PCMCI assumes linear maps from latents to observations.
We evaluate the methods in the following cases: 1) linear dynamics and linear decoding, 2) nonlinear
dynamics and linear decoding, and 3) linear dynamics and nonlinear decoding. We expect to find that
CDSD shows clear advantages when the mappings from latents to observations are nonlinear. We
also compare to other causal representation methods to show the identifiability gain induced by using
the constraints on W for data respecting the single-parent decoding assumption.
Datasets. We consider datasets randomly generated according to the model described at Section 3.1.
The generative process is described in detail in Appendix D.1. Unless otherwise specified, we consider


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           2.0
                                                           2.0                                                       15
                                                                                                                     15             CDSD
                                                                                                                                    CDSD
       44                              88                                                 33                                        Var-PCMCI
                                                                                                                                    Var-PCMCI
       33                              66                  1.5
                                                           1.5                                                       10
                                                                                                                     10

     SHD
       22                                                                                 22
                                       44
       11                                                  1.0
                                                           1.0                                                       55
                                       22                                                 11
       00
            55   10
                 10          15
                             15   20
                                  20        11   22   33     0.15
                                                             0.15                   0.3
                                                                                    0.3           2000
                                                                                                   2000 40004000               2000
                                                                                                                               2000 40004000
                      ddzz                                        graph
                                                                  graphdensity
                                                                        density(p)
                                                                                (p)            ##samples
                                                                                                  samples(linear)
                                                                                                          (linear)        ##samples
                                                                                                                             samples(nonlinear)
                                                                                                                                     (nonlinear)
                                                      (a)                                                                       (b)
Figure 2: Comparison of Varimax-PCMCI and CDSD in terms SHD (lower is better) on simulated
datasets with linear decoding and both a) linear and b) nonlinear latent dynamics.


T = 5000 timesteps, a stationary process of order τ = 1, dx = 100 observed variables, dz = 10 latent
variables, and random latent dynamic graphs, akin to Erdős-Rényi graphs, with a probability p = 0.15
of including an edge. The nature of the relationships among latents – and from latents to observables
– is either linear or nonlinear, depending on the specific experiment.
Protocol. We assess variability in each experimental condition by repeating each experiment 100
times with different randomly generated datasets. The hyperparameters of both methods are chosen
to maximize overall performance on 10 randomly generated datasets distinct from the evaluation (see
Appendix F). Note that, for both methods, dz and τ are not part of the hyperparameter search and are
set to the ground-truth values in the generative process.

Metrics. Performance is assessed using two metrics: i) mean correlation coefficient (MCC), which
measures the quality of the learned latent representation, and ii) structural Hamming distance (SHD),
which measures the number of incorrect edges in the learned causal graph. MCC corresponds to
the highest correlation coefficient between the estimated latents (ẑ) and the ground-truth latent (z)
across all possible permutations (as described in (40)). The use of permutations is necessary since
identification can only be guaranteed up to a permutation (see Section 3.4).
1) Linear latent dynamics, Linear decoding. We start by evaluating the methods in a context where
all causal relationships are linear. We consider a variety of conditions: dz = {5, 10, 20}, τ = {1, 2, 3},
T = {500, 1000, 5000}, and p = {0.15, 0.3} (which corresponds to sparse and dense graphs). We
observed that both methods achieve a high MCC ≥ 0.95, in all conditions, which is not surprising since
they are both capable of identifying the latents when the decoding function is linear (see Appendix G.2).
The average SHD and its standard error are reported at Fig. 2a. Varimax-PCMCI performs slightly
better than CDSD in most conditions, except for more challenging cases such as stationary processes
of greater order (τ = 3) and denser graphs (p = 0.3). The latter result is in line with previous studies,
which observed that continuous optimization methods tend to outperform their constraint-based
counterparts (95; 9) in dense graphs.
2) Nonlinear latent dynamics, Linear decoding. We now consider the case where causal relationships
between the latents are nonlinear, while those from latents to observables remain linear. The results
are reported at Fig. 2b. In contrast with the linear case, we do not present the results under all the
experimental conditions due to the prohibitive running time of Varimax-PCMCI, which was greater than
24 hours for a single experiment (for the complete results, see Appendix G.2). This can be explained
by its reliance on nonlinear conditional independence tests whose running time scales unfavorably
w.r.t. the number of samples and variables (74; 94; 85). Consequently, results for Varimax-PCMCI
are only reported up to 1000 samples. In sharp contrast, CDSD completed all experiments in a timely
manner. Hence, while its solutions tend to have slightly higher SHD, CDSD can be used in contexts
where Varimax-PCMCI, at least with a non-parametric conditional independence test, cannot.
3) Linear latent dynamics, Nonlinear decoding. The purpose of this experiment is to showcase
the inability of Varimax-PCMCI to identify the latent representation when the relationships between
the latents and the observables are nonlinear. This is the case, since PCA with a Varimax rotation is a
linear dimension-reduction method. In contrast, CDSD should have no problem identifying the latents
in this setting. We consider a dataset generated with the previously stated default conditions, where
we ensure that the identifiability conditions of Section 3.4 are satisfied. The results are reported at
Fig. 3. As expected, Varimax-PCMCI fails to recover the latent representation, achieving a poor MCC


                                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        16
       0.76                             15
       0.74                             14
                                                    CDSD
 MCC


                                  SHD
       0.72                             13          Var-PCMCI
       0.70                             12
       0.68                             11
           0.15             0.3          0.15               0.3
                  density                       density

Figure 3: Comparison of CDSD and Varimax-                             Figure 4: Comparison of CDSD to DMS and
PCMCI in terms of MCC (higher is better) and                          iVAE in terms of MCC.
SHD (lower is better) on simulated datasets
with linear dynamics and nonlinear decoding.


and, consequently, a poor SHD. In contrast, CDSD performs much better according to both metrics.
These results clearly show the superiority of CDSD over Varimax-PCMCI when the relationships
between latents and observables are nonlinear because of the linearity assumption in the Varimax step.
Comparison to causal representation methods. We compare CDSD to two causal representation
methods, iVAE (40) and DMS (46), on the synthetics data sets with linear decoding and nonlinear
dynamics in Figure 4. For a fair comparison, we implement iVAE and DMS by modifying the objective
for method in each case. For iVAE, this corresponds to not applying the constraints on W , not using
regularisation on the graph G (i.e., λs = 0) and fitting the variance of z t |z t−1 . For DMS, it simply
corresponds to not applying the constraints on W . Both methods have a worse MCC than CDSD. This
is in line with our theoretical result since only CDSD leverages the single-parent decoding assumption.
Note however that several assumptions required by iVAE and DMS may not hold in our datasets. For
example, the identifiability result of iVAE assumes that the variance of z t |z t−1 varies sufficiently,
which is not the case in our synthetic data. For DMS, while we use sparse transition graphs (G), we
did not verify if the graphical criterion required by Lachapelle et al. (46) is respected (Theorem 5,
assumption 5), nor whether its assumptions of sufficient variability hold. In Appendix I.3, we conduct
a similar ablation for Varimax-PCMCI, which shows the necessity of the Varimax rotation in order
for PCA to recover a good latent representation for the case of linear latent dynamics.

4.2       R EAL - WORLD A PPLICATION TO C LIMATE S CIENCE

To test the capabilities of CDSD in real-world settings, we apply it to the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) Reanalysis 1 mean sea-level pressure (MSLP) dataset (35).
Local variations in MSLP reflect changes in the dynamical state of the atmosphere for a certain region
or, in other words, the occurrence and passing of weather systems (e.g. low- or high-pressure systems).
Over time, MSLP data can thus be used to identify regions that share common weather properties, and
to understand how regional weather systems are coupled to each other globally. Identifying such causal
relationships would help climate scientists to better understand Earth’s global dynamical weather
system and could provide leverage for data-driven forecasting systems.
Here, we use MSLP data from 1948–2022 on a global regular grid with a resolution of 2.5◦ longitude
× 2.5◦ latitude. We aggregated the daily time-series to weekly data and regridded it onto an
icosahedral-hexagonal grid (see Appendix D.2) (55). The resulting dimensions are 3900 × 6250,
covering 52 weeks of 75 years (T = 3900) and dx = 6250 grid cells. We apply CDSD in order to
cluster regions of similar weather properties, and identify which regions are causally linked to weather
phenomena in other regions. We use the method with linear dynamics and linear decoding, and,
similarly to (76), we use dz = 50 and τ = 5.
Fig. 5a shows the learned spatial aggregations and the causal graph G obtained with CDSD. The learned
aggregations match well with the coarser climatological regions used in the latest climate change
assessment reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which were manually
defined (compare to Figure 1 in (29)). The learned clusters broadly reflect a superposition of the
effects of transport timescales, ocean-to-land boundaries, and the zonal and meridional patterns of the
tropospheric circulation (Hadley, Ferrel, and polar cells) in both hemispheres. Among the visually most
prominent features is the identification of East Pacific, Central Pacific, and Western Pacific clusters
(clusters 13, 39, 48) along the tropical Pacific. These zones are well-known to be coupled through ENSO,


                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Overview of the climate science results for CDSD. a) Segmentation of the Earth’s surface
according to W . The groups are colored and numbered based on the latent variable to which they are
related. b) Adjacency matrices for latent dynamic graphs G1 , . . . , G5 , shown as dz × dz heatmaps. c)
Subgraph of G1 showing the learned causal relationships between known ENSO-related regions.


but the East Pacific typically sees the most pronounced temperature oscillations due to its shallow
oceanic thermocline (e.g., 61). We also recover a relatively zonal structure of clusters in the Southern
Hemisphere mid-latitudes (clusters 17, 2, 41, 14, 20, 40, 15, 18, and 43 from west to east) where the zonal
tropospheric circulation moves relatively freely without significant disturbances from land boundaries.
While not strictly enforced, all the learned regions are spatially connected/homogeneous, i.e. not
divided into several de-localized parts (see Appendix G.3). Highly de-localized, globally distributed,
components are for example a major issue in interpreting standard principal component analyses of
MSLP data (21). In contrast, the regions learned by CDSD without constraints are not localized and
are harder to associate to known regions such as those related to ENSO (see Appendix G.3).
While a detailed analysis of the learned causal graphs (Fig. 5b) is beyond the scope of this study, it
is intuitive that the strongest and most frequent connections are found within a timescale of one week
(G1 ), but notably longer - likely more distant connections - are found, too. These likely reflect the
well-known presence of long-distance teleconnections between world regions (62). In Fig. 5c we show
one example of the causal coupling inferred for ENSO-related modes (clusters 13, 39, 47, 48) which
is similar to the causal graph found in Runge et al. (78).

5    D ISCUSSION
We present CDSD, a method that relies on the single-parent decoding assumption to learn a causal
representation and its connectivity from time series data. The method is accompanied by theoretical
results that guarantee the identifiability of the representation up to benign transformations. The key
benefits of CDSD over Varimax-PCMCI are that i) it supports nonlinear decoding functions, and ii)
as opposed to its constraint-based tests, it scales well in the number of samples and variables in the
nonlinear dynamics case. Furthermore, as illustrated in the application to climate science, CDSD
and its assumptions, appear to be applicable in practice and seem particularly well-suited for problems
of scientific interest, such as the spatial clustering of weather measurements.
We highlight a few limitations that should be considered. Several assumptions, such as the stationarity
of the dynamical system or the single-parent decoding assumption, can be partially or totally violated
in real-world applications. We did not study the impact of these model misspecifications on the
performance of CDSD. In all our experiments, we assumed that dz and τ were known. However, in
practical applications, these values are unknown and might be difficult to infer, even for experts.
Besides these limitations, CDSD, in its general form, can be used in several contexts or be readily
extended. It can be used with multivariate data (e.g., in climate science applications, one could be
interested in modeling sea-level pressure, but also temperature, precipitation, etc.). Furthermore, in
other contexts, such as brain imaging studies, one could be interested in learning different graphs G
for different subjects, while sharing a common spatial aggregation (as in Monti and Hyvärinen (56)).
We want to highlight that the method can be further extended to include instantaneous connections,
and learn from observational and interventional data. In Appendix H.1, we show how our method
can be adapted to support all these cases. Overall, we believe that CDSD is a significant step in towards
the goal of bridging the gap between causal representation learning and scientific applications.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
 [1] Kartik Ahuja, Jason Hartford, and Yoshua Bengio. Properties from mechanisms: an equivariance
     perspective on identifiable representation learning. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2022.
 [2] Kartik Ahuja, Jason Hartford, and Yoshua Bengio. Weakly supervised representation learning
     with sparse perturbations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
 [3] TW Anderson and Herman Rubin. Statistical inference in. In Proceedings of the Third Berkeley
     Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability: Held at the Statistical Laboratory,
     University of California, December, 1954, July and August, 1955, volume 1, page 111. Univ
     of California Press, 1956.
 [4] Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Yonatan Halpern, David Mimno, Ankur Moitra, David Sontag, Yichen
     Wu, and Michael Zhu. A practical algorithm for topic modeling with provable guarantees. In
     International conference on machine learning, 2013.
 [5] Sander Beckers, Frederick Eberhardt, and Joseph Y Halpern. Approximate causal abstractions.
     In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 606–615. PMLR, 2020.
 [6] Anirban Bhattacharya and David B Dunson. Sparse bayesian infinite factor models. Biometrika,
     98(2):291–306, 2011.
 [7] Xin Bing, Florentina Bunea, Yang Ning, and Marten Wegkamp. Adaptive estimation in structured
     factor models with applications to overlapping clustering. Annals of Statistics, 48(4), 2020.
 [8] Johann Brehmer, Pim De Haan, Phillip Lippe, and Taco Cohen. Weakly supervised causal
     representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
 [9] Philippe Brouillard, Sébastien Lachapelle, Alexandre Lacoste, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and
     Alexandre Drouin. Differentiable causal discovery from interventional data. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 33:21865–21877, 2020.
[10] Philippe Brouillard, Perouz Taslakian, Alexandre Lacoste, Sébastien Lachapelle, and Alexandre
     Drouin. Typing assumptions improve identification in causal discovery. In Conference on Causal
     Learning and Reasoning, pages 162–177. PMLR, 2022.
[11] Simon Buchholz, Michel Besserve, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Function classes for identifiable
     nonlinear independent component analysis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     35:16946–16961, 2022.
[12] Krzysztof Chalupka, Tobias Bischoff, Pietro Perona, and Frederick Eberhardt. Unsupervised
     discovery of el nino using causal feature learning on microlevel climate data. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1605.09370, 2016.
[13] Krzysztof Chalupka, Frederick Eberhardt, and Pietro Perona. Causal feature learning: an
     overview. Behaviormetrika, 44(1):137–164, 2017.
[14] Zhengming Chen, Feng Xie, Jie Qiao, Zhifeng Hao, Kun Zhang, and Ruichu Cai. Identification
     of linear latent variable model with arbitrary distribution. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
     on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pages 6350–6357, 2022.
[15] C Dey, C Sanders, J Clochard, and J Hennessy. Guide to the wmo table driven code form used for
     the representation and exchange of regularly spaced data in binary form: Fm 92 grib. Technical
     report, WMO Tech. Rep., 98 pp.[Available online at http://www. wmo. int/pages/prog . . . , 2007.
[16] Doris Entner and Patrik O Hoyer. On causal discovery from time series data using fci.
     Probabilistic graphical models, pages 121–128, 2010.
[17] Tian Gao, Debarun Bhattacharjya, Elliot Nelson, Miao Liu, and Yue Yu. Idyno: Learning
     nonparametric dags from interventional dynamic data. In International Conference on Machine
     Learning, pages 6988–7001. PMLR, 2022.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[18] Laurent Girin, Simon Leglaive, Xiaoyu Bie, Julien Diard, Thomas Hueber, and Xavier
     Alameda-Pineda. Dynamical variational autoencoders: A comprehensive review. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2008.12595, 2020.
[19] L. Gresele, P. K. Rubenstein, A. Mehrjou, F. Locatello, and B. Scholkopf. The incomplete rosetta
     stone problem identifiability results for multi-view nonlinear ICA. In Conference on Uncertainty
     in Artificial Intelligence, 2019.
[20] Luigi Gresele, Julius Von Kügelgen, Vincent Stimper, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Michel Besserve.
     Independent mechanism analysis, a new concept? Advances in neural information processing
     systems, 34:28233–28248, 2021.
[21] Abdel Hannachi, Ian T Jolliffe, and David B Stephenson. Empirical orthogonal functions and
     related techniques in atmospheric science: A review. International Journal of Climatology: A
     Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 27(9):1119–1152, 2007.
[22] Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. Neural networks for machine learning
     lecture 6a overview of mini-batch gradient descent. Cited on, 14(8):2, 2012.
[23] Harold Hotelling. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components.
     Journal of educational psychology, 24(6):417, 1933.
[24] S. Hoyer and J. Hamman. xarray: N-D labeled arrays and datasets in Python. In revision, J. Open
     Res. Software, 2017.
[25] Aapo Hyvarinen and Hiroshi Morioka. Unsupervised feature extraction by time-contrastive
     learning and nonlinear ica. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
[26] Aapo Hyvarinen and Hiroshi Morioka. Nonlinear ICA of Temporally Dependent Stationary
     Sources. The 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2017.
[27] Aapo Hyvärinen and Petteri Pajunen. Nonlinear independent component analysis: Existence
     and uniqueness results. Neural networks, 12(3):429–439, 1999.
[28] Aapo Hyvarinen, Hiroaki Sasaki, and Richard E Turner. Nonlinear ICA Using Auxiliary
     Variables and Generalized Contrastive Learning. The 22nd International Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence and Statistics, 2019.
[29] Maialen Iturbide, José M Gutiérrez, Lincoln M Alves, Joaquín Bedia, Ruth Cerezo-Mota, Ezequiel
     Cimadevilla, Antonio S Cofiño, Alejandro Di Luca, Sergio Henrique Faria, Irina V Gorodetskaya,
     et al. An update of ipcc climate reference regions for subcontinental analysis of climate model
     data: definition and aggregated datasets. Earth System Science Data, 12(4):2959–2970, 2020.
[30] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. Proceedings
     of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
[31] Richard Arnold Johnson, Dean W Wichern, et al. Applied multivariate statistical analysis. 2002.
[32] Philip W Jones. First-and second-order conservative remapping schemes for grids in spherical
     coordinates. Monthly Weather Review, 127(9):2204–2210, 1999.
[33] Henry F Kaiser. The varimax criterion for analytic rotation in factor analysis. Psychometrika,
     23(3):187–200, 1958.
[34] Diviyan Kalainathan, Olivier Goudet, Isabelle Guyon, David Lopez-Paz, and Michèle Sebag.
     Sam: Structural agnostic model, causal discovery and penalized adversarial learning. 2018.
[35] Eugenia Kalnay, Masao Kanamitsu, Robert Kistler, William Collins, Dennis Deaven, Lev
     Gandin, Mark Iredell, Suranjana Saha, Glenn White, John Woollen, et al. The ncep/ncar 40-year
     reanalysis project. Bulletin of the American meteorological Society, 77(3):437–472, 1996.
[36] Nan Rosemary Ke, Olexa Bilaniuk, Anirudh Goyal, Stefan Bauer, Hugo Larochelle, Bernhard
     Schölkopf, Michael C Mozer, Chris Pal, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning neural causal models
     from unknown interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01075, 2019.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[37] I. Khemakhem, R. Monti, D. Kingma, and A. Hyvärinen. Ice-beem identifiable conditional
     energy-based deep models based on nonlinear ica. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 2020.

[38] Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational
     autoencoders and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. Proceedings of the Twenty Third
     International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2020.

[39] Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational
     autoencoders and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In International Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence and Statistics, pages 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020.

[40] Ilyes Khemakhem, Ricardo Monti, Diederik Kingma, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Ice-beem:
     Identifiable conditional energy-based deep models based on nonlinear ica. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 33:12768–12778, 2020.

[41] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

[42] Bohdan Kivva, Goutham Rajendran, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Bryon Aragam. Identifiability
     of deep generative models without auxiliary information. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 2022.

[43] David A. Klindt, Lukas Schott, Yash Sharma, Ivan Ustyuzhaninov, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
     Bethge, and Dylan Paiton. Towards nonlinear disentanglement in natural data with temporal
     sparse coding. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

[44] David Knowles and Zoubin Ghahramani. Nonparametric bayesian sparse factor models with
     application to gene expression modeling. Annals of Applied Statistics, 2011.

[45] Erich Kummerfeld and Joseph Ramsey. Causal clustering for 1-factor measurement models.
     In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery
     and data mining, pages 1655–1664, 2016.

[46] Sebastien Lachapelle, Pau Rodriguez, Yash Sharma, Katie E Everett, Rémi LE PRIOL, Alexandre
     Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Disentanglement via mechanism sparsity regularization: A
     new principle for nonlinear ICA. In First Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, 2022.

[47] Sébastien Lachapelle, Tristan Deleu, Divyat Mahajan, Ioannis Mitliagkas, Yoshua Bengio,
     Simon Lacoste-Julien, and Quentin Bertrand. Synergies between disentanglement and sparsity:
     Generalization and identifiability in multi-task learning. International Conference on Machine
     Learning, 2023.

[48] Anson Lei, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Ingmar Posner. Variational causal dynamics: Discovering
     modular world models from interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11131, 2022.

[49] Yehua Li and Marc G Genton. Single-index additive vector autoregressive time series models.
     Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 36(3):369–388, 2009.

[50] Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy Löwe, Yuki M. Asano, Taco Cohen, and Efstratios Gavves.
     CITRIS: Causal Identifiability from Temporal Intervened Sequences. International Conference
     on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.

[51] Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard
     Schölkopf, and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning
     of disentangled representations. In international conference on machine learning, pages
     4114–4124. PMLR, 2019.

[52] Francesco Locatello, Ben Poole, Gunnar Rätsch, Bernhard Schölkopf, Olivier Bachem, and
     Michael Tschannen. Weakly-supervised disentanglement without compromises. In International
     Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[53] C. J. Maddison, A. Mnih, and Y. W. Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous relaxation
     of discrete random variables. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
     Learning, 2017.

[54] Detlev Majewski. The new global icosahedral-hexagonal gridpoint model gme of the deutscher
     wetterdienst. In Procceding of a Seminar held at ECMWF on Recent Developments in Numberical
     Methods for Atmospheric Modelling, 1998, pages 172–201, 1998.

[55] Detlev Majewski, Dörte Liermann, Peter Prohl, Bodo Ritter, Michael Buchhold, Thomas
     Hanisch, Gerhard Paul, Werner Wergen, and John Baumgardner. The operational global
     icosahedral–hexagonal gridpoint model gme: Description and high-resolution tests. Monthly
     Weather Review, 130(2):319–338, 2002.

[56] Ricardo Pio Monti and Aapo Hyvärinen. A unified probabilistic model for learning latent factors
     and their connectivities from high-dimensional data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09567, 2018.

[57] Gemma E Moran, Dhanya Sridhar, Yixin Wang, and David M Blei. Identifiable variational
     autoencoders via sparse decoding. Transactions of Machine Learning Research, 2022.

[58] Ignavier Ng, Sébastien Lachapelle, Nan Rosemary Ke, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and Kun Zhang. On
     the convergence of continuous constrained optimization for structure learning. In International
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 8176–8198. PMLR, 2022.

[59] Ignavier Ng, Shengyu Zhu, Zhuangyan Fang, Haoyang Li, Zhitang Chen, and Jun Wang. Masked
     gradient-based causal structure learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 SIAM International
     Conference on Data Mining (SDM), pages 424–432. SIAM, 2022.

[60] Jorge Nocedal and Stephen J Wright. Numerical optimization. Springer, 1999.

[61] P. J. Nowack, P. Braesicke, N. L. Abraham, and J. A. Pyle. On the role of ozone
     feedback in the enso amplitude response under global warming.   Geophysical Re-
     search Letters, 44:3858–3866, 2017. doi: 10.1002/2016GL072418. URL https:
     //agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2016GL072418.

[62] Peer Nowack, Jakob Runge, Veronika Eyring, and Joanna D Haigh. Causal networks for climate
     model evaluation and constrained projections. Nature communications, 11(1):1415, 2020.

[63] Roxana Pamfil, Nisara Sriwattanaworachai, Shaan Desai, Philip Pilgerstorfer, Konstantinos
     Georgatzis, Paul Beaumont, and Bryon Aragam. Dynotears: Structure learning from time-series
     data. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 1595–1605.
     PMLR, 2020.

[64] Karl Pearson. Liii. on lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space. The London,
     Edinburgh, and Dublin philosophical magazine and journal of science, 2(11):559–572, 1901.

[65] J. Peters, D. Janzing, and B. Schölkopf. Elements of Causal Inference - Foundations and
     Learning Algorithms. MIT Press, 2017.

[66] Trang Van Pham, Christian Steger, Burkhardt Rockel, Klaus Keuler, Ingo Kirchner, Mariano
     Mertens, Daniel Rieger, Günther Zängl, and Barbara Früh. Icon in climate limited-area mode
     (icon release version 2.6. 1): a new regional climate model. Geoscientific Model Development,
     14(2):985–1005, 2021.

[67] D. Pollard. A User’s Guide to Measure Theoretic Probability. Cambridge University Press, 2001.

[68] James Ramsay and Bernard Silverman. Applied functional data analysis: methods and case
     studies. 2007.

[69] Andrew T Reid, Drew B Headley, Ravi D Mill, Ruben Sanchez-Romero, Lucina Q Uddin,
     Daniele Marinazzo, Daniel J Lurie, Pedro A Valdés-Sosa, Stephen José Hanson, Bharat B
     Biswal, et al. Advancing functional connectivity research from association to causation. Nature
     neuroscience, 22(11):1751–1760, 2019.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[70] Patrik Reizinger, Luigi Gresele, Jack Brady, Julius Von Kügelgen, Dominik Zietlow, Bernhard
     Schölkopf, Georg Martius, Wieland Brendel, and Michel Besserve. Embrace the gap: Vaes
     perform independent mechanism analysis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     35:12040–12057, 2022.
[71] Travers Rhodes and Daniel Lee. Local disentanglement in variational auto-encoders using
     jacobian l_1 regularization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
     22708–22719, 2021.
[72] Raanan Y Rohekar, Shami Nisimov, Yaniv Gurwicz, and Gal Novik. From temporal to
     contemporaneous iterative causal discovery in the presence of latent confounders. Proceedings
     of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
[73] Paul K Rubenstein, Sebastian Weichwald, Stephan Bongers, Joris M Mooij, Dominik Janzing,
     Moritz Grosse-Wentrup, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal consistency of structural equation
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00819, 2017.
[74] Jakob Runge. Conditional independence testing based on a nearest-neighbor estimator of
     conditional mutual information. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
     Statistics, pages 938–947. PMLR, 2018.
[75] Jakob Runge. Discovering contemporaneous and lagged causal relations in autocorrelated
     nonlinear time series datasets. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages
     1388–1397. PMLR, 2020.
[76] Jakob Runge, Vladimir Petoukhov, Jonathan F Donges, Jaroslav Hlinka, Nikola Jajcay, Martin
     Vejmelka, David Hartman, Norbert Marwan, Milan Paluš, and Jürgen Kurths. Identifying causal
     gateways and mediators in complex spatio-temporal systems. Nature communications, 6(1):
     1–10, 2015.
[77] Jakob Runge, Sebastian Bathiany, Erik Bollt, Gustau Camps-Valls, Dim Coumou, Ethan Deyle,
     Clark Glymour, Marlene Kretschmer, Miguel D Mahecha, Jordi Muñoz-Marí, et al. Inferring
     causation from time series in earth system sciences. Nature communications, 10(1):1–13, 2019.
[78] Jakob Runge, Peer Nowack, Marlene Kretschmer, Seth Flaxman, and Dino Sejdinovic. Detecting
     and quantifying causal associations in large nonlinear time series datasets. Science advances,
     5(11):eaau4996, 2019.
[79] Jakob Runge, Andreas Gerhardus, Gherardo Varando, Veronika Eyring, and Gustau Camps-Valls.
     Causal inference for time series. Nature Reviews Earth & Environment, 10:2553, 2023.
[80] Kevin Sahr, Denis White, and A Jon Kimerling. Geodesic discrete global grid systems.
     Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 30(2):121–134, 2003.
[81] Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
     Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of
     the IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.
[82] Uwe Schulzweida. Cdo user guide, October 2022. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
     zenodo.7112925.
[83] Rajen D Shah and Jonas Peters. The hardness of conditional independence testing and the
     generalised covariance measure. The Annals of Statistics, 48(3):1514–1538, 2020.
[84] Ricardo Silva, Richard Scheines, Clark Glymour, Peter Spirtes, and David Maxwell Chickering.
     Learning the structure of linear latent variable models. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
     7(2), 2006.
[85] E. V. Strobl, K. Zhang, and S. Visweswaran. Approximate kernel-based conditional independence
     tests for fast non-parametric causal discovery. Journal of Causal Inference, 2019.
[86] Xiangyu Sun, Guiliang Liu, Pascal Poupart, and Oliver Schulte. Nts-notears: Learning
     nonparametric temporal dags with time-series data and prior knowledge. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2109.04286, 2021.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[87] Xavier-Andoni Tibau, Christian Reimers, Andreas Gerhardus, Joachim Denzler, Veronika
     Eyring, and Jakob Runge. A spatiotemporal stochastic climate model for benchmarking causal
     discovery methods for teleconnections. Environmental Data Science, 1:e12, 2022.
[88] Martin Vejmelka, Lucie Pokorná, Jaroslav Hlinka, David Hartman, Nikola Jajcay, and Milan
     Paluš. Non-random correlation structures and dimensionality reduction in multivariate climate
     data. Climate Dynamics, 44:2663–2682, 2015.
[89] J. Von Kugelgen, Y. Sharma, L. Gresele, W. Brendel, B. Scholkopf, M. Besserve, and F. Locatello.
     Self-supervised learning with data augmentations provably isolates content from style. In
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
[90] Ning Wang and Jin-Luen Lee. Geometric properties of the icosahedral-hexagonal grid on the
     two-sphere. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 33(5):2536–2559, 2011.
[91] Feng Xie, Yan Zeng, Zhengming Chen, Yangbo He, Zhi Geng, and Kun Zhang. Causal discovery
     of 1-factor measurement models in linear latent variable models with arbitrary noise distributions.
     Neurocomputing, 2023.
[92] W. Yao, Y. Sun, A. Ho, C. Sun, and K. Zhang. Learning temporally causal latent processes from
     general temporal data. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[93] K. Zhang, J. Peters, D. Janzing, and B. Schölkopf. Kernel-based conditional independence
     test and application in causal discovery. Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Conference on
     Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2011.
[94] Qinyi Zhang, Sarah Filippi, Arthur Gretton, and Dino Sejdinovic. Large-scale kernel methods
     for independence testing. Statistics and Computing, 28:113–130, 2018.
[95] Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep K Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. Dags with no tears:
     Continuous optimization for structure learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 31, 2018.
[96] Yujia Zheng, Ignavier Ng, and Kun Zhang. On the identifiability of nonlinear ica: Sparsity and
     beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07751, 2022.
[97] Dong Zhou, Avi Gozolchiani, Yosef Ashkenazy, and Shlomo Havlin. Teleconnection paths via
     climate network direct link detection. Physical review letters, 115(26):268501, 2015.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     D ERIVATION OF THE ELBO
We show explicitly the derivation of the ELBO by starting from the marginal likelihood and by using
the model we have proposed in Section 3.1.
                                                     ≤T
                                                         , z ≤T ) q(z ≤T | x≤T )

         ≤T                                  ≤T p(x
  log p(x ) = Ez≤T ∼q(z≤T |x≤T ) log p(x )                                                          (9)
                                                  p(x≤T , z ≤T ) q(z ≤T | x≤T )
                                          q(z ≤T | x≤T )          p(x≤T , z ≤T )

             = Ez≤T ∼q(z≤T |x≤T ) log                     +  log                                  (10)
                                          p(z ≤T | x≤T )         q(z ≤T | x≤T )
                                                                                   p(x≤T , z ≤T )

             = KL(q(z ≤T | x≤T )||p(z ≤T | x≤T )) + Ez≤T ∼q(z≤T |x≤T ) log                          .
                                                                                   q(z ≤T | x≤T )
                                                                                                  (11)
Since KL ≥ 0, we have:
                                                                p(x≤T , z ≤T )

                                ≤T
                        log p(x      ) ≥ Ez≤T ∼q(z≤T |x≤T ) log                  .                        (12)
                                                                q(z ≤T | x≤T )

Now we will replace p(x≤T , z ≤T ) and q(z ≤T | x≤T ) by the factorisation we assumed in Equation 4
and 5:
                                 "     QT                           #
                                                 t   <t      t    t
       ≤T                                t=1 p(z | z )p(x | z )
log p(x ) ≥ Ez≤T ∼q(z≤T |x≤T ) log           QT                                                   (13)
                                                       t   t
                                               t=1 q(z | x )
                                 " T                 #                       " T                      #
                                   X
                                              t    t
                                                                               X       p(z t | z <t )
           ≥ Ez≤T ∼q(z≤T |x≤T )        log p(x | z ) + Ez≤T ∼q(z≤T |x≤T )          log                  .
                                   t=1                                         t=1
                                                                                        q(z t | xt )
                                                                                                  (14)

Finally, thanks to the decomposition of our proposed posterior (Equation 5), we have:
                                           T h
                                           X
                          log p(x≤T ) ≥           Ezt ∼q(zt |xt ) log p(xt | z t ) −

                                                                                                          (15)
                                            t=1
                                                                                   i
                              Ez<t ∼q(z<t |x<t ) KL q(z t | xt ) || p(z t | z <t ) .

                                                                                                          (16)


B    I DENTIFIABILITY
In what follows, we overload the notation by defining f (z ≤T ) := [f (z 1 ) . . . f (z T )] and similarly
for other functions.
Lemma 3 (Denoising x). Assume we have two models p(x≤T , z ≤T ) and p̂(x≤T , ẑ ≤T ) as specified in
Section 3.1Rwith parameters (g, f , G,   2          ˆ         2
                                     R σ ) and (ĝ, f , Ĝ, σ̂ ), respectively. Assume dz < dx . Therefore,
whenever p(x≤T , z ≤T )dz ≤T = p̂(x≤T , ẑ ≤T )dẑ ≤T for all x≤T , we have that the distributions
of y ≤T := f (z ≤T ) and ŷ ≤T := fˆ(ẑ ≤T ) are equal.

Proof. Let P
           R x≤T and Px̂≤T be the probability measures   respectively induced by the densities
p(x≤T ) := p(x≤T , z ≤T )dz ≤T and p̂(x̂≤T ) := p̂(x̂≤T , ẑ ≤T )dẑ ≤T . We can thus write
                                               R

                                              Px≤T = Px̂≤T .                                              (17)
Let us define y t := f (z t ) and ŷ t := fˆ(ẑ t ) for all t where z ≤T ∼ p(z ≤T ) and ẑ ≤T ∼ p̂(ẑ ≤T ). Let
Py≤T and Pŷ≤T be the probability distributions of y ≤T and ŷ ≤T , respectively. Notice how we can
write x≤T = y ≤T + n≤T and x̂≤T = y ≤T + n̂≤T , where nt ∼ N (0, σ 2 Idx ) and n̂t ∼ N (0, σ̂ 2 Idx )
for all t ≤ T , where the noises are mutually independent across time. This means we can write
                                      Py≤T ∗ Pn≤T = Pŷ≤T ∗ Pn̂≤T ,                                       (18)
where Pn≤T stands for the probability measure of the Gaussian noise (similarly for Pn̂≤T ) and ∗ stands
for the convolution operator on measures.


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The following step makes use of the Fourier transform F generalized to arbitrary probability measures.
See Pollard (67, Chapter 8). Note that the Fourier transform of a probability distribution is exactly
the characteristic function of the random variable it represents.
                         F(Py≤T ∗ Pn≤T ) = F(Pŷ≤T ∗ Pn̂≤T )                                               (19)
                       F(Py≤T )F(Pn≤T ) = F(Pŷ≤T )F(Pn̂≤T )                                               (20)
                                          2                               2
                                      − σ2 ω ⊤ ω                     − σ̂2 ω ⊤ ω
                    F(Py≤T )(ω)e                   = F(Pŷ≤T )(ω)e                 , ∀ω ∈ RT ·dx ,         (21)
where we used the fact that (i) the Fourier transform of a convolution is the product of the Fourier
transforms and (ii) the fact that the Fourier transform of a Gaussian random vector with mean 0 and
                      σ2 ⊤
covariance σ 2 I is e− 2 ω ω .
Now our goal is to show that σ 2 = σ̂ 2 . Assume this is false, i.e. σ 2 < σ̂ 2 (w.l.o.g.). Because this
Fourier transform is positive for all ω ∈ RT ·dx , we can divide by its value on both sides and obtain
                                                                σ̂ 2 −σ 2 ⊤
                       F(Py≤T )(ω) = F(Pŷ≤T )(ω)e−                  2   ω ω
                                                                               , ∀ω ∈ RT ·dx ,             (22)
                               σ̂ 2 −σ 2   ⊤
where we recognize that e− 2 ω ω is the Fourier transform of a Gaussian distribution with mean
zero and covariance (σ̂ 2 − σ 2 )IT ·dx . Now notice how the l.h.s. is the Fourier transform of a distribution
with support contained in f (RT dz ), which is a dz -dimensional manifold embedded in RT dx . Since we
assume dz < dx , the set f (RT dz ) is a proper subset of RT dx (i.e. f (RT dz ) ̸= RT dx ). In contrast, the
r.h.s. is the Fourier transform of a distribution with full support, i.e. RT dx , since it is the convolution of
Pŷ≤T and a Gaussian distribution. This is a contradiction since both supports should be equal. Hence
we must have that σ 2 = σ̂ 2 . We can thus write
                                               F(Py≤T ) = F(Pŷ≤T )                                        (23)
                                                   Py≤T = Pŷ≤T ,                                          (24)
which concludes the proof.
Proposition 1 (Identifiability of f and p(z ≤T ) up to diffeomorphism). Assume we have two
models p(x≤T , z ≤T ) and p̂(x≤T , ẑ ≤T ) as specified in Section 3.1 with parameters (g, f , G, σ 2 )
and (ĝ, fˆ, Ĝ, σ̂ 2 ), respectively. Assume further that f and fˆ are diffeomorphisms onto their
respective  images and that dRz < dx (we do not assume single-parent decoding). Therefore, whenever
  p(x≤T , z ≤T )dz ≤T =           p̂(x≤T , ẑ ≤T )dẑ ≤T for all x≤T , we have f (Rdz ) = fˆ(Rdz ) and
R

v := f −1 ◦ fˆ is a diffeomorphism. Moreover, the density of the ground-truth latents p(z ≤T ) and
the density of the learned latents p̂(ẑ ≤T ) are related via
                                     T
                                     Y
                      p(v(ẑ ≤T ))         | det Dv(ẑ t )| = p̂(ẑ ≤T ), ∀ẑ ≤T ∈ Rdz ×T .
                                     t=1


Proof. By Lemma 3, we have that
                                                   Py≤T = Pŷ≤T .                                          (25)
By marginalizing out y 2:T on both sides, we get
                                                     Py1 = Pŷ1 ,                                          (26)
which of course implies that their supports are equal:
                                           supp(Py1 ) = supp(Pŷ1 )                                        (27)
                                      f (supp(p(z t ))) = fˆ(supp(p̂(ẑ t )))                              (28)
                                                f (R ) = fˆ(Rdz ) ,
                                                      dz
                                                                                                           (29)
                                                                                                     1
where supp(·) stands for support of a distribution. Note that the last step is because p(z ) is assumed
to have full support (Section Section 3.1).
Equation (29) and the fact that both f and fˆ are diffeomorphisms onto their image implies that the
map v := f −1 ◦ fˆ is both well-defined and a diffeomorphism.


                                                           17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From (25), we get
                                          Pz≤T ◦ f −1 = Pẑ≤T ◦ fˆ                                  (30)
                                       Pz≤T ◦ f −1 ◦ fˆ = Pẑ≤T                                     (31)
                                             Pz≤T ◦ v = Pẑ≤T .                                     (32)
The above equation combined with the change-of-variable formula yields
                                     T
                                     Y
                      p(v(ẑ ≤T ))         | det Dv(ẑ t )| = p̂(ẑ ≤T ), ∀ẑ ≤T ∈ Rdz ×T ,         (33)
                                     t=1
which concludes the proof.
Proposition 2 (Identifying latents of f ). Let f : Rdz → Rdx and fˆ : Rdz → Rdx be two
diffeomorphisms onto their image f (Rdz ) = fˆ(Rdz ). Assume both f and fˆ have a single-parent
decoding structure, i.e. |paF               F̂
                             j | ≤ 1 and |paj | ≤ 1. Then, the map v := f
                                                                                −1
                                                                                   ◦ fˆ has the following
property: there exists a permutation π such that, for all i, the function vi (z) depends only on zπ(i) .

Proof. We see that v = f −1 ◦ fˆ implies
                                                    fˆ = f ◦ v .                                    (34)

Taking the derivative on both sides of Equation 34, write
                           Dfˆ(z) = D(f ◦ v)(z) = Df (v(z))Dv(z),                                   (35)
where the second equality follows from applying the chain rule, each Jacobian Dfˆ(z) and Df (v(z))
is a dx × dz matrix and the Jacobian Dv(z) is a dz × dz matrix.
In words, Equation 34 tells us that the mapping fˆ is “imitating” the mapping f in the following sense:
Evaluating fˆ is the same as first evaluating v and then evaluating f .
We need to show that v(z) is a permutation-scaling transformation in the sense defined in the statement
of this proposition. To achieve this, we will show that the Jacobian Dv(z) is a permutation-scaling
matrix for all z.
We show this in a number of steps:

Step 1. Since fˆ is a diffeomorphism, its Jacobian, Dfˆ, has full column rank everywhere. Thus, its
Moore-Penrose inverse (also known as its pseudo-inverse), Dfˆ(z)+ , can be written as,
                            Dfˆ(z)+ = (Dfˆ(z)⊤ Dfˆ(z))−1 Df (z)⊤ .                            (36)
Further, Dfˆ(z)+ is a left inverse; that is, Dfˆ(z)+ Dfˆ(z) = I.
We can left-multiply both sides of Equation 35 by Dfˆ(z)+ , yielding,
                       I = (Dfˆ(z)⊤ Dfˆ(z))−1 Dfˆ(z)⊤ Df (v(z))Dv(z).                               (37)

Step 2. We now show that the matrix Dfˆ(z)⊤ Dfˆ(z) is diagonal. To see this, consider k ̸= k ′ and
write
                                             dx
                                             X
                    (Dfˆ(z)⊤ Dfˆ(z))k,k′ =      Dfˆ(z)d,k Dfˆ(z)d,k′ .                        (38)
                                                          d=1

This must be zero since, otherwise, it would imply that there exists a d such that both Dfˆ(z)d,k and
Dfˆ(z)d,k′ are different from zero, but this is impossible since yd has only one parent in the graph
F (by the “single-parent property”).
Define Λ(z) := Dfˆ(z)⊤ Dfˆ(z), which we just showed is diagonal. Equation 37 implies that
                          Dv(z)−1 = Λ(z)−1 Dfˆ(z)⊤ Df (v(z)),                                       (39)
and since Dv(z)  −1
                      is invertible, Dfˆ(z)⊤ Df (v(z)) must also be invertible.


                                                         18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Key idea. To show that Dv(z) is a permutation-scaling matrix, we will show that its inverse is
a permutation-scaling matrix. We have already shown that Λ(z) is a diagonal matrix. Thus, what
remains is to show that Dfˆ(z)⊤ Df (v(z)) is a permutation-scaling matrix.

Step 3. For any dz × dz invertible matrix L,
                                       X             dz
                                                     Y
                           det(L) =          sign(π)    Lπ(k),k ̸= 0,
                                          π∈Πdz                k=1
where Πdz is the set of (dz )-permutations. This implies that there exists a permutation π ∈ Πdz so
that for all k ≤ dz , Lπ(k),k ̸= 0.

Applying this result to the invertible matrix Dfˆ(z)⊤ Df (v(z)),
                    ∃π ∈ Πd : ∀k ≤ dz , (Dfˆ(z)⊤ Df (v(z)))π(k),k ̸= 0
                              z

                                      dx
                                      X
                      =⇒ ∀k ≤ dz ,          Dfˆ(z)d,π(k) Df (v(z))d,k ̸= 0                                (40)
                                      d=1

                      =⇒ ∀k ≤ dz , ∃d1 : Dfˆ(z)d1 .π(k) ̸= 0 ̸= Df (v(z))d1 ,k .

Key idea. To show that Dfˆ(z)⊤ Df (v(z)) is a permutation-scaling matrix, we want to show that
this matrix has nonzero values only at entries of the form (π(k), k). We will prove this by contradiction,
using the existence of the observed feature yd1 from Equation 40.

Step 4. By contradiction, suppose there exists a pair of indices (k, k ′ ) such that k ′ ̸= π(k) and
                                              Xdx
                (Dfˆ(z)⊤ Df (v(z)))k′ ,k =        Dfˆ(z)⊤  k′ ,d Df (v(z))d,k ̸= 0 .                 (41)
                                                        d=1

This means that there exists a feature yd2 so that
                                  Dfˆ(z)d ,k′ ̸= 0 ̸= Df (v(z))
                                            2                            d2 ,k .              (42)
We know that d2 is not equal to d1 from Equation 40, since if d1 and d2 were the same index, then
yd1 would have two distinct parents if fˆ, namely π(k) and k ′ .
By selecting only columns d1 and d2 in Equation 35, we obtain the following equality
                             Dfˆ(z){d1 ,d2 } ,· = Df (v(z)){d1 ,d2 } ,· Dv(z).                            (43)
By (40) & (42) and the fact that both f and fˆ satisfy the “single-parent property”, we have
                                                                     π(k)     k′
                                          d1        0    ···   0      ∗       0      0      ···   0

                   Dfˆ(z){d1 ,d2 } ,· =                                                                   (44)
                                          d2        0    ···   0      0       ∗      0      ···   0

                                                                     k
                                        d           0    ···   0     ∗   0     ···       0

                Df (v(z)){d1 ,d2 } ,· = 1                                                    ,            (45)
                                        d2          0    ···   0     ∗   0     ···       0

where ∗ denotes nonzero entries. From the above, it is clear that Dfˆ(z){d1 ,d2 } ,· has a rank of 2 and
Df (v(z)){d1 ,d2 } ,· has a rank of 1. Since Dv(z) is invertible we have that the r.h.s. of (43) has rank
1. Equation (43) is thus a contradiction since the l.h.s. has rank 2.
Thus, (Dfˆ(z)⊤ Df (v(z)))k′ ,k ̸= 0 if and only if k ′ = π(k), where π is a (dz )-permutation. In other
words, Dfˆ(z)⊤ Df (v(z)) is a permutation-scaling matrix.
Going back to Equation 39, Dv(z)−1 is a permutation-scaling matrix since it is a product of a diagonal
matrix and a permutation-scaling matrix. Thus, its inverse, Dv(z) is also a permutation-scaling matrix.
The argument above holds point-wise, i.e. for each z. However, a priori, it is possible that the
permutation π changes for different values of z. It turns out this is impossible since that would violate
the fact that Dv(z) is continuous.


                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     O PTIMIZATION
C.1    AUGMENTED L AGRANGIAN M ETHOD

The main idea of the Augmented Lagrangian Method (ALM) is to remove constraints in an optimization
problem and instead add a penalty term to the objective (For more detailed explanations, see Nocedal
and Wright (60), Chapter 17). For an optimization problem where we aim to minimize L(x) subject
to a constraint h(x) = 0, the equivalent ALM objective is:
                                                               µk
                          L(x, λk , µk ) = L(x) + λk h(x) +       ||h(x)||2 .
                                                                2
To approximately solve the constrained problem, a sequence of problems will be solved where λk and
µk will be incrementally increased as k increases. A problem is considered solved when the loss on a
held-out dataset does not decrease. Then, a new problem is initialized with the values λk+1 and µk+1 :
                                                   ∗
                            λk+1 ← λk + µk · h(W(k)  )
                                   (
                                                     ∗             ∗
                                     η · µk , if h(W(k) ) > δ · h(W(k−1) )
                            µk+1 ←
                                     µk ,     otherwise
                            ∗
where µk > 0 and η > 1 and W(k) is the approximate solution to the k-th problem.

C.2    P ROJECTED G RADIENT

The projected gradient descent method can be used when some parameters are under constraints. In
general, we proceed in two steps: 1) perform a step of gradient descent and 2) project the result on
the feasible set. More formally, we do a normal gradient descent step from xk :
                                         yk+1 = xk − α∇f (xk ),

and then we project the result yk+1 on the feasible set Q:
                                                    1
                                     xk+1 = arg min ||x − yk+1 ||22 .
                                                x∈Q 2

In our case, the feasible set is R≥0 , thus the projection is simply:

                                                  yk+1 if yk+1 ≥ 0
                                       xk+1 =                                                             (46)
                                                  0       otherwise.

D     DATASETS
D.1    S YNTHETIC DATASETS

Here, we detail the generative process of the synthetic datasets. The four main steps are:

      1. Sample transition graphs G ∈ {0, 1}τ ×dz ×dz .
      2. Sample mechanisms to generate the latent variables z with relations following G.
      3. Sample a matrix W .
      4. Sample mechanisms of the decoding function to generate the observable x from z.

1- Graphs G. For the adjacency matrices representing the lagged relations, we sampled independently
Gkij ∼ Bernoulli(p) where p ∈ [0, 1] is a parameter corresponding to the probability of adding an edge.
As a reminder: Gkij = 1 if and only if zjt−k is a parent of zit . Note that since these adjacency matrices rep-
resent links at different timesteps, we don’t need to sample DAGs since it is impossible to create cycles.
For the graph G1 , we systematically set the elements of its diagonal to 1. These edges correspond
to the relations of zit to themselves at the previous timestep: zit−1 . This assumption is often observed
in real-world phenomena and is commonly used to generate time-series datasets (78; 49).


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      10                                    10

                       5                                     5

                       0                                     0

                       5                                     5

                      10                                    10
                           10   5     0      5       10          10         5   0    5   10

Figure 6: Examples of nonlinear functions used for the dynamics. For large values, the functions
behave as linear functions.


2- Dynamic’s functions. We first explain how we generate the mechanisms for the nonlinear case
and, since it is a particular case, we then explain the linear case.
It is not obvious in general how to sample a nonlinear generative process that is stationary or, at
least, that won’t greatly diverge over time. In order to have non-divergent generative processes with
nonlinear functions, we follow (49) (See Theorem 1). Their method relies on two tricks: 1) the process
is additive and the functions used have a linear behavior for large values, and 2) the coefficients are
chosen so that an equivalent linear process would be stationary.
We use the following structural equation:
                                            dz
                                          τ X
                                          X
                                 zit :=             Gkij Akij skij (zjt−k ) + ϵi ,
                                          k=0 j=1

where ϵi ∼ N (0, 1) and the coefficients Aij are independently sampled from U([−1, −0.2] ∪ [0.2, 1])
and will be reweighted to ensure stationary. The range around 0 is removed to ensure that the data is
faithful to the graph. Following (78), each nonlinear dynamic’s function skij has a structure similar to:
                                                                      −x2
                                          f1 (x) = x(1 + 4e 2 )


                                                                      −x2
                                      f2 (x) = x(1 + 4x3 e 2 ).

See the code to see all the functions that were used. As it can be noticed in Fig. 6, these functions are
almost linear when x is large. Then, to make the process stationary, we have to make sure that the
linear process that has the same coefficient matrix A would be stationary. One way to verify this is
to make sure that all the eigenvalues of the following matrix H have a modulus of less than one:
                                            A Aτ −1 . . . A0
                                           τ                       
                                           Iτ      0     ...    0
                                    H=                          ..                                 (47)
                                             0     ...     0      .
                                                                   
                                             0      0     Iτ     0

To do so, we compute the spectrum ρ(H) and we divide each matrix Ak by ρ(H)k+1 . The resulting
process will be stationary (49).
For the linear datasets, we follow the same sampling process except that skij is the identity.
                                                                                   x ×dz
3- Graph F. To generate the observable x from z, we first sample the matrix W ∈ Rd≥0     which
is non-negative and orthogonal following these steps:

      1. We first sample an assignment matrix M ∈ {0, 1}dx ×dz where in each row, only one element
         is set to 1 and the rest is equal to 0. We also make sure that for each column, there is at least
         one element equal to 1.
      2. We sample independently Aij ∼ U([0.2, 1]) and mask it: W̃ := M ⊙ A.


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3. Finally, we normalize the column of W to ensure that it is orthogonal. In other words:
                   W̃
         W:j := ||W̃ :j|| .
                      :j   2


4- Decoding functions. In the nonlinear case, each function rj (from Section 3.3 §3) was randomly
sampled either as a linear function or as a nonlinear function. The nonlinear function takes the
following general form:
                                    f (x) = ax(2σ(10x) − 1),

where a ∼ U[0.2, 0.7]. This nonlinear function is approximately an absolute value function
but is still differentiable since it is smooth at x = 0. In the linear case, each function rj is the identity.
We sample the observable x following:
                                       xtj | z t ∼ N (rj (W z t ), σj2 ),

where σj2 = 0.1 and 0.5 in experiments with linear and nonlinear decoding, respectively.

D.2    R EAL - WORLD DATASETS

Here, we describe how the sea-level pressure data was regridded to an icosahedral-hexagonal grid to
achieve an equal-area projection (54; 55). This form of regridding is motivated by the fact that the poles
are singularities in the traditional longitude-latitude grid, i.e. that each grid cell contains a different
amount of total surface area (for 1◦ × 1◦ resolution, the length of a grid cell decreases from ≈ 111 km
at the equator to 0 km at the poles). This means that more grid cells represent a smaller area the further
we move from the equator towards the south or north poles, leading to an overrepresentation of polar
regions and an underrepresentation of equatorial regions. One way to address this issue is by projecting
the data on a geodesic grid, such as the icosahedral-hexagonal grid (80), as nowadays used in climate
models (e.g. ICON, see Pham et al. (66)). By regridding the data we can ensure that northern/southern
weather regions are not overrepresented in the clustering and during the causal discovery process.
The sea-level pressure data was projected to the GME icosahedral grid (55), with first-order
conservative remapping (32) and the number of intervals N I = 24 to match the original resolution of
2.5◦ × 2.5◦ at the equator as closely as possible. The original netCDF4 input files had to be converted
to GRIB2 files for this purpose since netCDF4 files can only store quadrilateral data, whereas GRIB2
has no such restrictions (15). After making the original data GRIB2 compliant and converting it to
this format, Climate Data Operators (CDO) (82), was used to remap the longitude-latitude gridded
data to the GME icosahedral-hexagonal grid. Two parameters are relevant during the regridding
process: 1) N I, the number of intervals, and 2) the remapping function. The number of intervals
was chosen in a manner to resemble the resolution of the original data at the equator, and in a manner
to allow the recursive generation of bisected equilateral triangles (90). The remapping function was
chosen to ensure a monotonic remapping that can deal with a fine-to-coarse setting. First-order or
second-order conservative remapping seem to be the best choices for that and we decided to use
first-order conservative remapping since it is sufficiently accurate and easier to handle. The regridded
sea-level pressure files in GRIB2 format can be easily loaded with the xarray package in Python (24).

E     M ETHODS AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

E.1    VARIMAX -PCMCI

Varimax-PCMCI is a two-step method where 1) a dimensionality reduction is conducted to obtain time
series of latent variables and then 2) a causal discovery method is applied on the latent level time series.
We follow Tibau et al. (87) by using PCA with a Varimax-rotation as the dimensionality reduction
method. This method was observed empirically in Tibau et al. (87) to lead to better results. For more de-
tails on PCA-Varimax, see Appendix I. For the causal discovery algorithm we use PCMCI+ (75) which
is an update to PCMCI, that also supports instantaneous connections. For the conditional independence
tests used by PCMCI+, we use the partial correlation test for linear dynamics and the CMI-knn test (74),
which is a test based on a nearest-neighbor estimator of conditional mutual information, for nonlinear dy-
namics. We use the implementation from https://github.com/jakobrunge/tigramite
and https://github.com/xtibau/savar/tree/master/savar.


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Visualization of icosahedral-hexagonal grids with different N I’s (number of intervals on
triangle edge). the grid is generated recursively by halving the triangles, resulting in new, finer triangles.
The figure stems from Majewski (54).



The significance level in PCMCI+ was set to αPC = 0.2 and the time lags of causal links were
restricted to τ ≥ 1, hence, only lagged links are considered. PCMCI+ then still slightly differs from
PCMCI. Both share the PC1 phase that detects lagged (supersets) of parents, but they differ in the
second phase because the MCI tests are only restricted to the superset of parents found in the first
phase in PCMCI+ (75), whereas all lagged links are tested again in case of PCMCI.


E.2    CDSD

For all neural networks, we use leaky-ReLU as activation functions. For the neural networks gj fitting
the nonlinear dynamic, we used MLPs with 2 hidden layers and 8 hidden units. For the neural network
rj fitting the nonlinear encoding, instead of having dx functions, we use some parameter sharing in
order to keep the number of parameters low. We use a single neural network that receives as input
the masked W z t and an embedding (dimension 10) of the index s(j) is concatenated to the input. This
neural network has 2 hidden layers and 32 hidden units. The log of the variance terms and the matrix
                                                              1
W are free parameters initialized respectively to −4 and U[ 10d z
                                                                  , d1z ]. The parameters Γ are initialized
to 5 which corresponds to an almost full graph (i.e. σ(Γ) ≈ 1). We use the optimizer RMSProp (22)
with a learning rate of 1e − 3 and batch size of 64.


E.3    MCC M ETRIC

As stated in the main text, the mean coefficient correlation (MCC) is a metric commonly used in causal
representation learning to assess the quality of the learned representation. It is necessary since the
identifiability result is up to permutation. We use an implementation from Khemakhem et al. (37)
(https://github.com/ilkhem/icebeem/blob/master/metrics/mcc.py). This
corresponds to calculating the Pearson correlation between the learned representation ẑ and the
ground-truth z under all possible permutations, selecting the permutation π leading to the highest
score, and taking its mean. To calculate the SHD between the learned graph Ĝ and G, we first apply
the permutation π to the learned graph.


                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     H YPERPARAMETER S EARCH
For all experimental conditions, we use the default hyperparameters specified in Table 1 and 2. These
values were determined based on the SHD from a few experiments on distinct synthetic datasets than
those used for evaluation. The regularisation coefficient (for the graph sparsity of CDSD) and the
alpha term (the significance threshold for the conditional independence tests of Varimax-PCMCI)
have a bigger impact in terms of performance and accordingly they vary per dataset. For both methods,
they have been tested respectively on the log scale [−3, 1] and [−11, −1]. For these values, for each
experimental condition, 10 datasets (distinct from evaluation) were used each with 10 different values of
regularisation and alpha. The average of the parameter value leading to the best SHD of the 10 datasets
was used for the synthetic experiments. As stated earlier, both dz and τ are given when using synthetic
datasets. In the linear dynamics case, Varimax-PCMCI uses the partial correlation test and CDSD
uses neural networks gj without hidden layers. In the nonlinear dynamics case, Varimax-PCMCI uses
the CMI-knn test and CDSD uses neural networks gj without 2 hidden layers and 8 hidden units.
For the real-world dataset, we reused the same default hyperparameters. For the regularisation
coefficient, we selected it based on the mean-square error between the prediction x̂t and xt on a
held-out testing set. The split ratio is 0.8 for the training set and 0.2 for the testing set.

                             Table 1: Default hyperparameters for CDSD

                           CDSD hyperparameters
                           ALM parameters:
                           threshold: 10−4 , µ0 : 10−3 , γ0 : 0, η: 2, δ: 0.9
                           Optimizer:
                           RMSProp, learning rate: 10−3 , batch size: 64
                           Transition NN (gj ):
                           Nonlinearity: Leaky-ReLU,
                           # hidden layers: [linear = 0, nonlinear = 2],
                           # hidden units: 8
                           Encoder/Decoder NN for nonlinear encoding:
                           Nonlinearity: Leaky-ReLU,
                           # hidden layers: 2,
                           # hidden units: 32


                           Table 2: Default hyperparameters for PCMCI+

                         PCMCI+ hyperparameters
                         αP C = 0.2
                         τmin = 1
                         CI test: linear = partical corr., nonlinear = CMI-knn


G     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
G.1    RUNNING T IME

We show the running time of CDSD and Varimax-PCMCI as a function of the number of samples and
the number of latent variables. Note that the methods have not been highly optimized and that these
running times are only given to give a general idea and assess the trends of growth. Varimax-PCMCI
is much faster than CDSD when using partial correlation as the conditional independence test (see
the left panels of Fig. 8 and 9). However, for the nonlinear dynamics, CDSD is much faster, whereas
Varimax-PCMCI often requires more than 24 hours to run. We only included cases where the time
was under 24 hours (see the right panels of Fig. 8 and 9).
In Figure 8, it can be observed that for linear dynamics, the running time is almost constant in function
of the number of samples. However, for the nonlinear dynamics, the time for Varimax-PCMCI


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               Execution time wrt the number of samples
                                          Linear dynamics                                                            Nonlinear dynamics
                       12                                                                         200                                                M-PCMCI
                                                                                                                                                     CDSD
                       10                                                                         175
                                                                                                  150
                        8
                                                                                                  125

          Time (min)


                                                                                     Time (min)
                        6                                                                         100
                        4                                                                           75

                        2                                                                           50
                                                                                                    25
                        0
                              1000       2000       3000         4000        5000                         1000       2000       3000          4000        5000
                                           Number of samples                                                           Number of samples


Figure 8: Comparison of the running time with respect to the number of samples in linear and nonlinear
dynamics settings.


                                                        Execution time wrt the number of latent variables
                                            Linear dynamics                                             Nonlinear dynamics
                       20.0                                                                                                                           M-PCMCI
                                                                                                    600                                               CDSD
                       17.5
                       15.0                                                                         500
                       12.5                                                                         400
          Time (min)


                                                                                       Time (min)

                       10.0
                                                                                                    300
                        7.5
                                                                                                    200
                        5.0
                        2.5                                                                         100
                        0.0                                                                           0
                              6      8     10    12       14      16    18    20                          6      8     10    12       14      16     18    20
                                         Number of latent variables                                                  Number of latent variables


Figure 9: Comparison of the running time with respect to the number of latent variables in linear and
nonlinear dynamics settings.



increases steeply and is > 24h for 5000 samples. In Figure 9, it can be observed that, as expected,
the running time increases as the number of latent variables of the model increases. The same pattern
can be observed for Varimax-PCMCI: while the running time is extremely low for linear functions,
it is very high and only below 24 hours when 5 latent variables (with 5000 samples) are considered.
All experiments were run on AMD EPYC 7742 2.25GHz 64-Core Processor with 40G of RAM. We
present in Table 3 the total running time for each experiment.


                                         Table 3: Running time for each set of experiments

                                                   Synthetic experiments
                                                   Linear dynamics, linear decoder:
                                                   CDSD: 76 hours
                                                   Varimax-PCMCI: 0.3 hours
                                                   Nonlinear dynamics, linear decoder:
                                                   CDSD: 116 hours
                                                   Varimax-PCMCI: 1212 hours
                                                   Linear dynamics, nonlinear decoder:
                                                   CDSD: 383 hours
                                                   Varimax-PCMCI: 0.03 hours
                                                   Ablation study: 4.3 hours
                                                   Real-world experiments: 75 hours


                                                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          4.0                         15
                10                  10                    3.5
                                                                                      10     CDSD



          SHD
                                                          3.0                                Var-PCMCI
                 5
                                     5                    2.5                          5
                 0                                        2.0
                     10        20        1   2      3        0.15               0.3        2000 4000
                          dz                                    graph density (p)          # samples

      Figure 10: Comparison in terms of SHD (lower is better) on nonlinear dynamics datasets.


Figure 11: Spatial partitioning learned by CDSD using a lower regularisation. The dashed lines in the
causal graph represent edges that were not present in the main text.


G.2    S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS

We show in Fig. 10 the results of CDSD on all the different experimental conditions in the nonlinear
dynamics case. These results were not included in the main text since, as explained in the previous
section, Varimax-PCMCI had a running time too high in most conditions. It can be observed that
overall the nonlinear dynamics seems to be a more challenging task than its linear counterpart.
Otherwise, the general trends are similar (improvement with the number of samples, deterioration
as the other parameters increase).

G.3    R EAL - WORLD E XPERIMENT

In this section, we show additional results on the real-world dataset, namely we show an alternate
result using a lower regularisation, we show more clearly the learned clusters and we show additional
results using a lower number of latents.
In Fig. 11 we show an alternate result that had a similar validation loss, but learned a denser graph.
Overall, the conclusions remain the same. It can be observed that the learned spatial aggregation
is nearly identical to the one in the main text. The graph is denser, but the same general pattern is
observed: G1 is denser, the diagonal has edges, etc. Furthermore, a similar pattern can be observed
between the nodes related to ENSO with two additional edges.
In the main text, we claimed that the learned clusters are localized. Since in the main figure of the
real-world application (Fig. 5) some neighboring clusters have very similar colors, for clarity, we show
in Fig. 12 all the learned clusters separately. It can be observed that all the clusters are well localized
even if this is not directly enforced in CDSD. In contrast, if CDSD without any constraints on W is
used, the learned clusters are not localized (Fig. 15 and Fig. 16) and regions specific to ENSO are
now all in a unique cluster.
We also investigated using a number of latent relatively smaller (dz = 20). Fifty latents were chosen in
the main text since it is close to what has been used in similar studies (60 were used in (78)). In Fig. 13 we
present the learned clustering. It can be seen that the coarser aggregation has many regions that are the
union of the one observed in Fig. 5, however, interestingly, the regions related to ENSO (WPAC, CPAC,


                                                     26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


EPAC, but not ATL) are still separated. Contrary to using fifty latents, some regions are composed of
disconnected regions potentially indicating that the number of latent variables is too low, see Fig. 14.

H     E XTENSIONS OF CDSD

H.1    U SING CDSD IN M ULTIVARIATE AND M ULTI -S UBJECT SETTINGS

Multivariate case. Researchers are often interested in multivariate problems where each feature
might require different clustering. For the climate example, researchers might have several features
of interest: sea-level pressure, temperature, precipitation, etc. While we only presented the univariate
version of CDSD, it can easily be used as a multivariate method by slightly modifying W .
Assume we have d features of interest. Reusing the notation from Section 3, let xtki and zkj  t
                                                                                                be the
observable and latent variables at time t pertaining to the k-th feature. Note that now the cardinality
of dkx and dkz can vary in function of k. As a matter of fact, since they are different features, it
might be adequate to model them at a different coarsening. We denote the total dimensionality by
       Pd                   Pd
dx := k=1 dkx and dz := k=1 dkz .
For a feature k we assume the observables xk can only be related to the latent variables zk . This
amounts to blacklisting some edges in W ∈ Rdz ×dx . Thus, W will be a block matrix of the form:

                                           1
                                           W
                                                                            
                                                   W2                      
                                                             ..            ,                              (48)
                                                                  .        
                                                                       Wk
                 k     k
where W k ∈ Rdz ×dx is the matrix defining the connections of the variable related to the feature k.
Besides this change, the orthogonality constraint can be directly applied to each matrix W k .
Multiple subjects case. In many scientific applications such as neurosciences, many subjects are
observed and it is often assumed that they share common properties. For example, in a brain imaging
application, one could assume that the brain regions are invariant, whereas the connectivity between
these regions is patient-specific (as in Monti and Hyvärinen (56)). Similarly to the multivariate
case, we can use graphs with an extra dimension (G ∈ {0, 1}dp ×τ ×dz ×dz where dp is the number of
patients) and blacklist connections along the dimension related to the patient.

H.2    S UPPORTING I NSTANTANEOUS C AUSAL R ELATIONSHIPS

In order to support instantaneous relations, we add two components: 1) a graph G0 and the parameters
Γ0 to the generative model, and 2) an acyclicity constraint to the objective. Note that contrary
to G1 , . . . , Gτ , the graph G0 has to be a directed acyclic graph (DAG) in order to have a valid
factorization. We have the following modified transition model:
                                                      dz
                                                      Y
                                  p(z t | z <t ) :=         p(zjt | zpaG0 , z <t ).                         (49)
                                                                        j
                                                      j=1

Each conditional is:
            p(zjt | zpaG0 , z <t ) := h(zjt ; gj ([G0j: ⊙ z t , G1j: ⊙ z t−1 , . . . , Gτj: ⊙ z t−τ ]) ).   (50)
                           j


The observation and the density models remain the same. For the objective, we add the acyclicity
constraint (95) on Γ0 :
                                            0
                                    Tr(eσ(Γ ) ) − dz = 0.                                   (51)
This constraint formulation is continuous and thus differentiable. We can then use the quadratic penalty
method to optimize this constrained problem (58). However, in this case, the identifiability of the graph
G is not guaranteed: at best the Markov Equivalence Class can be recovered or additional assumptions
are needed such as assuming an additive noise model.


                                                         27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.3    S UPPORTING I NTERVENTIONS

In order to support interventions on z, the model can be adapted following Brouillard et al. (9); Gao
et al. (17); Lei et al. (48). Assume that we have interventional data from K different interventions.
The k-th interventional distribution of the transition model p(k) (z t | z <t ) with the intervention target
Ik ⊆ [dz ] is given by:
                                                Y                    Y
                          p(k) (z t | z <t ) :=   p(k) (zjt | z <t )   p(zjt | z <t ),                  (52)
                                              j∈Ik                      j ∈I
                                                                          / k

where p(k) are conditionals different from the observational conditionals except for k = 0 where
I0 := ∅. Since there are no interventions on x, the conditional p(xt | z t ) remains the same as in the
observational case. The joint interventional distribution is:
                                                     T
                                                     Y
                           p(k) (x≤T , z ≤T ) :=           p(k) (z t | z <t )p(xt | z t ) .            (53)
                                                     t=1


In terms of ELBO, we now have:
                                              T h
                                              X
                        log p(k) (x≤T ) ≥            Ezt ∼q(zt |xt ) log p(xt | z t ) −

                                                                                                       (54)
                                              t=1
                                                  h                                  ii
                             Ez<t ∼q(z<t |x<t ) KL q(z t | xt ) || p(k) (z t | z <t ) .                (55)

                              (k)
We denote this ELBO as Lx . Finally, the objective changes to:
                             K
                             X                     h            i
                                    EG∼σ(Γ) Ex∼p(k) L(k)

                     max                             x (W, Γ, ϕ)   − λs ||σ(Γ)||1
                     W,Γ,ϕ
                             k=0
                                                                                                       (56)
                    s.t. W is orthogonal and non-negative,
where ϕ is now augmented with different parameters for each conditional p(k) .

I     PCA-VARIMAX
I.1   PCA

PCA is a commonly used dimensionality reduction method that finds a linear mapping W between the
data and a latent projection having a smaller dimensionality. It can be framed as finding the projection
that maximizes the variance or, alternatively, as the projection that minimizes the reconstruction
loss (64; 23). If we consider the latter formulation, we can write the PCA method as the following
optimization problem:
                                         L(x; W ) = ||x − W W T x||22
                                        Ŵ ∈ arg min              L(x; W ),
                                             W s.t.W T W =Idz



where x ∈ Rdx and W ∈ Rdx ×dz .
In that case, the matrix W is not identifiable since any rotation would lead to the same fit of PCA
(as already noted by (3)). To see this, suppose that a rotation matrix R ∈ Rdz ×dz is applied to
W . The resulting matrix W̃ = W R is still orthogonal (since orthogonal matrices are closed under
multiplication) and leads to the same loss since RRT = I:
                                      L(x; W̃ ) = ||x − W̃ W̃ T x||22
                                                = ||x − W RRT W T x||22
                                                = ||x − W W T x||22 .


                                                        28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I.2   T HE VARIMAX ROTATION

In practice, researchers from many different fields, such as Earth science (88; 87), use a criterion called
Varimax (33) in order to find a particular rotation of W. The optimal rotation according to this criterion
is given by:
                                     1 X  dx X dz              dx       dz           2
                                                              X     1 X
                  RVAR = arg max                  (W R)4ij −               (W R)2ij      .             (57)
                                 R    dz i=1 j=1              i=1
                                                                    dz j=1

While it leads to the same loss, this rotation has been shown empirically to lead to more interpretable
variables (31; 68) (i.e. the latent dimensions are recognized as important factors of variation by experts
in the fields). The criterion corresponds to maximizing the sum of the variances of the squared loadings
Wij2 . Intuitively, this criterion will make the large loadings larger and the small loadings smaller
making the rotated matrix sparse. The good representation learned by PCA-Varimax when W respects
the single-parent assumption could be explained by the identifiability results of Zheng et al. (96). They
show that, under a more general sparsity assumption than the single-parent assumption, W can be
identified using an adequate sparsity regularisation.

I.3   E MPIRICAL VALIDATION

In this section, we show empirically that PCA-Varimax can learn a disentangled representation when
the decoding function is linear and W respects the single-parent assumption. The results stress the
fact that PCA without the Varimax rotation generally leads to entangled representation.
The PCA-Varimax algorithm used in Varimax-PCMCI can be decomposed in three steps:

       • Step 1. Apply PCA and recover a matrix Ŵ .
       • Step 2. Find the rotation matrix RVAR that maximizes the Varimax criterion. Apply this
         matrix to Ŵ :
                                                ŴVAR := Ŵ RVAR .
       • Step 3. Apply a reflection matrix S:
                                                  +
                                                ŴVAR := ŴVAR S,
         where Sjj = sgn(arg maxi |Wij |) and Sij = 0 for all i ̸= j.

For this experiment, we do an ablation study of these three steps, namely we consider the three
conditions: 1) PCA without rotation (PCA), 2) PCA with the Varimax rotation (PCA-Var), and 3)
PCA with the Varimax rotation and reflection (PCA-Var+). We reuse the default synthetic datasets
with the same alpha values that were chosen in the main hyperparameter search. For each condition,
we present the average on 10 different datasets.
In terms of representation, it can be seen in Figure 17 that the Varimax rotation is essential to learn
a disentangled representation as observed by the MCC metric. Learning a good representation has
a repercussion on the recovery of the graph G as shown by the SHD metric. The reflection operation
might flip signs but does not have any impact in terms of disentanglement. However, if we look at the
recovered matrices Ŵ in terms of absolute error with W , the reflection allows us to recover a matrix
more similar to W .


                                                    29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Figure 12: Representation of each region learned by CDSD.



                                              30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Figure 13: Spatial partitioning learned by CDSD using a low number of latents (dz = 20).


Figure 14: Representation of each region learned by CDSD using a low number of latents (dz = 20).


       Figure 15: Spatial partitioning learned by CDSD without constraint on W (dz = 50).


                                               31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Figure 16: Representation of each region learned by CDSD without constraint on W (dz = 50).



                                              32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Effect of using rotation and reflection with PCA
           50                                    1.00                                          0.08
                                                 0.95                                          0.07
           40
                                                 0.90                                          0.06
           30                                    0.85                                          0.05
                                                                                       W_MAE
                                           MCC
     SHD


                                                 0.80                                          0.04
           20
                                                 0.75                                          0.03
           10                                    0.70                                          0.02
                                                                                               0.01
                                                 0.65
            0                                                                                  0.00
                PCA   PCA-Var   PCA-Var+                PCA      PCA-Var    PCA-Var+                  PCA   PCA-Var   PCA-Var+

Figure 17: Comparison of 1) PCA without rotation (PCA), 2) PCA with the Varimax rotation (PCA-
Var), and 3) PCA with the Varimax rotation and reflection (PCA-Var+). The Varimax rotation is crucial
to recover the graph (left panel) and a good representation (middle panel). In order to recover the matrix
W, the reflection operation is necessary (right panel).


                                                                33
