Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ULTI -C ONCEPT T2I-Z ERO : T WEAKING O NLY THE
T EXT E MBEDDINGS AND N OTHING E LSE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                     A BSTRACT
            Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models have enabled the photo-
            realistic generation of images from text prompts. Despite the great progress, ex-
            isting models still struggle to generate compositional multi-concept images nat-
            urally, limiting their ability to visualize human imagination. While several re-
            cent works have attempted to address this issue, they either introduce additional
            training or adopt guidance at inference time. In this work, we consider a more
            ambitious goal: natural multi-concept generation using a pre-trained diffusion
            model, and with almost no extra cost. To achieve this goal, we identify the limita-
            tions in the text embeddings used for the pre-trained text-to-image diffusion mod-
            els. Specifically, we observe concept dominance and non-localized contribution
            that severely degrade multi-concept generation performance. We further design
            a minimal low-cost solution that overcomes the above issues by tweaking (not
            re-training) the text embeddings for more realistic multi-concept text-to-image
            generation. Our Correction by Similarities method tweaks the embedding of
            concepts by collecting semantic features from most similar tokens to localize the
            contribution. To avoid mixing features of concepts, we also apply Cross-Token
            Non-Maximum Suppression, which excludes the overlap of contributions from
            different concepts. Experiments show that our approach outperforms previous
            methods in text-to-image, image manipulation, and personalization tasks, despite
            not introducing additional training or inference costs to the diffusion steps.


 Stable Diffusion   Ours     Stable Diffusion   Prompt2Prompt       Ours   Target Images   Custom Diffusion   Ours

Figure 1: Object Dominance and Non-Localized Contribution make multi-concept image syn-
thesis particularly complex. As a result, existing image manipulation and personalization methods
struggle with multiple concepts. Our proposed method addresses these issues and demonstrates its
capabilities in text-to-image, image manipulation, and personalization for multiple concepts.

1     I NTRODUCTION
Recently, large-scale diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022) have enabled
photo-realistic text-to-image generation. Querying with a text prompt, users receive high-quality
images that follow the text description. Numerous works have attempted to further improve the
image generation qualities in terms of resolution (Vahdat et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia
et al., 2022), personalization ability (Kumari et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023), and diversity (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans, 2022).


                                                                1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Despite the progress, heavy prompt engineering (Xie et al., 2023) is needed to generate visually
pleasing images. Moreover, it is hard to obtain high-quality prompts for multi-concept composi-
tional generation since the design space of prompt engineering is greatly enlarged. Users often wish
to synthesize specific concepts within the same image, but obtaining ideal multi-concept results is
much harder than single-concept ones due to the complexity of text prompts. When generating
multiple concepts, it is quite common for the generated image to confuse the attributes of different
objects or relations between objects (Kumari et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022). This is partially due to
the limited quality of text prompts in the LAION dataset, where a considerable domain gap exists
between the user-generated text prompts and captions of images in the training set (Xie et al., 2023).
Previous works have attempted various fine-tuning methods and utilized inference-time additional
guidance. (Kumari et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023) overcome the limitations by in-
troducing well-designed, high-quality annotations to augment the training dataset. By fine-tuning
the diffusion models on images containing multiple concepts and corresponding dense annotations,
the models understand multi-concept compositional relationships better. Another line of work (Liu
et al., 2022; Chefer et al., 2023; Phung et al., 2023) focuses on improving pre-trained diffusion
models with inference-time guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022). These approaches can sample more
realistic multi-concept images by manipulating the conditional distribution through classifier guid-
ance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) and classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022). However,
these approaches introduce additional computation costs for each diffusion step at either training or
inference time to achieve their desired performance. This prompts the need for a minimal, low-cost
method approach to generating multiple concepts.
We present a novel task of zero-shot multi-concept text-to-image generation and outline an econom-
ical solution, bypassing the necessity for training or optimizing at each diffusion step. This involves
merely tweaking the text embeddings employed in text-to-image diffusion models. In our pilot
study, we evaluated the efficacy of text embedding and identified two main caveats:

       • We pinpoint the first problem of Concept Dominance. In certain text prompts, one concept
         exerts greater influence due to a higher norm, overshadowing other prompts with smaller
         norms. In such scenarios, the diffusion model is inclined to prioritize the generation of the
         dominant concept, neglecting the others.
       • Even when all concepts are adequately synthesized, we observe a second roadblocker
         termed Non-localized Contribution. Here, the contributions of concepts in the attention
         maps are distributed across other tokens, including null tokens. This dispersion can be at-
         tributed to the pivotal role played by those tokens positioned after the end-of-sentence of
         the text prompt. Specifically, when these tokens correlate with the semantic regions of a
         particular concept via cross-attention, it may lead to a distortion of the attended concept in
         the resultant output.

To address the two-fold challenges, we propose a comprehensive framework. First, we introduce a
Corrections-by-Similarities approach to combat the non-localized contribution issue. Specifically,
we find similar embeddings and combine them all by their similarity scores to replace the original
embedding of a concept. Second, our Cross-Token Non-Maximum Suppression method minimizes
the overlap of contributions of different concepts to avoid mixing their features. This technique
also helps to retain the contribution of neglected tokens in the first stages of the diffusion process,
which leads to the proper generation of all concepts. As shown in Fig. 1, our method not only
presents multi-concept text-to-image results more loyal to the text prompts than the original Stable
Diffusion, but also delivers more realistic image manipulation and better identity in personalization
compared with existing baselines.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

       • The first pilot study on a minimal, low-cost design of zero-shot multi-concept text-to-image
         generation. We not only eliminate the need for re-training a pre-trained text-to-image dif-
         fusion model, but also ensure that our adjustments solely impact the text embedding prior
         to the diffusion steps, leaving the diffusion timesteps unaffected.
       • Two novel, effective post-hoc techniques to tweak the text embeddings during multi-
         concept text-to-image generation without re-training. Our Correction by Similarities
         method tweaks the embedding of concepts by aggregating semantic attributes from most


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         similar tokens, thereby localizing the contribution. To avoid mixing features of concepts,
         we further introduce Cross-Token Non-Maximum Suppression, which eliminates overlap-
         ping contributions of different concepts.
       • Extensive experimental results on multi-concept text-to-image, image manipulation, and
         personalization demonstrate our superiority against prior methods. Our method effectively
         addresses the object dominance and non-localized contribution issues, delivering better
         text-image aligned image synthesis results, more realistic image manipulations, and better
         identity preservation in personalization for multiple concepts.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
2.1   M ULTI - CONCEPT T EXT- TO - IMAGE G ENERATION

Existing methods for multi-concept text-to-image generation either introduce additional training
on multi-concept datasets or require additional optimization-based guidance at each inference step.
GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023) proposes gated self-attention layers for multi-concept compositional gen-
eration. Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023) fine-tunes only the attention layers for subject-
driven generation. Break-A-Scene (Avrahami et al., 2023) proposes union sampling to enhance the
generation of concept combinations. Composable Diffusion (Liu et al., 2022) proposes a frame-
work that composes multiple outputs of a pre-trained diffusion model. StructureDiffusion (Feng
et al., 2022) adopts consistency trees or scene graphs to split text prompts into several noun phrases
and combine the attention operations afterward. Attend-and-Excite (Chefer et al., 2023) opti-
mizes the cross-attention maps to attend to all subject tokens or excite their activations. Attention-
refocusing (Phung et al., 2023) leverages an intermediate spatial layout generated by LLM and
further guides the attention maps via the layout predictions. Contrary to the aforementioned meth-
ods, our study addresses a particularly challenging low-cost scenario in which we only tweak the
text embeddings before starting the diffusion process. This method obviates the need for fine-tuning
and incurs no additional costs during each inference diffusion step.

2.2   I MAGE M ANIPULATION VIA D IFFUSION M ODEL

Text-driven image editing has attracted much attention thanks to the remarkable progress in text-
driven image synthesis. Early approaches leverage text-guided image inpainting (Lugmayr et al.,
2022) or SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021) for simple textural edits. InstructPix2pix (Brooks et al., 2023)
constructs a conditional diffusion model based on SDEdit-generated data. Later methods (Hertz
et al., 2023; Parmar et al., 2023) study to manipulate the cross-attention maps in the diffusion pro-
cess for more complex shape edits. Prompt mixing (Patashnik et al., 2023) and Self-guidance (Ep-
stein et al., 2023) further leverage self-attention maps to perform object-level shape control over the
generative process. Specifically, in the context of editing multi-concept images, we observe that
existing attention-based editing techniques frequently encounter challenges stemming from non-
localized contributions inside attention maps. With the implementation of our proposed strategies,
optimally formulated text embeddings facilitate superior image editing than existing baselines.

2.3   P ERSONALIZED T EXT- TO - IMAGE G ENERATION

Personalized generation targets generating user-specified concepts and preserving the identity of the
concept. DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) optimizes the whole diffusion model using a special token
in the text prompt. Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022) optimizes the text embedding while keeping
the diffusion model frozen. Custom Diffusion (Kumari et al., 2023) fine-tunes only the attention
layers. Perfusion (Tewel et al., 2023), SVDiff (Han et al., 2023), LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) further
introduce the decomposition of weight kernels during fine-tuning. Specialist Diffusion (Lu et al.,
2023) presents a style-specific personalized model via plug-and-play sample-efficient fine-tuning.
SuTI (Chen et al., 2023) adopts apprenticeship learning to mimic the behavior of DreamBooth
experts. ELITE (Wei et al., 2023) designs a global and a local mapping network for customization.
XTI (Voynov et al., 2023) extends textual inversion into a richer inversion space. NeTI (Alaluf
et al., 2023) learns to personalize concepts using a neural representation learned over a space-time
conditioning space. Given that our methodology centers on the formulation of suitable text
embeddings for multi-concept prompts, we demonstrate that the proposed approach can adaptively


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


extend the single-concept personalization method, NeTI (Alaluf et al., 2023), to accommodate
multi-concept personalization.

3     M ETHOD
Overview In this section, we first discuss the preliminaries of the latent diffusion model and
the cross-attention mechanism for text-conditioned image generation. Then, we illustrate in de-
tail the object dominance and non-localized contribution issues observed in the text embeddings for
multi-concept text prompts. Finally, we present our proposed low-cost framework, introducing our
Corrections-by-Similarities approach and Cross-Token Non-Maximum Suppression method.

3.1   P RELIMINARIES

Latent Diffusion Model In this work, we apply our method over Stable Diffusion (Rombach
et al., 2022) (SD), which has gained tremendous interest among the community since its release.
Unlike Dalle-2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) that operate on image space,
SD (Rombach et al., 2022) operates on the latent space of a pre-trained variational autoencoder. The
training process optimizes the weighted evidence lower bound (ELBO) (Ho et al., 2020; Kingma
et al., 2021):                         h                                  i
                                                                        2
                        LELBO (θ) = E w(t) ∥ϵθ (αt x0 + σt ϵ; t) − ϵ∥2 ,                          (1)
where ϵ ∼ N (0, I). w(t) are coefficients found to perform well when set to w(t) = 1 (Ho et al.,
2020). In the sampling process, we start with xT ∼ N (0, I), and then gradually reduce the noise
level as we reduce timestep t. Finally, at the end of the iterative process, we reach a clean latent
image, which can be further decoded by the pre-trained variational autoencoder into a clean RGB
image.

Cross Attention Mechanism for Text Conditioning Text-conditioned image generation is imple-
mented via cross-attention units connecting text embeddings and multi-scale feature maps extracted
from the input image. Text embeddings in SD (Rombach et al., 2022) are obtained via a pre-trained
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) text encoder. For an input latent image at resolution 64 × 64, the cross-
attention layers operate at resolutions of 64, 32, 16, and 8. For an image feature of size H × W
and lengths of text token N , we construct cross-attention maps of size H × W × N , where each
token attends to all spatial patches inside the image feature. Specifically, the value at (i, j, k) inside
the attention map refers to the information relationship between k-th text token and (i, j)-th spatial
location in the feature map. In this work, we analyze the attention maps and identify the issues
brought by text embeddings in multi-concept text-to-image generation.

3.2   T HE D EVIL IS IN THE T EXT-E NCODER

Modern text-guided image diffusion models, such as LDM (Rombach et al., 2022) and Imagen (Sa-
haria et al., 2022), are designed to generate images with the condition of a sentence. Even though
the models are trained on huge datasets, generating multiple concepts still remains challenging. In
many cases, the model is not able to generate all concepts properly. The challenges of multi-concept
image synthesis can be divided into the following parts: Object Dominance - when some concepts
dominate the generation process and others get neglected. Non-Localized Contribution - when all
concepts are synthesized, but their respective embeddings contribution is not localized (see Fig 4).
This behavior limits the opportunities for image manipulations of multiple concepts.

Object Dominance In multi-concept image synthesis, the order of the concepts in the text defines
dominance, and the first concept often becomes superior. As can be seen in Fig 2, switching the
input embeddings of the text encoder (d), causes switching dominance between concepts. However,
when switching output embeddings of the model (c), the dominance is not changed. This is because
the order of an embedding in the cross-attention layer is not decisive for dominance. The text en-
coder has defined the dominance in one of the embedding vectors beforehand. Also, reversing the
positional encoding of the text encoder (b) does not impose confusion between the dominant and
non-dominant concepts. This issue can be solved by tweaking the output of the text encoder before
conditioning the diffusion process. We noticed the embedding vector of the dominant concept often


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             (a)             (b)              (c)            (d)
Figure 2: Synthesized images with replacements of inputs and outputs of text-encoder. (a) original,
(b) reversed positional encoding, (c) switched output embeddings of “cat” and “dog” words, (d)
switched input embeddings of “cat” and “dog” words.


has a higher norm than non-dominant ones. In our simple experiment, we decrease the norm of the
dominant concept by a suppression strength s ∈ [0, 1]. A qualitative comparison between the results
of Attend&Excite (Chefer et al., 2023), A-STAR (Agarwal et al., 2023) can be found in Fig 3.


                                      Stable Diffusion   Attend&Excite       A-STAR   Suppression s = 0.5

Figure 3: A comparison of the results of solutions against concept dominance of “A photo of a cat
and a dog” prompt.
“A photo of a cat “A photo of a cat
   and a pot”        and a dog”


Figure 4: Cross-Attention visualization. In each group, from left to right, the cross-attention maps
correspond to the text tokens inside the prompt, followed by padding null tokens. Red tokens are
marked with red rectangles. Top: Concept Dominance, Bottom: Non-Localized Contribution.

Non-Localized Contribution Multi-concept image manipulation remains a challenging problem.
All concepts can be synthesized, but not all of them can be edited. This is due to the non-localized
contribution of embedding vectors. A concept can be generated by other embeddings, including the
embeddings of null tokens. In the second row of Fig 4, the pot is generated by the contribution of
null tokens, and its corresponding attention scores are too low. We believe the text encoder leads
to this phenomenon. Often, the embeddings of null tokens contain rich information about the text,
such as the features of the scene, main objects, attributes, and others. Due to the nature of the design
of text encoders, they often contain more information about the last concept with respect to the order


                                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in the text, than the first one. We computed cosine similarity and Euclidean distance between the
embeddings of the selected concepts and all other embeddings (see Fig 5). It can be noticed that
null tokens often are more similar to the non-dominant concept than the dominant one. In the next
section, we propose a training-free solution to localize the contribution of concepts.

                          1.0                                       Concepts                             1.0                                       Concepts
                                                                        Concept 1                                                                      Concept 1
                                                                        Concept 2                                                                      Concept 2
                          0.8                                                                            0.8


                                                                                    Euclidean Distance
      Cosine Similarity


                          0.6                                                                            0.6

                          0.4
                                                                                                         0.4

                          0.2
                                                                                                         0.2
                          0.0
                                                                                                         0.0
                                0   10   20   30     40       50   60       70                                 0   10   20   30     40       50   60       70
                                               Tokens Index                                                                   Tokens Index
Figure 5: Difference between selected concepts and all other embeddings. All prompts contain less
than ten words. (Left) Cosine Similarity ↑, (Right) Normalized Euclidean Distance ↓.


3.3          C ONTRIBUTION L OCALIZATION

Corrections by Similarities In this section, we propose a zero-shot method, which aims to rec-
ollect features of concepts from most similar embeddings, such as embeddings of null tokens. We
tweak the f ∈ Rn×d output vectors of the text encoder before the cross-attention operation. First,
we compute the elementwise product between the embedding of the concept fc ∈ Rd and all other
embeddings fi ∈ Rd . Then, we filter the product values that are below a threshold τ and normalize
them to leave only the most similar dimensions between the two vectors. A windowing function is
also applied to eliminate the impact on the tokens that are farther away from the selected one in the
text. We use these similarity scores to combine all embeddings as a new vector representation.
A new f˜c vector will be used to replace the embedding of the selected concept with α blending
hyperparameter. This parameter helps to control the strength of the suppression. The f˜c vector
is considered to be a corrected and recovered version of the previous embedding, which has high
attention scores and localized contribution in the respective area of the cross-attention map. The
end-to-end algorithm of our proposed method is described in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1: Correction by Similarities

1 Input: Embedding f ∈ Rn×d , selected token indices C = {c1 , c2 , ..., ck }, score threshold
τ ∈ [0, 1], window size γ, correction strength α ∈ [0, 1]
2 Output: Corrected embedding f˜ ∈ Rn×d
3 for c = c1 , c2 , ..., ck do
4    Sc ← f c ⊗ f ;                  S c ∈ Rn×d
5    S˜ ← Φ(S , τ )
        c          c
                                     S˜c ∈ Rn×d
6    S˜c ← Ψ(c, γ) ⊗ S˜c             S˜c ∈ Rn×d
                n
     f˜c ← i=1 S˜c ⊗ f               f˜c ∈ Rd
             P
7
8     ˜c
     f ← (1 − α)f + αf    c    ˜c    f˜c ∈ Rd
9 end
10 Return f˜


where ⊗ is the elementwise multiplication operation, Φ(S, τ ) is a function that thresholds S values
with τ parameter and normalizes them by max(S), Ψ(c, γ) ∈ [0, 1]n is a windowing function with
window size γ, which excludes the contribution of tokens farther from the selected token c. In the
first example of Fig 6, the cross-attention mask of the embedding of the “pot” word has low attention
scores and the pot was originally generated by the contribution of other tokens. Meanwhile, our
method is able to re-scale the contribution by collecting semantic information from the most similar


                                                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


embeddings, without any training phase. Moreover, our proposed solution recovers the features of
neglected concepts and synthesizes all of them, often minimizing the dominance problem (see the
second example of Fig 6).
             “A photo of a cat and a pot”                    “A turtle and a yellow bowl”


     Stable Diffusion           Algorithm 1              Stable Diffusion          Algorithm 1

Figure 6: A comparison between Stable Diffusion and Algorithm 1. Masks are average cross-
attention maps of the concept highlighted in red.


          “A teddy bear and gray wolf”                       “A blue parrot and a golden cat”


     Stable Diffusion           Algorithm 2              Stable Diffusion          Algorithm 2

Figure 7: A comparison between Stable Diffusion and Algorithm 2. Masks are average cross-
attention maps of the concept highlighted in red.


Cross-Token Non-Maximum Suppression One of the issues that often occur in multi-concept
image synthesis is the features mixing of different concepts. The model often generates a hybrid
object mixing different features and attributes (see Fig 7). This is due to the overlap of the con-
tribution areas of embedding of corresponding tokens. Motivated by the idea of eDiff-I (Balaji
et al., 2022) and the Non-Maximum Suppression algorithm of object detection methods, we propose
a method that suppresses weak contributions by using attention maps of the cross-attention layer.
The attention map of each token represents the contribution score for every pixel of an image. By
leaving the highest contributed token of a pixel, the algorithm excludes the contribution of other
tokens by decreasing their attention scores, avoiding mixing the features and attributes of different
concepts. A step-by-step implementation of our proposed method can be found in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2: Cross-Token Non-Maximum Suppression

1 Input: Attention Map A ∈ Rn×h×w×t , selected token indices C = {c1 , c2 , ..., ck }
2 Output: Suppressed Attention Map Ã ∈ Rn×h×w×t
3 AC ← A[:, :, :, C];            AC ∈ Rn×h×w×k
    C        C
4 A ← G(A );                     AC ∈ Rn×h×w×k
5 M ← arg maxC (AC );            M ∈ Rn×h×w
6 M̃ ← O(M );                    M̃ ∈ Rn×h×w×t
7 Ã ← M̃ ⊗ A;                   Ã ∈ Rn×h×w×t
8 Return Ã


where G(A) is a Gaussian smoothing operator with kernel size κ = 3 and σ = 1, O(M ) is a sup-
pression function, such as one-hot vector operator with size t, ⊗ is element-wise product operator.
Our proposed method is able to disentangle mixed features of different concepts, which leads to the
proper generation of all concepts. In the first example of Fig 7, attention scores of the “bear” token
are high on the contribution area of the “wolf” token, which causes the generation of a hybrid animal.
The suppression of low scores in overlapping areas leads to the proper generation of the “wolf”.
While in the second example of Fig 7, our proposed method helped to synthesize both concepts by
retaining high contributions of the “cat” token in the first stages of the diffusion process.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4               E XPERIMENTS

4.1                 M ULTI -C ONCEPT I MAGE M ANIPULATIONS

Modern image manipulation solutions, such as (Hertz et al., 2023; Patashnik et al., 2023), heavily
rely on the contribution of word embeddings. Specifically, they use attention maps of selected tokens
to do manipulations. Multi-concept image manipulation is another challenging problem because of
the concept dominance and non-localized contribution problems. The embedding vector of the
neglected concept does not have a big contribution, thus making the manipulation impracticable.
Our designed algorithms (Algorithm 1, Algorithm 2) improve the contribution localization, which
leverages multi-concept image manipulation capabilities. Motivated by the idea of prompt mixing in
(Patashnik et al., 2023), we use a simple prompt injection technique in the denoising process. For an
original prompt Pc1 ,c2 ,...,ck , with {c1 , c2 , ..., ck } concepts, we replace a concept in the prompt with
a new one: Pc∗i ←c̃ and inject it into the denoising process for timesteps smaller than a predefined
t threshold. As shown in Fig 8, our proposed solution expands image editing opportunities for
neglected concepts. Moreover, our methods show superiority over other known image manipulation
“A turtle and a
 yellow bowl”


                        SD        Algorithm 1   bowl,
                                                    box      bowl,
                                                                 cake      bowl,
                                                                               napkin        bowl,
                                                                                                 pillow
and a golden cat”
 “A blue parrot


                        SD        Algorithm 2    cat,
                                                    bottle   cat,
                                                                bulb           cat,
                                                                                  egg           cat,
                                                                                                   mug

Figure 8: Image manipulation results with our proposed Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2. The ma-
nipulated concept highlighted is in red.

techniques such as Prompt2Prompt and Instruct Pix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023). We used default
values of hyperparameters for both methods. A qualitative comparison can be found in Fig 9.

4.2                 M ULTI -C ONCEPT P ERSONALIZATION

Personalized text-to-image methods have become very popular in the research community recently.
Many solutions, such as Dreambooth and Textual Inversion, require no more than ten examples
of a concept to finetune the diffusion model. However, these models often struggle to work with
multiple concepts. Similar to multi-concept image manipulation, the aforementioned issues limit
the opportunities for multi-concept personalization. Our solution is applicable to personalization
for multiple concepts. Specifically, we adapted the NeTI (Alaluf et al., 2023) advanced textual
inversion architecture for multiple concepts by extending the number of learnable embeddings for
concepts of more than one. To avoid memorizing features of each other, we applied Supervised
Contrastive Loss (Khosla et al., 2020) between embeddings that are inversed and between their
respective outputs of the textual encoder. We used the same prompt injection technique mentioned
in Section 4.1. For the first stages of the denoising process, We used general stable diffusion to get
the layout and shapes of the image. After layout acquisition, we replace embeddings of concepts
with their personalized and inversed vectors for the next stages of the diffusion process. A qualitative
comparison can be found in Fig 10.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          “A little                      “A photo of a “A headset on
                       “A blue parrot “A turtle and a
                                                       hummingbird     “An eagle next to cat and a pot
                                   cat
                      and a golden    yellow   bowl
                                                                                                               laptop
                                                                                                      top of a
                                                                flower
                                                      and a red        a  deer
                                                                               cow”
                                                                                             cup”

                           bulb”          table”                                                          book”
                                                         tomato”
     Diffusion
      Stable
          P2P
     Instruct
     Pix2Pix
          Ours


                    Figure 9: Comparisons on image editing against Prompt2Prompt and Instruct Pix2Pix.
“A photo of a cat
   and a pot”
“A photo of a table
   and a chair”


                          Target Images          Stable Diffusion        Custom Diffusion              Ours
                Figure 10: A comparison of personalization results between Custom Diffusion and Ours.

5                C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we reach for an ambitious goal: natural multi-concept generation with a pre-trained
diffusion model and almost no extra cost. We first identify the concept dominance and non-localized
contribution issues in text embeddings. Then, we propose a minimal, low-cost solution that tweaks
the text embeddings only without any impact on the diffusion timesteps. With the help of our
Corrections-by-Similarities approach and Cross-Token Non-Maximum Suppression method, we
outperform existing approaches on text-to-image, image manipulation, and personalization, despite
not including extra cost to the diffusion steps.


                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Aishwarya Agarwal, Srikrishna Karanam, K J Joseph, Apoorv Saxena, Koustava Goswami, and
  Balaji Vasan Srinivasan. A-star: Test-time attention segregation and retention for text-to-image
  synthesis, 2023.
Yuval Alaluf, Elad Richardson, Gal Metzer, and Daniel Cohen-Or. A neural space-time representa-
  tion for text-to-image personalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15391, 2023.
Omri Avrahami, Kfir Aberman, Ohad Fried, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski. Break-a-scene:
 Extracting multiple concepts from a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16311, 2023.
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika
  Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, Tero Karras, and Ming-Yu Liu. ediff-i: Text-
  to-image diffusion models with ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324,
  2022.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In CVPR, 2023.
Hila Chefer, Yuval Alaluf, Yael Vinker, Lior Wolf, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Attend-and-excite:
  Attention-based semantic guidance for text-to-image diffusion models. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–10, 2023.
Wenhu Chen, Hexiang Hu, Yandong Li, Nataniel Rui, Xuhui Jia, Ming-Wei Chang, and William W
 Cohen. Subject-driven text-to-image generation via apprenticeship learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.00186, 2023.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Dave Epstein, Allan Jabri, Ben Poole, Alexei A. Efros, and Aleksander Holynski. Diffusion self-
  guidance for controllable image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00986, 2023.
Weixi Feng, Xuehai He, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Pradyumna Narayana, Sugato
 Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Training-free structured diffusion guidance for
 compositional text-to-image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05032, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Ligong Han, Yinxiao Li, Han Zhang, Peyman Milanfar, Dimitris Metaxas, and Feng Yang. Svdiff:
  Compact parameter space for diffusion fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11305, 2023.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross-attention control. In The Eleventh International
 Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
 forum?id=_CDixzkzeyb.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.            Classifier-free diffusion guidance.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola,
  Aaron Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan.       Supervised contrastive learning.  In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 18661–18673. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/d89a66c7c80a29b1bdbab0f2a1a94af8-Paper.pdf.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diederik Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 34:21696–21707, 2021.
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. In CVPR, 2023.
Yuheng Li, Haotian Liu, Qingyang Wu, Fangzhou Mu, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Chunyuan Li,
  and Yong Jae Lee. Gligen: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22511–22521, 2023.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  423–439. Springer, 2022.
Haoming Lu, Hazarapet Tunanyan, Kai Wang, Shant Navasardyan, Zhangyang Wang, and
  Humphrey Shi. Specialist diffusion: Plug-and-play sample-efficient fine-tuning of text-to-image
  diffusion models to learn any unseen style. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14267–14276, 2023.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.
Jian Ma, Junhao Liang, Chen Chen, and Haonan Lu. Subject-diffusion: Open domain personalized
   text-to-image generation without test-time fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11410, 2023.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.01073, 2021.
Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
  Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp.
  1–11, 2023.
Or Patashnik, Daniel Garibi, Idan Azuri, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Localiz-
  ing object-level shape variations with text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
Quynh Phung, Songwei Ge, and Jia-Bin Huang. Grounded text-to-image synthesis with attention
  refocusing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05427, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Proceed-
  ings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022. URL https://github.com/
  CompVis/latent-diffusion.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, Jonathan
  Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion mod-
  els with deep language understanding. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=08Yk-n5l2Al.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yoad Tewel, Rinon Gal, Gal Chechik, and Yuval Atzmon. Key-locked rank one editing for text-to-
  image personalization. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–11, 2023.
Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based generative modeling in latent space.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11287–11302, 2021.
Andrey Voynov, Qinghao Chu, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Kfir Aberman. p+: Extended textual condi-
  tioning in text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09522, 2023.
Yuxiang Wei, Yabo Zhang, Zhilong Ji, Jinfeng Bai, Lei Zhang, and Wangmeng Zuo. Elite: Encoding
  visual concepts into textual embeddings for customized text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.13848, 2023.
Yutong Xie, Zhaoying Pan, Jinge Ma, Luo Jie, and Qiaozhu Mei. A prompt log analysis of text-
  to-image generation systems. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, pp. 3892–3902,
  2023.


                                               12
