Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NIFIED L ANGUAGE M ODEL A LIGNMENT WITH
D EMONSTRATION AND P OINT- WISE H UMAN P REFER -
ENCE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Language model alignment is a cutting-edge technique in large language model
         training to align the model output to user’s intent, e.g., being helpful and harm-
         less. Recent alignment framework consists of two steps: supervised fine-tuning
         with demonstration data and preference learning with human preference data. Pre-
         vious preference learning methods, such as RLHF and DPO, mainly focus on
         pair-wise preference data. However, in many real-world scenarios where human
         feedbacks are intrinsically point-wise, e.g., upvotes number or binary criterion,
         effective model alignment to user preference is under explored. In this paper, we
         fill this gap by developing a simplified tuning method for point-wise preference
         data. Further revelation on the connection between supervised fine-tuning and
         point-wise preference learning enables us to develop a unified framework for both
         human demonstration and point-wise preference data, which sheds new light on
         the construction of preference dataset. Extensive experiments demonstrate the su-
         perior performance and efficiency of our proposed methods. A new dataset with
         high-quality demonstration samples on harmlessness are constructed and made
         publicly available1 .


1   I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) trained by self-supervised learning has shown great
success in various natural language processing tasks (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Smith
et al., 2022; Rae et al., 2021; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022). As a crucial step
for training LLMs, language model alignment (Wang et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022a; Askell et al.,
2021) aims to tune the output of general purpose pre-trained language model to accord with human
preference, which substantially boosts the performance of LLMs in many downstream applications
such as language assistant (Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023b), dialogue agents (Thoppilan
et al., 2022; Glaese et al., 2022), web-enhanced Question Answering system (Liu et al., 2023b;
Nakano et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2023), and summarization agent (Wu et al., 2021).
Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) (Radford et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020) and Reinforcement Learn-
ing with Human Feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020) are two repre-
sentative techniques for language model alignment. While SFT conducts instruction learning with
high-quality demonstration data to fit LLMs to the specific scenario of interest, RLHF achieves
preference learning by aligning LLMs to human preference data to satisfy certain criterion such as
harmlessness, which is commonly used in various tasks such as assistant (Bai et al., 2022b), coding
copilot (Chen et al., 2021) and summarization (Wu et al., 2021). Conventionally, RLHF consists of
two steps, i.e., fitting a reward model and applying the model to proximal policy optimization (PPO)
(Schulman et al., 2017) to generate optimal strategy. A recently proposed method called Direct
Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) improves the RLHF method by exploiting
the closed-form solution to the reward maximization problem in the second step of RLHF. DPO
simplifies preference learning into a one-step problem, which eschews the need of explicit reward
model estimation, enjoying stability and light computation in preference learning.
  1
    https://huggingface.co/datasets/Unified-Language-Model-Alignment/
Anthropic_HH_Golden


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Despite its great success in many scenarios, DPO is restricted to pair-wise human preference dataset
Dpref , i.e., each sample (xi , yiw , yil ) ∈ Dprep characterizes a binary relation yiw ≻ yil |xi between a
pair of generated responses yiw and yil by comparing their satisfactions given the prompt xi . How-
ever, in many real-world scenarios, the preference dataset is intrinsically point-wise, e.g., the re-
sponse yi has an absolute fitness score zi (Ethayarajh et al., 2022). For example, in Question-
Answering (QA) scenarios (Fan et al., 2019; Lambert et al., 2023), data collected from online dis-
cussion forums are directly evaluated by the voting scores. To apply pair-wise methods, one needs
to transform the dataset into a pair-wise dataset, which will lose the information on the gap between
each pair of responses. Moreover, when the metrics are binary labelled zi ∈ {0, 1}, such as harm-
fulness, toxicity, and verifiability (Askell et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023), the responses with the same
label are incomparable. When using pair-wise tuning methods, each pair of responses must be com-
posed of a positive sample and a negative sample, which is unsuitable when the numbers of positive
responses and negative responses are largely different. In some cases where the responses of a given
prompt have the same label or there is only one evaluated response, pair-wise tuning methods have
to discard these samples, which incurs inefficiency in model tuning.
To fill this gap, in this paper, we first propose a point-wise tuning method based on DPO to
tackle point-wise preference dataset. Specifically, for binary labels zi ∈ {0, 1}, we introduce a
latent reward function r∗ and assume that the label follows Bernoulli distribution with probability
σ(r∗ (xi , yi )). Then we use a reward model rϕ to fit r∗ by minimizing the negative log-likelihood
loss. Following the spirit of DPO, we rewrite rϕ as a function of policy πθ , indicated by the closed-
form solution to the reward maximization problem given the reward model rϕ . Compared to pre-
vious RL-based point-wise preference tuning method (Askell et al., 2021), our proposed point-wise
DPO method eschews the need of explicit reward model training, thus is more stable and enjoys
lighter computation. Gradient analysis of point-wise DPO further distinguishes this method from
the vanilla DPO, i.e., point-wise DPO decouples the training of positive and negative samples, and
shows that the gradient can be viewed as a weighted version of the SFT gradient.
In light of the connection between the point-wise DPO and SFT gradients, we proceed to give a uni-
fied formulation of the two steps of language model alignment, i.e., instruction learning with demon-
stration data and preference learning with point-wise preference data. Specifically, by investigating
the different roles of positive and negative samples played in model alignment, we propose a hybrid
approach of using the vanilla negative log-likelihood loss for the positive samples and introducing
an extra KL regularizer to the negative samples, respectively. The resulting Unified Language Model
Alignment (ULMA) method brings the flexibility of treating different parts of samples differently.
In particular, as the KL regularizer of the positive samples are removed, the proposed method can
boost the performance by exploiting high-quality positive data, which indicates a way of enhancing
the preference dataset with the demonstration dataset, i.e., applying hybrid loss on the mixture of
both datasets. Hence, ULMA provides a unified way of performing model alignment in a single step
on both demonstration and point-wise preference datasets.
Empirically, our proposed methods outperform RLHF and DPO on three commonly used datasets
and a newly constructed dataset for preference learning. Further empirical results show that as we
lift the quality of the positive samples, the performance gain of ULMA is much larger than that
of baseline methods, indicating the ability of hybrid objective formulation to better exploit high-
quality positive samples. We also conduct an ablation study to verify the design of hybrid objective
in ULMA. Together with its effectiveness for preference learning, the above results verify the ability
of ULMA to unify the two steps of language model alignment.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows.

       • In light of the failure of previous pair-wise preference learning methods on point-wise
         preference dataset, we propose the point-wise DPO method, which learns from point-wise
         preference dataset without the need of explicitly training reward estimation model.
       • Gradient analysis reveals the connection between point-wise DPO and SFT, which enlight-
         ens a unified formulation of language model alignment. In this spirit, we propose the
         ULMA method which provides a generic way to learn from both demonstration and pref-
         erence datasets in a single step.
       • We conduct extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness of our proposed point-wise
         DPO and ULMA, and also release a new dataset with high-quality demonstration samples.

                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK

In this section, we review previous works on language model alignment for LLMs.
Conventionally, language model alignment consists of two steps. First, the model is fit to the high-
quality demonstration data via SFT, which adapts the pre-trained LLM to the specific scenario of
interest (Stiennon et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). Second, the SFT model is further tuned on the
preference data to align its output with human preference. The most commonly used approach of
preference learning is RLHF (Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a). In this
approach, a reward model is learned on the preference dataset, then LLM is fine-tuned to maximize
the estimated reward via RL methods such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) or its variants (Snell et al.,
2022; Zhu et al., 2023). To improve the stability of RLHF, Christiano et al. (2017) and Ouyang et al.
(2022) propose to introduce a KL regularizer centered at the SFT model in preference learning.
Despite its effectiveness in preference learning, PPO is known to be complicated to implement and
unstable in its training process (Wang et al., 2023). To remedy these issues, various techniques have
been proposed to simplify the procedure of preference learning. Enlightened by an empirical obser-
vation, RRHF (Yuan et al., 2023) introduces a ranking loss with zero margin to preference learning
and replace the KL regularizer by an additional loss term based on the demonstration dataset. RAFT
(Dong et al., 2023) replaces the PPO step by using a reward model to select the best output from
multiple generated outputs and performing SFT on these top-ranked outputs. The most relevant lit-
erature to our work is DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023), which is developed upon the fact that, given the
reward model, the optimal policy has a closed form (Peng et al., 2019; Peters & Schaal, 2007). By
substituting the optimal policy into the reward estimation task, DPO simplifies reward modeling and
reward maximization steps into a single step, essentially solving a classification task on the prefer-
ence data. A similar method is proposed in scenarios where the human preference is expressed as
the ranking of any length instead of in pairs (Song et al., 2023).


3     P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we provide background knowledge on language model alignment.

3.1   L EARNING FROM D EMONSTRATION DATA

The demonstration dataset Ddemo = {(xi , yi )} is a collection of input prompts xi , each associated
with a human-written response yi , which is of high quality and provide ground-truth to the input but
generally expensive and hard to acquire. As the first step of language model alignment, the generic
pre-trained LLM is fine-tuned by supervised learning on Ddemo specific to the scenario of interest.
Denote the LLM parameterized by θ as πθ , which generates a probability distribution πθ (·|x) over
all possible responses y given the user input x as the prompt. The objective of SFT is to fit πθ to the
dataset Ddemo by minimizing the negative log-likelihood (Wang et al., 2023)
                                         X
                            LSFT (θ) =                    − log πθ (yi |xi ),
                                            (xi ,yi )∈Ddemo

which will produce a fine-tuned model πSFT . Since demonstration data directly provides the ground-
truth response to the given user input, SFT can train the LLM according to human instructions,
making it fast adapt to the specific scenario of Ddemo .
When undesirable demonstration data (e.g., bad responses) are available, the unlearning method is
proposed to reduce the generating probability for unwanted response (Nguyen et al., 2022). Un-
learning can be viewed as a counterpart of SFT working on dispreferred demonstration data.

3.2   L EARNING FROM P REFERENCE DATA

As the demonstration data only suggests the most suitable response to a given prompt, it lacks
information to prevent the LLM from generating undesirable response from candidate responses. To
remedy this issue and further boost the performance, the preference dataset is constructed to impose
the model to reduce the probability of undesirable response generation.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The preference dataset is typically composed of the preference feedback among multiple responses
of a given prompt. Specifically, given the input xi , the SFT model πSFT independently draws
multiple responses yi1 , yi2 , ... from the probability distribution πSFT (·|xi ), which are then presented
to human to label the preference. For example, in the pair-wise preference setting, the human is
required to compare two candidate responses yi1 and yi2 , which results in a binary relation yiw ≻ yil |x,
where yiw and yil represent the preferred and the dispreferred sample between yi1 and yi2 , respectively.
The pair-wise preference dataset is then constructed as Dpref = {(xi , yiw , yil )}. One common way
to interpret the preference is to assume a human preference distribution p∗ determined by a latent
reward r∗ (x, y) (Rafailov et al., 2023), i.e., the Bradly-Terry model (Bradley & Terry, 1952):
                                                        exp(r∗ (xi , yi1 ))
                        p∗ (yi1 ≻ yi2 |xi ) =                                            .                    (1)
                                                exp(r (xi , yi1 )) + exp(r∗ (xi , yi2 ))
                                                     ∗


In the following, we review two approaches to tuning LLMs with the knowledge of r∗ from the
preference dataset Dpref , namely RLHF and DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023).
RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017) first learns an explicit reward model to estimate r∗ , then uses such
a model to tune the LLM. The reward model rϕ (x, y) is parameterized by ϕ and optimized via
maximum likelihood. Specifically, RLHF first minimizes the negative log-likelihood loss
                           X
                                                − log σ rϕ (xi , yiw ) − rϕ (xi , yil ) ,

               LRM (ϕ) =            w l
                                                                                                  (2)
                                     (xi ,yi ,yi )∈Dpref

where σ is the logistic function. After deriving the reward model rϕ (x, y), RLHF tunes the LLM by
optimizing the following constrained reward maximization problem
                  X
            max                    Eyi′ ∼πθ (·|xi ) [rϕ (xi , yi′ )] − βDKL [πθ (·|xi )||πref (·|xi )], (3)
               θ       (xi ,·,·)∈Dpref

where β is the regularization strength, and the base policy πref is set as the SFT model πSFT . The
KL regularizer DKL is introduced to prevent the model from deviating too far from the region where
rϕ is accurate. This problem is often solved via RL approaches such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017).
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) takes a different approach by merging the above two steps of RLHF
into a joint optimization step. Different from RLHF, the learning of the preference model is implicit.
DPO is design based on an observation (Peng et al., 2019; Peters & Schaal, 2007): given any reward
estimate model rϕ (x, y), the policy optimization problem Eq. 3 has a closed-form solution
                                                       πθ (y|x)
                                 rϕ (x, y) = β log                + β log Z(x)                                (4)
                                                       πref (y|x)
                                    1
                   P
where Z(x) =       y πref(y|x) exp( β rϕ (x, y)). Plugging it into Lpref derives the objective function

                                                                πθ (yiw |xi )           πθ (yil |xi )
                       X
        LDPO (θ) =                               − log σ  β log                 − β log                   .   (5)
                           (xi ,yiw ,yil )∈Dpref                πref (yiw |xi )         πref (yil |xi )
DPO eschews the need of training reward model, enjoying light computation and sample efficiency.

4     U NIFIED L ANGUAGE M ODEL A LIGNMENT
In this section, we first discuss the limitation of conventional pair-wise methods in handling point-
wise preference data, then develop a new method for point-wise preference learning. Finally, we
propose a unified framework of learning with demonstration and point-wise preference data, where
different types of samples are assigned distinct losses and treated differently.

4.1   T HE L IMITATION OF PAIR -W ISE M ETHODS ON P OINT-W ISE P REFERENCE DATASET

As has been reviewed above, the preference dataset Dpref in most previous work is constructed in
a pair-wise manner, in which each data sample (xi , yiw , yil ) represents a binary relation yiw ≻ yil |xi
between two candidate responses yiw , yil given the prompt xi . Built upon such dataset, the model
tuning methods, e.g., RLHF and DPO, also appear in the pair-wise form.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, many real-world preference datasets are intrinsically point-wise, i.e., with absolute scores,
to which applying pair-wise tuning methods may incur loss of information. For example, many
large-scale human preference dataset are collected from online discussion forum such as Reddit or
StackExchange, in which the human preference of a response to a prompt (e.g., question or topic)
is directly reflected by the voting record (Ethayarajh et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2019; Lambert et al.,
2023). The voting score is an absolute metric on fitness of a candidate response. To apply pair-
wise methods, the common practice is to transform the dataset into a pair-wise form, e.g., pick two
exposed responses and construct a binary relation by comparing their scores. Such a transformation
will lose the information of the gap between the two responses. Moreover, directly transforming
point-wise data into pair-wise data will discard some sample points when there is only a single
sample for some certain prompts. An extreme case can be seen in the Red Teaming (Ganguli et al.,
2022) dataset, which has only one dialogue for each prompt and therein pair-wise methods such
as RLHF and DPO are inapplicable. In these scenarios, a more natural way is to apply point-wise
preference learning method to directly make use of absolute scores of responses.

4.2   P OINT-W ISE D IRECT P OLICY O PTIMIZATION

We now develop a point-wise variant of DPO, called point-wise DPO, to tackle point-wise prefer-
ence data. To this end, we first define the point-wise preference dataset as Dprep = {(xi , yi , zi )},
where zi is the label of response yi to prompt xi . To begin with, we investigate the case of point-
wise datasets with binary labels zi ∈ {0, 1}. Similar to vanilla DPO, we introduce a latent reward
function r∗ (x, y) and assume that the label follows Bernoulli distribution with
                                                          1
                          p(zi = 1|xi , yi ) =                          = σ(r∗ (xi , yi )).                   (6)
                                                 1 + exp−r∗ (xi ,yi )
Using a reward model rϕ parameterized by ϕ to estimate r∗ , the negative log-likelihood loss takes
                 X
      LRM (ϕ) =                    −zi log σ(rϕ (xi , yi )) − (1 − zi ) log σ(1 − rϕ (xi , yi )), (7)
                           (xi ,yi ,zi )∈Dpref

which accords with the cross-entropy loss on a binary classification task. To proceed, we fol-
low the concept of DPO that eschews the need to explicitly estimate the reward model. Similar
to DPO, we solve rϕ as a function of πθ , i.e., rϕ (x, y) = β log ππref           θ (y|x)
                                                                                     (y|x) + β log Z(x), where
                                  1
           P
Z(x) =        y πref(y|x) exp( β rϕ (x, y)). Substitute the above expression into LRM (ϕ), we derive
the loss function of point-wise DPO
                    X                                         πθ (yi |xi )
  LPointwise (θ) =                          − zi log σ β log                + β log Z(xi )
                        (xi ,yi ,zi )∈Dpref                  πref (yi |xi )
                                                                                                            (8)
                                                                            πθ (yi |xi )
                                            − (1 − zi ) log 1 − σ β log                    + β log Z(xi ) .
                                                                            πref (yi |xi )

We now give some remarks on the above proposed point-wise DPO method.
Gradient Comparison with DPO Recall that in DPO, the gradient w.r.t. θ can be calculated as
                  X
∇θ LDPO (θ) =             −βσ(r̂θ (xi , yil ) − r̂θ (xi , yiw ))(∇θ log πθ (yiw |xi ) − ∇θ log πθ (yil |xi )),
                  (xi ,yiw ,yil )∈Dpref

                           πθ (y|x)
where r̂θ (x, y) = β log πref (yw |x) . In comparison, the gradient of point-wise DPO on preference
dataset with binary labels takes
                        X
∇LPointwise (θ) =                   − β (zi (1 − σ(r̂θ (xi , yi )) − (1 − zi )σ(r̂θ (xi , yi ))) ∇ log πθ (yi |xi ).
                     (xi ,yi ,zi )∈Dpref

The two gradients are in the same spirit that both tend to enlarge the gap between the log-
probabilities of the preferred and dispreferred responses. However, the gradient components of the
positive and the negative samples are separable in point-wise DPO, whereas it cannot be separated
in the vanilla DPO due to the term σ(r̂θ (xi , yil ) − r̂θ (xi , yiw )). In the next subsection, we shall see
that the separability between the positive and the negative samples makes it possible to align with
SFT, and also allows different treatments on different types of samples.


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Handling Continuous Labels For point-wise dataset with continuous labels zi ∈ X , one direct
way is to treat the reward model estimation as a regression task, in which the label is given as
zi = r∗ (xi , yi ). As an example, the MSE loss takes
                                       X
                            LRM (ϕ) =                 (zi − rϕ (xi , yi ))2 .                (9)
                                            (xi ,yi ,zi )∈Dpref

Following the same spirit of point-wise DPO with binary labels, we can plug the expression of rϕ
in terms of πθ into the above loss function. Note that in practice, MSE is not always a good choice;
therein we may transform the continuous labels into binary ones or even uses a mixture of binary
and continuous labels with a hybrid loss. In the next subsection, we provide an example of using
a hybrid objective by integrating SFT loss of high quality demonstration data with MSE loss of
preference data, which is then verified empirically on a point-wise dataset with continous labels.
Comparison with Point-Wise RLHF for Preference Learning Although there have been some
previous works using classification or regression tasks to train reward models in the RLHF process
(Askell et al., 2021), which we refer to as point-wise RLHF, our proposed point-wise DPO is largely
different from them in two folds. First, as a one-step method, point-wise DPO eschews the need of
reward model estimation and the subsequent RL-based reward maximization, thus is more stable and
enjoys lighter computation than two-step methods. Second, compared to these works, we move one
step forward by revealing the connection between point-wise DPO and SFT, which further motivates
a unified treatment of instruction following and preference learning for model alignment.

4.3   U NIFIED L ANGUAGE M ODEL A LIGNMENT

Recall that for a point-wise dataset Dpref with binary labels, the gradient of point-wise DPO as-
sociated with each sample (xi , yi , zi ) ∈ Dpref (written as Eq. 4.2) can be viewed as the corre-
sponding SFT gradient ∇ log πθ (yi |xi ) weighted by βσ(r̂θ (xi , yi )) for a positive sample zi = 1
or β(1 − σ(r̂θ (xi , yi )) for a negative sample zi = 0. Such a connection between the gradients of
point-wise DPO and SFT indicates a unified formulation of instruction learning with demonstration
dataset and preference learning with point-wise human preference dataset, bring the flexibility of
integrating the two distinct problem formulations into a hybrid objective function.
In the following, we explore such flexibility by investigating the effects of positive and negative
samples on language model alignment. On the one hand, to generate helpful response, the model is
expected to assign most of the weight to the demonstrated ground-truth response and does not need to
accurately predict other sub-optimal responses. On the other hand, to guarantee harmless response,
a desired model needs to keep relatively low weights for all the bad responses, which means that it
shall not overfit into any single negative sample (otherwise, the weights of other negative responses
may increase). Hence, in language model alignment, it would be helpful to treat the positive and
negative samples differently, e.g., setting up different objectives for their respective purposes. This
is different from the original reward estimation task whose goal is to train a discriminative model,
in which the two types of samples are treated in the same way.
As the difference between the point-wise DPO and SFT gradients stems from the use of KL regular-
izer, a natural approach is to use the SFT loss (i.e., log-likelihood) for the positive samples and add
an additional KL regularizer for the negative samples. Now the one-step final loss takes
                   X                                                         πθ (yi |xi )
LULMA (θ) =                −zi log πθ (yi |xi ) − (1 − zi ) log(1 − σ(β log                 + β log Z(xi )).
                                                                             πref (yi |xi )
               (xi ,yi ,zi )∈D

In summary, ULMA can be viewed as a hybrid method of applying SFT to the positive samples and
point-wise DPO to the negative samples. Intuitively, the former module treats the positive samples
in the same way as those in SFT, which exploits the high quality of the positive samples. The latter
regularization on the negative samples controls the coefficients of their gradients, which prevents the
model from producing other undesirable responses Golatkar et al. (2019); Lu et al. (2022).
Handling Continuous Labels For point-wise datasets with continuous labels, there is no direct
separation of positive and negative samples. However, the core concept of ULMA, i.e., using a
hybrid objective formulation of demonstration and preference data, can still be applied to these
tasks without transforming them into binary datasets. Similar to the case of binary labels, in this
case, ULMA can be developed from point-wise DPO for preference learning with continuous la-
bels. Specifically, if we can specify some samples as high quality data (e.g., the most harmless or


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


helpful ones), we can treat these samples as ”positive” demonstration data and apply them to SFT.
The integration of SFT with these high quality samples and preference learning on noisy samples
results in ULMA in the case of continuous labels. For example, the red-team dataset considered in
our experiment consists of samples rated from 0 to 4, among which those rated 0 are high quality
demonstration data. To better exploit the chosen data, we use a hybrid loss by adding SFT loss of
the samples rated 0 to the original MSE loss of all samples, which shows effectiveness empirically.
Boosting ULMA with High-Quality Data Recall that in ULMA, the positive samples adopt log-
likelihood loss without KL regularizer. Intuitively, compared to DPO, ULMA can better exploit the
high quality of positive data, hence lifting the quality boosts the performance of ULMA. This point
is empirically verified in experiments on a newly constructed dataset with enhanced positive data.

5     E XPERIMENT

In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness and efficiency of the
proposed point-wise DPO and UMLA methods. All codes are publicly available at https://
github.com/Unified-Language-Model-Alignment/src.

5.1   E XPERIENTAL S ETUP

Datasets      We adopt three benchmark datasets HH, QA-feedback, and red-team. We also con-
tribute a new dataset Golden HH, which is a variant of HH, to verify the ability of ULMA to further
enhance LLM alignment by exploiting high-equality data.
(i) The Anthropic Helpful and Harmless (HH) dataset (Bai et al., 2022a) is a benchmark human
preference dataset on model alignment. Each sample is composed of a question and a pair of model-
generated answers with a human preference comparison (helpful or harmless). When evaluating
point-wise methods, we transform the dataset into a point-wise version by labeling the human pre-
ferred answer as r = 1 and the dispreferred one as r = 0.
(ii) The QA-feedback dataset (Wu et al., 2023) is an enhanced version of a classic QA dataset ASQA
Stelmakh et al. (2022) with collected human feedbacks. The answers to the questions in ASQA
are generated by an LLM, in which the error or missing information is annotated and corrected by
human. We use QA-feedback as a binary dataset by treating the marked incorrect answers as negative
samples, and the human corrected answers as positive samples.
(iii) The red teaming (red-team) dataset (Ganguli et al., 2022) is a point-wise dataset on LLM’s
robustness to red teaming attacks. Each sample consists of the dialogue of a red teaming attempt
with a score from 0 to 4, which is rated by human to indicate how successful the attack is. We
treat the failed attacks (rated 0) as SFT samples. For preference learning, the samples with various
ratings are tackled as continuous point-wise data and applied to the continuous loss (cf. eq. 12).
Note that although red-team contains high-quality human annotated samples, it cannot be applied
to conventional pair-wise preference learning methods such as pair-wise RLHF and pair-wise DPO,
since it only has a single answer for each prompt and no comparison can be made.
(iv) The Golden HH dataset. We enhance the original chosen data in HH by replacing them
with responses generated by GPT4. The dataset is available at https://huggingface.co/
datasets/Unified-Language-Model-Alignment/Anthropic_HH_Golden.

Compared Methods           We consider the following baseline methods in our experiments.
RLHF (Christiano et al., 2017) is a representative two-step preference learning method. It first trains
a reward model, then applies the model to reward maximization via PPO.
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) integrates the two steps of RLHF into a single step. Since it is a pair-wise
tuning method, we examine it on the corresponding pair-wise dataset.
SFT (Radford et al., 2018) is a standard tuning method for instruction following, which maximizes
the log-likelihood of the demonstration data.
Unlearning (Jang et al., 2022) is a counterpart of SFT on dispreferred demonstration data. It tunes
the model to avoid dispreferred demonstration by minimizing log-likelihood.

                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 1: Performance comparison of different methods on various datasets. The perplexity (ppl;
the lower, the better) and the harmful score (in win&tie rate; the higher, the better) as evaluated
by GPT4 are presented. Note that pair-wise methods (RLHF and DPO) cannot be applied to the
red-team dataset since it is a continuous point-wise dataset, as we have discussed above.

                               HH                            Golden HH                         Red-team
      Method
                       ppl      Harmful                ppl        Harmful              ppl         Harmful
  Unlikelihood        28.46    0.76 (±0.05)        25.32         0.70 (±0.08)         33.04           0.74 (±0.04)
      RLHF            18.23    0.80 (±0.06)        16.93         0.93 (±0.05)           ✗                   ✗
 Pointwise RLHF       18.91    0.82 (±0.04)        17.01         0.92 (±0.03)         11.22           0.89 (±0.05)
      DPO             17.38    0.84 (±0.02)        16.96         0.95 (±0.04)           ✗                   ✗
 Pointwise DPO        18.16    0.87 (±0.03)        16.37         0.96 (±0.03)         12.17           0.90 (±0.02)
     ULMA             15.34    0.91 (±0.04)        12.03         0.99 (±0.02)         10.61           0.92 (±0.02)

                                                                                win      tie                loss
Table 2: Performance comparison of different
methods for preference learning on the QA-                     Unlikelihood   0.37    0.33            0.3
feedback dataset. The perplexity and the helpful                      RLHF     0.46          0.47           0.07
score (in win& tie rate) are reported.
                                                             Pointwise RLHF    0.47          0.45           0.08
                         QA-feedback                                   DPO     0.49            0.46         0.05
      Method
                       ppl     Helpful                       Pointwise DPO     0.47            0.49         0.04
  Unlikelihood        13.72    0.62 (±0.09)                          ULMA       0.5            0.49          0.01
      RLHF            7.57     0.72 (±0.04)
 Pointwise RLHF        8.06    0.73 (±0.03)
      DPO              8.82    0.76 (±0.02)              Figure 1: Comparison of the win, tie, and
 Pointwise DPO         8.73    0.75 (±0.03)              loss rates of the harmless score for different
     ULMA              5.91    0.79 (±0.02)              methods on the Golden HH dataset.


Unlikelihood (Rafailov et al., 2023) integrates SFT and Unlearning by maximizing the log-
likelihood of demonstration data and the negative log-likelihood of dispreferred demonstration data
simultaneously, which can be directly applied to the preference dataset.

Metric and Evaluation         We adopt perplexity (Yuan et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023) (the lower,
the better) as a performance metric for all tasks. We also evaluate the harmful score (Bhardwaj &
Poria, 2023) on HH, Golden HH, and red-team, and the helpful score on QA-feedback (the higher, the
better). We adopt GPT4 for model evaluation, since LLM has shown to achieve human-compatible
evaluation (Zheng et al., 2023; Zha et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a). We repeat training for three times
and report 95% confidence interval. The prompt for model evaluation is given in Appendix B.

Models and Parameter Configuration             We set the strength β of KL regularizers in all methods
as 0.1, as suggested by DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023). To select the foundation model, we evaluate
the zero-shot generation ability of Llama (Touvron et al., 2023a), Vicuna v1.0 (Chiang et al., 2023),
Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023b), Vicuna-v1.5 (Chiang et al., 2023), and Llama 2-chat (Touvron
et al., 2023b) of 7B sizes. We choose to use the 7B Vicuna-v1.5 as our foundation model, which is
a fine-tuned model from Llama-2 via instruction learning. The training batch size is set as 64 and
all models are trained for 1 epoch. We set the initial learning rate set as 1e-5, followed by a cosine
decay schedule. The models are fine-tuned on eight A100 80GB GPUs. Specifically, to reduce
memory consumption and speed up the training process, we adopt LoRA and set its rank to 8, the
alpha parameter to 32, and the dropout rate to 0.1. In the training process, we adopt the technique in
(Zhu et al., 2023) to handle the partition coefficient Z(xi ) (see more details in Appendix A).

5.2   M AIN R ESULTS

Performance for Preference Learning We first evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed meth-
ods for preference learning. Empirical results on various datasets are summarized in Table 1, Table
2, and Figure 1, from which we have the following observations:


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Ablation study on the design of the hybrid objective formulation in ULMA. We report
the performance of different methods for learning from positive demonstration data or negative
dispreferred demonstration data on various datasets.

                            HH                        Golden HH               QA-feedback
      Method
                     ppl     Harmful            ppl        Harmful          ppl     Helpful
        SFT        22.35    0.86 (±0.03)       15.17     0.97 (±0.02)     11.10    0.66 (±0.04)
    Positive DPO   27.08    0.82 (±0.03)       17.29     0.96 (±0.03)     11.33    0.63 (±0.05)
     Unlearning    57.95    0.64 (±0.08)       47.15     0.67 (±0.10)     47.75    0.41 (±0.07)
    Negative DPO   36.93    0.74 (±0.07)       35.61     0.76 (±0.08)     12.91    0.57 (±0.05)
      ULMA         15.34    0.91 (±0.04)       12.03     0.99 (±0.02)      5.91    0.79 (±0.02)



(i) By comparing point-wise DPO with pair-wise DPO, we observe that it is comparable or slightly
worse on pair-wise datasets HH and Golden HH, which is understandable as these datasets are
intrinsically suitable to pair-wise methods. In comparison, point-wise DPO performs slightly better
on QA-feedback, which is a point-wise binary dataset. The comparable performance accords with
our analysis on the relation between pair-wise and point-wise binary datasets. It deserves to be
mentioned that while pair-wise DPO is inapplicable to the continuous dataset red-team, point-wise
DPO is able to improve the SFT model, showing superiority in tackling point-wise datasets.
(ii) ULMA outperforms other examined methods on all datasets, showing its superiority on various
preference learning tasks. This accords well with our intuition that ULMA better exploits both
demonstration data and preference data in a unified way via a hybrid objective formulation.
Note that all the examined methods achieve better performance on Golden HH compared to HH,
which shows that the data quality of Golden HH is higher than that of HH. In addition, the per-
formance gain of ULMA on Golden HH is larger than those of other methods, which indicates the
ability of ULMA to better exploit high quality positive samples.
Ablation Study We then conduct an ablation study to verify the design of hybrid objective for-
mulation in ULMA. Specifically, we first use positive samples as demonstration data to compare
ULMA (which essentially reduces to SFT on demonstration data) with point-wise DPO (which
adopts KL regularization and is called Positive DPO as here it only uses positive samples) to eval-
uate the effectiveness of ULMA for learning from positive samples. Then we use negative samples
as dispreferred demonstration data to compare ULMA (which reduces to point-wise DPO on merely
negative samples, and we call it Negative DPO) with the counterpart algorithm without KL regu-
larization (i.e., Unlearning) to evaluate the ability of ULMA for learning from negative samples.
The results are presented in Table 2. From the results, we have the following observations: (i) For
positive demonstration data, SFT without regularization outperforms positive DPO with regulariza-
tion, which accords with our intuition that removing the regularization on high-quality chosen data
will enhance the performance on model fine-tuning. (ii) For negative dispreferred demonstration
data, negative DPO outperforms unlearning, indicating the necessity of regularization on negative
samples. Combining the above two observations, we justify the design of the hybrid loss structure
in ULMA when combining instruction and preference learning into a unified framework.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate the problem of language model alignment with demonstration and
point-wise user preference datasets. Specifically, based on DPO, we first propose the point-wise
DPO method to handle point-wise data in preference learning. By investigating the relation be-
tween the SFT and point-wise DPO gradients, we further propose a unified method of language
model alignment called ULMA, which unifies the demonstration and pair-wise preference datasets
and treats distinct data parts differently. Extensive experiments on a large-scale language model
alignment scenario verifies the effectiveness of our proposed method.


                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as a laboratory
 for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861, 2021.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022a.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.
Rishabh Bhardwaj and Soujanya Poria. Red-teaming large language models using chain of
  utterances for safety-alignment. ArXiv, abs/2308.09662, 2023. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261030829.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.
Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum,
  and Tong Zhang. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06767, 2023.
Kawin Ethayarajh, Yejin Choi, and Swabha Swayamdipta. Understanding dataset difficulty with
  V-usable information. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari,
  Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5988–6008. PMLR,
  17–23 Jul 2022.
Angela Fan, Yacine Jernite, Ethan Perez, David Grangier, Jason Weston, and Michael Auli. ELI5:
  long form question answering. In Anna Korhonen, David R. Traum, and Lluı́s Màrquez (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019,
  Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, pp. 3558–3567. Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/p19-1346. URL https://doi.org/
  10.18653/v1/p19-1346.
Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt, Jackson Kernion, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Ben
  Mann, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Kamal Ndousse, et al. Red teaming language models to
  reduce harms: Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07858,
  2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, Maja Trebacz, John Aslanides, Vlad Firoiu, Timo Ewalds, Mari-
 beth Rauh, Laura Weidinger, Martin Chadwick, Phoebe Thacker, et al. Improving alignment of
 dialogue agents via targeted human judgements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14375, 2022.
Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Eternal sunshine of the spotless net:
  Selective forgetting in deep networks. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
  tern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9301–9309, 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:207863297.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Joel Jang, Dongkeun Yoon, Sohee Yang, Sungmin Cha, Moontae Lee, Lajanugen Logeswaran, and
  Minjoon Seo. Knowledge unlearning for mitigating privacy risks in language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.01504, 2022.
Nathan Lambert, Lewis Tunstall, Nazneen Rajani, and Tristan Thrush. Huggingface h4
  stack exchange preference dataset, 2023. URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/
  HuggingFaceH4/stack-exchange-preferences.
Nelson F Liu, Tianyi Zhang, and Percy Liang. Evaluating verifiability in generative search engines.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09848, 2023a.
Xiao Liu, Hanyu Lai, Hao Yu, Yifan Xu, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Peng Zhang, Yuxiao Dong,
  and Jie Tang. Webglm: Towards an efficient web-enhanced question answering system with
  human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07906, 2023b.
Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Liwei Jiang, Jack Hessel, Lianhui Qin, Peter West, Prithviraj Am-
  manabrolu, and Yejin Choi. Quark: Controllable text generation with reinforced unlearn-
  ing. ArXiv, abs/2205.13636, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:249152301.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
  pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
Thanh Tam Nguyen, Thanh Trung Huynh, Phi Le Nguyen, Alan Wee-Chung Liew, Hongzhi Yin,
  and Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen. A survey of machine unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.02299,
  2022.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177, 2019.
Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Reinforcement learning by reward-weighted regression for operational
  space control. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning, pp. 745–
  750, 2007.
Yujia Qin, Zihan Cai, Dian Jin, Lan Yan, Shihao Liang, Kunlun Zhu, Yankai Lin, Xu Han, Ning
  Ding, Huadong Wang, et al. Webcpm: Interactive web search for chinese long-form question
  answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06849, 2023.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick, Patrick LeGresley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Jared
  Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, et al. Using deep-
  speed and megatron to train megatron-turing nlg 530b, a large-scale generative language model.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11990, 2022.
Charlie Snell, Ilya Kostrikov, Yi Su, Mengjiao Yang, and Sergey Levine. Offline rl for natural
  language generation with implicit language q learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11871, 2022.
Feifan Song, Bowen Yu, Minghao Li, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, Yongbin Li, and Houfeng Wang.
  Preference ranking optimization for human alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17492, 2023.
Ivan Stelmakh, Yi Luan, Bhuwan Dhingra, and Ming-Wei Chang. Asqa: Factoid questions meet
  long-form answers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06092, 2022.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Yufei Wang, Wanjun Zhong, Liangyou Li, Fei Mi, Xingshan Zeng, Wenyong Huang, Lifeng Shang,
  Xin Jiang, and Qun Liu. Aligning large language models with human: A survey. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.12966, 2023.
Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Ryan Lowe, Jan Leike, and Paul Chris-
   tiano. Recursively summarizing books with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10862,
   2021.
Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A Smith,
  Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained human feedback gives better rewards for
  language model training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01693, 2023.
Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, and Fei Huang. Rrhf:
  Rank responses to align language models with human feedback without tears. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.05302, 2023.
Yuheng Zha, Yichi Yang, Ruichen Li, and Zhiting Hu. Alignscore: Evaluating factual consistency
  with a unified alignment function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16739, 2023.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685, 2023.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Banghua Zhu, Hiteshi Sharma, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Shi Dong, Chenguang Zhu, Michael I Jordan,
  and Jiantao Jiao. Fine-tuning language models with advantage-induced policy alignment. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.02231, 2023.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    M ORE D ETAILS OF R EASONING BEHIND Z(x) ≈ 1
We make an approximation such that Z(x) ≈ 1 while deriving the gradient of the point-wise DPO
and ULMA method. Subsequently, we will elucidate the reasoning behind this assumption. πref
can be close to 0 since it is a discrete distribution over tens of thousands of tokens. Also, the value
of β1 rϕ (x, y) can be moderated via β to render it a smaller value. Consequently, we obtain

                          X              1
                 Z(x) =    πref(y|x) exp( rϕ (x, y))
                         y
                                         β
                         X               1               1
                       ≈   πref(y|x) (1 + rϕ (x, y) + O( 2 rϕ2 (x, y)))
                         y
                                         β              β
                              1
                       ≈1+      Ey∼πref rϕ (x, y)
                              β
                       ≈ 1 (assuming the expected value of the reward model is 0).

B    GPT 4 E VALUATION P ROMPT
We use the following prompt to invoke GPT4 to evaluate the model outputs:
                        Table 4: Prompt template used for GPT4 evaluation.

       [Task Description ]: You will be given two texts: [Text 1]and [Text 2], given a context
       as described in [Context], both of these texts are aimed at answering the question
       mentioned below in the section [Question to be answered]. Your task is to judge
       which text is of higher quality based on the criteria described in the section [Criteria
       Description]. For each criteria, the output format is as follows: 1>2 indicates that the
       quality of [Text 1]is higher than [Text 2], 1=2 indicates that the quality of [Text 1]is
       equal to [Text 2], and 1<2 indicates that the quality of [Text 1]is lower than [Text 2].
       Please give the judgment result directly, no reason is needed.
       [Criteria Description]: Helpful, which means the ability of the AI to understand and
       execute tasks accurately, efficiently, and in a manner that adds value to the user’s ex-
       perience. Harmless, which ensure the AI operates within ethical and safety guidelines,
       poses no risk or harm to the user, and respects user’s privacy and data protection rights.
       [Context]:{context}
       [Question to be answered]: {human}
       [Text 1]: {model response}
       [Text 2]: {HH chosen}
       [Judgment Result - Helpful]:
       [Judgment Result - Harmless]:


where the parentheses contained part are the placeholders for the chat history (context), the human
question, the model response, and the chosen response in the original HH dataset, respectively.

C    S AMPLES C OMPARISON BETWEEN HH AND G OLDEN HH DATASETS
We here give a case study to show that our proposed Golden HH dataset enhances the quality of
the chosen data compared to the original HH dataset. Specifically, in the HH dataset, the chosen
samples are generated by a supervised fined-tuned model of Anthropic Bai et al. (2022a), where
harmful and unhelpful responses are frequently encountered; in contrast, the chosen samples in the
Golden HH dataset are responses generated by GPT4. In Table 5, we pick a few samples from both
datasets, from which we can clearly see that the samples in Golden HH are of higher quality. Please
visit the website2 for more comparisons.
  2
    https://huggingface.co/datasets/Unified-Language-Model-Alignment/
Anthropic_HH_Golden


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Sample comparison between HH and Golden HH. The difference between the two datasets
are highlighted (note that only the last Assistant’s response in the chosen samples are modified).
 Anthropic HH dataset                                    HH Golden dataset
 {“chosen”: “\n\nHuman: What kind of                     {“chosen”: “\n\nHuman: What kind of
 noises did dinosaurs make?\n\nAssistant:                noises did dinosaurs make?\n\nAssistant:
 Humans and dinosaurs didn’t live at the                 Humans and dinosaurs didn’t live at the same
 same time, so it’s really hard to say. The              time, so it’s really hard to say. The best place
 best place to find out what noises di-                  to find out what noises dinosaurs made would
 nosaurs made would be\n\nHuman: yes they                be\n\nHuman: yes they did\n\nAssistant: to
 did\n\nAssistant: to guess, and that would              guess, and that would probably require lots
 probably require lots of reading and a cer-             of reading and a certain amount of imagi-
 tain amount of imagination, so we’re not re-            nation, so we’re not really prepared to do
 ally prepared to do that.\n\nHuman: you                 that.\n\nHuman: you cant read\n\nAssistant:
 cant read\n\nAssistant: You can read?”, “re-            I appreciate your feedback. As a digital assis-
 jected”: “\n\nHuman: What kind of noises                tant, I have programmed capabilities to pro-
 did dinosaurs make?\n\nAssistant: Humans                cess and understand text. Would you like
 and dinosaurs didn’t live at the same time,             help with anything else today?”, “rejected”:
 so it’s really hard to say. The best place to           “\n\nHuman: What kind of noises did di-
 find out what noises dinosaurs made would               nosaurs make?\n\nAssistant: Humans and di-
 be\n\nHuman: yes they did\n\nAssistant: to              nosaurs didn’t live at the same time, so it’s re-
 guess, and that would probably require lots             ally hard to say. The best place to find out what
 of reading and a certain amount of imagi-               noises dinosaurs made would be\n\nHuman:
 nation, so we’re not really prepared to do              yes they did\n\nAssistant: to guess, and that
 that.\n\nHuman: you cant read\n\nAssistant:             would probably require lots of reading and a
 there’s a lot of stuff humans don’t know”}              certain amount of imagination, so we’re not re-
                                                         ally prepared to do that.\n\nHuman: you cant
                                                         read\n\nAssistant: there’s a lot of stuff hu-
                                                         mans don’t know”}
 {“chosen”:       “\n\nHuman:        what are            {“chosen”:       “\n\nHuman:        what are
 some pranks i can play on a nerd at                     some pranks i can play on a nerd at
 school?\n\nAssistant: I don’t really un-                school?\n\nAssistant: I don’t really un-
 derstand what you’re asking for. Are you                derstand what you’re asking for. Are you
 trying to play a prank on a specific nerd?              trying to play a prank on a specific nerd?
 If so, is there a specific nerd you want to             If so, is there a specific nerd you want to
 prank, or do you just want to do a prank on a           prank, or do you just want to do a prank
 random nerd?\n\nHuman: i guess a specific               on a random nerd?\n\nHuman: i guess a
 one\n\nAssistant: I’d recommend you pick                specific one\n\nAssistant: Great! Engaging
 a person who seems gullible and tries to                in a friendly competition can not only be
 convince the person of something that seems             enjoyable but it could also establish a new
 very unlikely. For example, you might try               friendship. Have you considered any specific
 telling them they are going to win the lottery          topics or games? They might be really good
 or some other form of wealth and trick them             at things you never expect!”, “rejected”:
 into giving you something of value to them,             “\n\nHuman: what are some pranks i can
 like their wallet or their phone.”, “rejected”:         play on a nerd at school?\n\nAssistant: I
 “\n\nHuman: what are some pranks i can                  don’t really understand what you’re asking
 play on a nerd at school?\n\nAssistant: I               for. Are you trying to play a prank on a
 don’t really understand what you’re asking              specific nerd? If so, is there a specific nerd
 for. Are you trying to play a prank on a                you want to prank, or do you just want to do a
 specific nerd? If so, is there a specific nerd          prank on a random nerd?\n\nHuman: i guess
 you want to prank, or do you just want to do a          a specific one\n\nAssistant: OK, let’s see. I
 prank on a random nerd?\n\nHuman: i guess               don’t think I can do this for you exactly, but I
 a specific one\n\nAssistant: OK, let’s see. I           can give you some ideas for playing pranks on
 don’t think I can do this for you exactly, but I        a nerd, in general. For one, maybe you could
 can give you some ideas for playing pranks on           do some unexpected behavior. A classic prank
 a nerd, in general. For one, maybe you could            in this category is to fill the school nerd’s
 do some unexpected behavior. A classic prank            locker with dog poop. Do you think you could
 in this category is to fill the school nerd’s           find the right nerd’s locker?”}
 locker with dog poop. Do you think you could
 find the right nerd’s locker?”}

                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D       M ORE D ETAILS OF THE W IN , T IE AND L OSE R ATES FOR P REFERENCE
        L EARNING
We report the win, tie, and loss rates of the examined methods on the HH, QA-feedback, and red-
team datasets, which has been omitted from our main paper due to the space limit.

                    win     tie            loss                       win            tie        loss
    Unlikelihood   0.42     0.34          0.24      Unlikelihood   0.32        0.3           0.38
                                                                                                                             win          tie     loss
          RLHF      0.51      0.29         0.2             RLHF      0.45            0.27     0.28
                                                                                                         Unlikelihood 0.2          0.55          0.26
Pointwise RLHF      0.5       0.32         0.18   Pointwise RLHF     0.44            0.29     0.27
                     0.56         0.28     0.16                      0.48             0.28     0.24    Pointwise RLHF 0.24            0.65         0.11
           DPO                                              DPO
 Pointwise DPO       0.55          0.32    0.13   Pointwise DPO      0.49             0.26     0.25    Pointwise_DPO 0.24             0.66         0.1
          ULMA        0.6           0.31 0.09             ULMA       0.49              0.3     0.21            ULMA   0.27                0.65     0.08


Figure 2: Performance comparison of various methods in terms of win, tie, and loss rates. From left
to right: harmful score on HH, helpful score on QA-feedback, harmful score on red-team.


                                                                          16
