Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CAS: A P ROBABILITY-BASED A PPROACH FOR U NI -
VERSAL C ONDITION A LIGNMENT S CORE

 Chunsan Hong∗                           ByungHee Cha∗                                     Tae-Hyun Oh†
 KAIST                                   Seoul National Univ.                              Dept. EE and GSAI, POSTECH &
                                                                                           Inst. for CREAT, Yonsei Univ.
 South Korea                             South Korea                                       South Korea
 hoarer@kaist.ac.kr                      paulcha1025@snu.ac.kr                             taehyun@postech.ac.kr



                                                              A BSTRACT
            Recent conditional diffusion models have shown remarkable advancements and
            have been widely applied in fascinating real-world applications. However, sam-
            ples generated by these models often do not strictly comply with user-provided
            conditions. Due to this, there have been few attempts to evaluate this alignment
            via pre-trained scoring models to select well-generated samples. Nonetheless,
            current studies are confined to the text-to-image domain and require large train-
            ing datasets. This suggests that crafting alignment scores for various conditions
            will demand considerable resources in the future. In this context, we introduce
            a universal condition alignment score that leverages the conditional probabil-
            ity measurable through the diffusion process. Our technique operates across all
            conditions and requires no additional models beyond the diffusion model used
            for generation, effectively enabling self-rejection. Our experiments validate that
            our metric effectively applies in diverse conditional generations, such as text-to-
            image, {instruction, image}-to-image, edge-/scribble-to-image, and text-to-audio.
            Project page: https://unified-metric.github.io/

                 Model               Condition                                 High Rank               Low Rank

             Text-to-image     “Woman with green
                (Stable      hair, wearing sunglasses
              Diffusion)            and dress”


             Text-to-image      “Van Gogh style, a
              (Fine-tuned      romantic scene of a
             on Van Gogh)       couple sharing an
                                    umbrella”


               Instruct                                  Generate
               Pix2Pix                                  Samples and
                               “Make the whether         Order by
                                  cloudless”             Our Score


              ControlNet



                                   “Sine wave                         Hz
              AudioLDM              with high
                                     pitch”



Figure 1: Results of generated samples ordered by our universal score for various conditions. From
left to right, the sequence shows the conditional diffusion model used, the employed condition, two
high/low-ranked samples. The last column’s generation is audio, so it is visualized using a Mel
Spectrogram. Our metric demonstrates automatic and reliable assessment of perceptual alignment
between condition and generated results across text-to-image models (Rombach et al., 2022), diffu-
sion models trained on specific domains such as Van Gogh, InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023),
ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023), and AudioLDM (Liu et al., 2023), but not limited to.

  ∗
       These authors contributed equally to this work.
   †
       Corresponding author.


                                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1    I NTRODUCTION

The recent surge of large-scale diffusion-based text-to-image models, e.g., (Saharia et al., 2022;
Brooks et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Rombach et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023; Ramesh et al.,
2022), has drawn widespread attention to the overall conditional diffusion models. The conditional
diffusion models take arbitrary conditional inputs provided by the users and generate impressive
samples conforming the given conditions. While text-to-image is the most popular example, the
modalities and types of conditions are not limited, e.g., image-to-image (Brooks et al., 2023), pose-
/segmentation-to-image (Zhang et al., 2023), text-to-audio (Liu et al., 2023), etc. These develop-
ments exhibit impressive compositional generalization abilities and complying behaviors according
to unbounded conditions. Despite those impressive quality, diffusion models generate undesirable
samples that are not perfectly aligned with or even further neglect the given conditions. In this case,
the common practice is to generate many samples for a given condition and manually pick preferred
images among the diverse samples. This demands human’s effort, cost and time.
To mitigate these costs and automate the processes, in the specific text-to-image (T2I) application,
numerous learning-based alignment scores (Hessel et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023;
Kirstain et al., 2023) have been proposed, where they train a separate neural network model to
predict a perceptual alignment score between a text and an image. Likewise, there are a few attempts
to define individual scores for each problem depending on different forms of the condition and the
output, e.g., Gal et al. (2022) present the directional CLIP similarity for image editing.
The previous development methods are all anchored for each specific format pair of condition, in-
put, and output. These require to design alignment scores individually for various conditions, such
as text, segmentation, pose, and others. Establishing a new alignment score for each of the count-
less types of condition pairs requires an immense amount of effort. In particular, learning-based
approaches, e.g., (Hessel et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Kirstain et al., 2023), strongly
rely on extensive and well-curated data for training neural models, which demands significant ex-
penditures in terms of both cost and time for data collection and model training. Furthermore, there
are practical scenarios, where collecting data and training a new score model are even more chal-
lenging; for example, specifically to the T2I field, conditional diffusion models are often fine-tuned
for various domains for user-specific needs, such as animation, pixel art, or even the distinctive style
of a particular artist. However, our experimental findings suggest that existing metrics, relying on
pre-trained models, markedly underperform in these scenarios.
In this regard, we propose Condition Alignment Score (CAS), the universal score to evaluate align-
ment with the given condition and generated samples, regardless of the type of conditions and with-
out any separate model training and data. Our key idea is to use the conditional likelihood p(x|c)
which can be obtained from the diffusion model as CAS. We utilize the same diffusion model which
is used in generating samples without modification, i.e. self-rejection, thereby addressing all the
previously mentioned shortcomings. By leveraging the diffusion model itself, no pre-trained scor-
ing model is needed, and our technique possesses the capability to reject out-of-distribution images
from the domain in which the diffusion was trained. Since the conditional probability itself is used
as metric, there is no need to design separate scores for each condition individually.
We leverage the exact probability computation method by Song et al. (2021b), yet the condi-
tional probability is not measurable during the sampling process where Classifier Free Guidance
(CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2022) is employed. Therefore we utilize the inversion process. However,
we observe that the common practice of the inversion method (Song et al., 2021a), called Denoising
Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM) inversion, does not provide accurate alignment of the reverse pro-
cess due to the utilization of approximations. We additionally present a recursive inversion method
which improves the performance of our method. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

• We present a universal alignment score applicable to all possible conditions.

• Our self-rejection technique leverages the diffusion model that is used for generating images,
  thereby eliminating the dependency on well-curated datasets and separately pre-trained score mod-
  els that the previous studies grappled with.

• We developed a method for improved DDIM inversion, boosting the performance of our technique.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    R ELATED W ORK

Since our scope is related to the assessment of the alignment between given conditions and gen-
erated samples, we first brief the evaluation conventions used in the most popular application of
diffusion, text-to-image (T2I). Among T2I diffusion models, Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), Sta-
ble Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), and DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) stand out as the most
prominent. In these studies, the primary metrics proposed for T2I alignment largely rely on human
evaluation and the CLIP Score (Hessel et al., 2021). CLIP Score measures the cosine similarity be-
tween the text representation and the generated image representation obtained from the pre-trained
CLIP model (Radford et al., 2021). The most recent studies (Wu et al., 2023; Kirstain et al., 2023;
Xu et al., 2023) propose learning-based metrics in which training data includes prompts, multiple
images generated from each prompt, and their human preference annotations. All the aforemen-
tioned scores rely on learning models pre-trained on elaborated or vast datasets. Beyond the T2I
diffusion models, various kinds of conditional diffusion models such as ControlNet (Zhang et al.,
2023), InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023), and AudioLDM (Liu et al., 2023) have been proposed
with different combinations of modalities for conditions and generated targets. Considering vast
application scenarios, it would be impractical to define and develop respective scores for each com-
bination case; thus, it has been barely studied for general use cases.
Our work focuses on measuring the conditional probability of generated samples, and for this, we
employ the method proposed by Song et al. (2021b). They present a method to measure the log-
likelihood of images through a pre-trained diffusion model, which has been adapted in various stud-
ies (Zimmermann et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2023). Zimmermann et al. (2021) utilize this method
to measure the class-conditioned likelihood of images on CIFAR-10 for classification, achieving
promising results. However, we find that calculating conditional probability in this manner does not
work as desired in complex conditions, such as natural language prompts. Our approach diverges in
that we additionally exploit unconditional probability for debiasing, thereby expanding the effective-
ness to numerous conditions. Feng et al. (2023) utilize their method to solve the inverse problem and
empirically exhibit that the image prior is measured close to the real-world prior. However, while
they aim to solve problems using the prior, our approach differs in that we strive to solve problems
leveraging the likelihood.
Research measuring the likelihood probability is not only confined to diffusion models, but has been
explored in other generative models, such as flow-based generative models. Flow-based generative
models (Dinh et al., 2015; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018) come with
a method to calculate the likelihood of a sample and utilize it as an objective function in model
training. Nevertheless, this approach bears a critical drawback: it imposes substantial constraints
on the architecture of models to satisfy the required flow properties. This limitation hampered the
development of flow-based generative models for practical applications, which is why we utilize
diffusion models. Nonetheless, this remains a notable area, as the method proposed by Song et al.
(2021b) is inspired by the formula that flow-based generative models aim to solve.


3    P RELIMINARY

DDIM and DDIM inversion. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020)
serves as generative models that aim to approximate real data distribution q(x) by a model pθ (x).
For each x0 ∼ q(x),√DDPM constructs a discrete Markov chain {x0 , x1 , ..., xN } that satisfies
p(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I). This process is termed the forward step, where the se-
quence {βt }N t=1 is a sequence of positive noise scales, i.e., 0 < β1 , β2 , ..., βN < 1. Assuming that
N is considerably large, DDPM presumes that pN (x) ≈ N (0; I). DDPM starts by sampling xN
from a Gaussian distribution and then undergoes a stochastic reverse process to generate the sample
x0 , e.g., image.
On the contrary, the Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM) adapts the formula to facilitate
a deterministic reverse process, enabling inversion.
                                                   √      Given the conditions of the forwardQt step, the
                                         √
following equation is satisfied: xt = αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0; I), where αt = i=1 (1 − βi ).
By training the diffusion model θ to predict noise ϵ that is deviated to the original image x0 with
given xt , i.e. training with the objective function E[||ϵθ (xt , t) − ϵ||2 ], we can perform the following
sampling to generate image:


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       √
                   √            xt −       1 − αt ϵθ (xt , t)
                                                                   q
          xt−1 =       αt−1 (                √                )+       1 − αt−1 − σt2 ϵθ (xt , t) + σt ϵt .   (1)
                                               αt

Setting σt = 0 for all t results in a deterministic DDIM sampling process. When rearranging this
equation for xt , it becomes the ideal DDIM inversion, which recovers the latent from the image:
                                        xt = at−1 xt−1 + bt−1 ϵθ (xt , t),                                    (2)
              √
                αt           √        q
where at−1 = √αt−1 , bt−1 = ( 1 − αt − ααt−1
                                          t
                                             − αt ), and σt = 0. However, it is contradictory
to use xt itself to recover xt . Therefore, it is convention to approximate it by:
                                       x̂t = at−1 xt−1 + bt−1 ϵθ (xt−1 , t),                                  (3)
so that xt ≈ x̂t . This is referred to as the DDIM inversion. The effectiveness of this approximation
hinges on the linearity assumption to the latents, which is proved by Miyake et al. (2023).
Probability Flow ODE and Exact Probability Computation. Song et al. (2021b) present proba-
bility flow ordinary differential equation (ODE). Contrary to methods like DDIM and DDPM, where
t is treated as a discrete variable, in probability flow ODE, t is considered as a continuous variable,
where latent is denoted as x(t). We change the domain of t from [1, N ] to [0, 1] for probability
flow ODE. Then, probability flow ODE is given as follows: dx = fθ (x(t), t)dt. By applying the
instantaneous change of variable formula provided by Chen et al. (2018) to this equation, one can
compute the probability value of the synthesized sample x(0):
                                                          Z 1
                         log p0 (x(0)) = log p1 (x(1)) +      ∇x · fθ (x(t), t)dt,                  (4)
                                                                   0

where p1 (x) ≈ N (0; I). Since computation of ∇x · fθ (x, t) is intractable, Song et al. (2021b) ap-
proximately compute this value by Skilling-Hutchinson trace estimator (Skilling, 1989; Hutchinson,
1989): ∇x · fθ (x, t) ≈ Ep(z) [z⊤ ∇x fθ (x, t)z]. z is a random variable which satisfies Ep(z) [z] = 0
and Covp(z) [z] = I, and ∇x fθ is Jacobian matrix of fθ where z⊤ ∇x fθ (x, t) can be computed by
reverse mode automatic differentiation.
Classifier Free Guidance (CFG). When training a conditional diffusion model, learning solely
with E[||ϵθ (xt , c, t) − ϵ||2 ] does not yield satisfactory results. Thus, CFG (Ho & Salimans, 2022)
is commonly employed. In this method, both E[||ϵθ (xt , ∅, t) − ϵ||2 ] and E[||ϵθ (xt , c, t) − ϵ||2 ]
are simultaneously trained within a single diffusion network, and an image is sampled through the
following equation: ϵ̃θ (x, c, t) = ϵθ (x, ∅, t) + w · (ϵθ (x, c, t) − ϵθ (x, ∅, t)). We will denote the
latent variable derived through CFG as {x̃t }N   t=0 .


4     M ETHOD
4.1   M ETRIC D EFINITION

Our goal is to estimate the true conditional likelihood             Comparison between Various Probs.
                                                                                             −1
                                                                     ×10
log p(x|c) of the generated sample x given condition c as        3.3
                                                                           Mean Clip Score


a fundamental metric for CAS. In this section, we delve          3.2
into the rationale behind the decision of our score formu-
                                                                 3.1
lation defined by probability. The methodology for cal-                    log pθ (x|c)
culating probability will be discussed further in Sec. 4.2.      3.0       log pθ (x)
                                                                           − log pθ (x)
We approximate the conditional likelihood pθ (x|c) ≈             2.9
                                                                           log pθ (x|c) − log pθ (x)
p(x|c), by the diffusion model as a competent metric for
measuring whether generated samples satisfy the given                100    80        60        40   20

condition. However, upon ranking with this metric, we                Cherry pick N% via each method
discovered that it did not exhibit meaningful tendencies. Figure 2: Average CLIP Score (Hessel
This lack of a meaningful pattern would be primarily due et al., 2021) of top N% images cherry-
to the diffusion model’s inability to mimic the true likeli- picked by each metric.
hood accurately.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Step 1: Sampling Process (CFG)                                Step 2: Inversion Process                 Step 3: Compute
                    𝑥!&   𝑥!&"#     𝑥!#      𝑥$                      𝑥$                    𝑥#'         '
                                                                                                      𝑥&"#    𝑥&'          Probability
                                                                                                                          𝑝(𝑥$ |𝑐)
                                                                                                      '
                𝜀%̃ (𝑥!& , 𝑁, 𝑐)   𝜀%̃ (𝑥!# , 1, 𝑐)                       𝜀% (𝑥$ , 0, 𝑐)         𝜀% (𝑥&"# , 𝑁 − 1, 𝑐)
Initial Noise 𝑥!&                               Generated Image 𝑥$                         𝑥#(         (
                                                                                                      𝑥&"#    𝑥&(
 Prompt 𝑐      “Woman with green hair, wearing sunglasses”                                                                 𝑝(𝑥$ )
                                                                                                      (
                                                                          𝜀% (𝑥$ , 0, ∅)         𝜀% (𝑥&"# , 𝑁 − 1, ∅)


Figure 3: The figure illustrates our method and which latents of the diffusion process are used to
compute CAS, log pθ (x0 |c) − log pθ (x0 ). The values highlighted in yellow in Step 2 are needed.
Therefore, to measure CAS, the image first undergoes an inversion process (Step 2), and then the
values obtained during this process are used to calculate pθ (x0 ) and pθ (x0 |c) (Step 3).


In our analysis, we found a significant bias stemming from pθ (x) when calculating pθ (x|c). We
conducted a preliminary experiment using the Stable Diffusion v1.5 model Rombach et al. (2022)
in Fig. 2. We synthesized 100 images from the prompt “Woman with green hair, wearing sunglasses
and dresses.” We then compared the average CLIP Score (Hessel et al., 2021) of top N% images
cherry-picked by each of log pθ (x), − log pθ (x), log pθ (x|c) and log pθ (x|c) − log pθ (x). Fig. 2
illustrates that images boasting a higher log pθ (x|c) tend to possess a markedly lower CLIP Score,
and that the tendency of log pθ (x|c) and that of log pθ (x) are almost the same. Since a lower CLIP
Score indicates that the image is not aligned with the prompt, this advocates the hypothesis that
log pθ (x|c) does not mimic the true likelihood, p(x|c). On the other hand, we observed − log pθ (x)
shows better performance than log pθ (x). Therefore, we venture the following hypotheses: 1) the
conditions for generating images are often unseen in the training data of the diffusion model; hence
resulting in a low measurement of p(x) and 2) this effect is so pronounced that it biases p(x|c).
We speculate that the task of forming the likelihood distribution of an “unseen condition” demands
strong extrapolation assumptions, which in reality may not hold true. Sehwag et al. (2022) demon-
strate the difficulty in probability estimation in diffusion models when faced with unseen images,
while Kirichenko et al. (2020) reveal similar challenges within flow-based generative models. Based
on these findings, we hypothesize that extrapolation for probability computation on unseen condi-
tions may pose challenges in our scenario.
To address this inherent bias, it is imperative to correct the root cause, which is the skewed log pθ (x).
To this end, we introduce a correction factor into our ranking metric, S = log pθ (x|c)−λ log pθ (x).
In our experiments, we set λ = 1. With this setting, it is equivalent to picking a sample based on
log pθ (c|x) where p(c) is constant. As shown in Fig. 2, images with higher values of our metric
tend to align well with conditional text description.

4.2     DDIM IN ODE FORM & PROBABILITY COMPUTATION

Based on the idea of Sec. 4.1, we define CAS and present its computation method utilizing equa-
tion 4. We denote the latent generated from the unconditional inversion process at time step t as xut ,
and the latent generated from the conditional inversion process at time step t as xct .
Both pθ (x) and pθ (x|c) cannot be measured in the reverse process since CFG breaks the stochastic
modeling of the diffusion model. Instead, the probabilities can be obtained during the inversion
process which is the analogous process to recovering latents. In Fig. 3, we illustrate the process of
how we obtain the latents necessary for probability computation from conditional diffusion models.
When N is large, by transferring the time domain from [1, N ] to [0, 1], we can convert xut and xct
into continuous variables with respect to t as xu (t/N ) and xc (t/N ). Accordingly, CAS is defined:
Definition 1 (Condition Alignment Score (CAS)). Given diffusion model, θ, the latent at time t
from an unconditional DDIM inversion process initiated from an image x(0), xu (t), and the corre-
sponding latent at the time t from a conditional DDIM inversion process also beginning from x(0),
xc (t), the CAS is defined as:
                                         Z 1
                         p1 (xc (1)|c)              ∇x · ϵθ (xc (t), c, t) − ∇x · ϵθ (xu (t), ∅, t)
   CAS(x, c, θ) = log          u
                                       −     α′ (t)                      p                          dt. (5)
                          p1 (x (1))      0                      2α(t) 1 − α(t)


                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We can compute equation 5 using a numerical solver. To derive the above metric, we start by repre-
senting the DDIM in the form of an ordinary differential equation (ODE), (the detailed derivation is
provided in Supplementary Material)
                                                                    !
                           dx      ′      x(t)        ϵθ (x(t), t)
                              = α (t)           −        p            .                         (6)
                           dt            2α(t) 2α(t) 1 − α(t)

Applying equation 4 to equation 6, we can compute the log probability in DDIM inversion process:
                                             p           Z 1
                                              α(0)                  ∇x · ϵθ (xu (t), ∅, t)
                u                u
       log p0 (x (0)) = log p1 (x (1)) + log p      D−       α′ (t)        p               dt, (7)
                                              α(1)        0          2α(t) 1 − α(t)
where D is the number of dimensions of x. For a given condition c, the conditional log probability
is expressed as:
                                                 p         Z 1
                                                   α(0)               ∇x · ϵθ (xc (t), c, t)
                c                  c
       log p0 (x (0)|c) = log p1 (x (1)|c) + log p      D−     α′ (t)       p                dt. (8)
                                                   α(1)     0          2α(t) 1 − α(t)

By subtracting equation 7 from equation 8, we derive the formula for CAS in Definition 1, which
offers a principled framework for evaluating the alignment between a sample and a given condi-
tion through calculating associated probabilities. Note that applying CAS is not limited to image
domains, but can be applied to arbitrary modalities of input and condition.

4.3   I MPROVING DDIM I NVERSION P ROCESS VIA DDIM R ECURSIVE I NVERSION

To obtain an accurate measure of probability, the inver-
sion process must perfectly align with the reverse process.                              ×10−3   Error of Each Inversion
However, the current DDIM inversion does not, as an er-
                                                                                   1.5
ror occurs when approximating xt ≈ x̂t (Mokady et al.,
                                                               M SE(x̂t n , xt )


2023; Miyake et al., 2023). Although several studies                                                              DDIM (n=1)
                                                                                   1.0
have been conducted to address this issue in image edit-                                                          Recur. (n=2)
ing, Mokady et al. (2023); Miyake et al. (2023) present                            0.5                            Recur. (n=5)
the compensation methods exclusively for image editing
                                                                                   0.0
rather than accurately calculating the inversion. On the
                                                                                          0      200   400    600     800   1000
other hand, Wallace et al. (2023) defines a precise method                                               step #
for inversion using two coupled variables. However, it is
unsuitable for probability computation, since it is neces-   Figure 4: Mean Squared Error (MSE)
sary to solve the coupled variable differential equation. In of latent during the reverse process
contrast, we precisely invert the DDIM without bells and     and inversion process of the original
whistles. Under the simple assumption that x̂t is closer to  DDIM inversion and our method (recur-
xt than xt−1 , we can establish the following equation:      sive inversion). We sample xN from
Definition 2 (DDIM Recursive Inversion). We define the a Gaussian     N −1
                                                                          distribution and then gener-
i-th step recursive inversion as:                            ate {xt }k=0   through a reverse process.
                                                             Subsequently, starting from x0 , we im-
            x̂it = at−1 xt−1 + bt−1 ϵθ (x̂ti−1 , t)      (9) plement the inversion processes to pro-
                                                             duce {x̂nt }N
                                                                         t=1 , where setting n = 1
for i = 2, 3, ... and x̂1t = x̂t . We denote the approxima- becomes original DDIM inversion and
tion xt ≈ x̂nt as the n-th order recursive inversion.        n > 1 becomes our recursive inversion.
The difference is apparent by comparing with the original DDIM inversion x̂t = at−1 xt−1 +
bt−1 ϵθ (xt−1 , t). To verify the validity of Definition 2, we empirically test it on the CelebA dataset,
as shown in Fig. 4. This preliminary test exhibits that, through a mere utilization of our proposed
equation, the error between the inversion process and the reverse process can be diminished to less
than 10% of the original DDIM inversion, i.e., accurate. In addition, one might question whether
simply increasing the number of the inversion steps could be beneficial. From our experiments,
the recursive inversion not only saves much time compared to just increasing the steps but also en-
hances the cherry-picking performance of CAS more. We provide the evidence for these claims in
Supplementary Material.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 σ                  0.1              0.01              0.001            0.0001           0.00001
 NRMSE             0.164            0.012              0.002            0.021             0.212

Table 1: Normalized Root Mean Square Error (NRMSE) between log probability computed us-
ing Song et al. (2021b)
                   q andP log probability computed using our method. NRMSE is defined as
                            N
N RM SE(y, ŷ) = 1/N · i ((yi − yˆi )/yi )2 where y is ground truth and ŷ is approximation.

1 Van Gogh Image                                      4 Non Van Gogh Images


Figure 5: Example of 5 generated images from Van Gogh Diffusion. The prompt used for generating
images is “Van Gogh style, a romantic gondola ride under Venetian bridges”. However, except for
the leftmost image, negative weighting to “Van Gogh style” was done for the rest of the images,
leading to a noticeable deviation from the intended artistic style.


4.4   FASTER COMPUTATION

In this section, we propose an efficient and faster method to approximate Skilling-Hutchinson trace
estimator (Skilling, 1989; Hutchinson, 1989) Ep(z) [z⊤ ∇x ϵθ (x, t)z]. Song et al. (2021b) bypass
Jacobian computation from Skilling-Hutchinson estimator by directly calculating z⊤ ∇x ϵθ (x, t) us-
ing backpropagation. However, backpropagation requires expensive computations. To avoid the
resource-intensive backpropagation process, we have approximately computed z⊤ ∇x ϵθ (x, t)z as:
                              ϵθ (x + σz, t) − ϵθ (x, t)  1
      z⊤ ∇x ϵθ (x, t)z ≃ z⊤                              = z⊤ (ϵθ (x + σz, t) − ϵθ (x, t)),        (10)
                                         σ                σ
where σ is a sufficiently small number. By leveraging the above expressions, we can make the
approximation Ep(z) [z⊤ ∇x ϵθ (x, t)z] feasible even without resorting to backpropagation. Notably,
with only two forward operations, the process becomes significantly faster, reducing the total time
to 16% with negligible error. Furthermore, GPU memory used for backpropagation is also saved. In
this work, we set and fix σ to 0.001, which shows the best approximation of log probability in our
empirical test as shown in Table 1.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In our experimental section, we validate the efficacy of our approach through tests on five distinct
models: a T2I diffusion model fine-tuned in the Van Gogh domain (Mackay, 2023), Stable Diffusion
v1.5 (Rombach et al., 2022), InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023), ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023),
and AudioLDM (Liu et al., 2023). Through experiments, we validate that CAS consistently delivers
high performance in various domains without necessitating additional model training.

5.1   T2I D IFFUSION M ODEL

Baselines. To validate ability of CAS as T2I alignment score, we selected several baselines: CLIP
Score (Hessel et al., 2021), Human Preference Score (HPS) (Wu et al., 2023), Image Reward (Xu
et al., 2023), and Pick Score (Kirstain et al., 2023). CLIP Score leverages CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
model which is trained with real image and text annotation pairs. In contrast, HPS, Image Reward,
and Pick Score utilize models that are trained based on human-ranked annotations of multiple images
generated from text prompts. Details are shown in Table 2. Our method utilizes 2nd order recursive
inversion with a total step of 10. The comparison between our method and the established baselines


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Image
                                  CLIP Score                   HPS      Pick Score         Ours
                                                   Reward
  Train data (Image)                  400M        4–9/Text    ∼99K        ∼584K            None
  Train data (Text)                   400M          ∼9K       ∼25K        ∼38K             None
  Acc. on Van Gogh dataset            0.284         0.247     0.229          0.338    0.470 ± 0.013
  Acc. on Pick Score dataset          0.580         0.621     0.697          0.721    0.622 ± 0.004

Table 2: Amount of training data for each metric, and accuracy on our conducted Van Gogh dataset
and Pick Score dataset. For our method, accuracy is measured five times, and we indicate the 95%
confidence interval for these measurements.


 Model              InstructPix2Pix           Canny Edge           Scribble            AudioLDM
                                              ControlNet          ControlNet
 Accuracy (%)             59.2                   64.3                 61.0                 58.3

Table 3: Human preference evaluation on each model. The accuracy listed in the table represents
the average preference accuracy across five participants.



hinges on two pivotal criteria: 1) The capacity to measure whether the image has a style that the
diffusion model is fine-tuned on, and 2) The accuracy in evaluating T2I Alignment. Each of them is
measured under the experiment done in our conducted Van Gogh dataset and Pick Score dataset.
Experiment Setting in Van Gogh Dataset. Evaluating the style fidelity in domain-specific diffu-
sion models is important. Typically, this style is specified within the prompt. Therefore, the T2I
alignment score should also be able to measure whether the image adheres to the specified style. To
exemplify this, we conduct experiments on a diffusion model specifically trained on Vincent Van
Gogh, the well-known artist. For evaluation, we utilize 275 prompts, randomly generated by GPT-4,
encompassing landscapes, portraits, and still-life paintings. For each prompt, we generate five dis-
tinct images using the Van Gogh diffusion model, denoted as “Van Gogh style, {prompt}”. Images
are divided into two groups: 1) one image generated directly from the prompts themselves, and
2) four images generated by applying negative weighting (implemented by the diffuser (von Platen
et al., 2022)) to the “Van Gogh style” portion of the prompt. We designated the ground truth for the
first group as Van Gogh and for the second group as non-Van Gogh. Additionally, we conducted
a human verification step. Examples of this can be found in Fig. 5, where all samples are clearly
distinguished. We compute the proportion of numbers each metric successfully identifies one real
Van Gogh style image per each prompt. The prompts used for evaluating T2I Alignment in each
metric are also framed as “Van Gogh style, {prompt}”.
Experiment Setting in Pick Score dataset. The Pick Score dataset consists of a total of 500
prompts, two image pairs generated from each prompt, and annotations based on human preferences.
Among these, data entries marked as “indistinguishable” are excluded, and we analyze the accuracy
of each method in the remaining 432 image pairs. We utilize Stable Diffusion v1.5 for our score.
Results. As shown in Table 2, our approach exhibits an accuracy that is approximately 13.2% higher
than the second-best performing method, Pick Score in Van Gogh dataset. This result underscores
the inherent advantage of our self-rejection technique, an exceptional capability to measure whether
images are from the intended domain. The margin of superiority is already notable; however, given
that Van Gogh is a globally renowned artist, it is plausible to infer that our method’s performance
would be even more pronounced in minor domains. We also observed that our method outperforms
CLIP Score and is comparable with Image Reward in Pick Score dataset. While our accuracy might
be lower than that of HPS or Pick Score, the fact that CAS outperforms the CLIP Score and is com-
parable with Image Reward without using any pre-trained scoring models is remarkable. Although
it might not represent the state of the art in the T2I domain, the significance lies in the potential for
saving time and resources in the majority of other conditional domains where scores have not yet
been researched. The 2nd order recursive inversion achieved an accuracy about 2.9% higher than the
original DDIM in Pick Score dataset, 1.1% higher than the original DDIM in the Van Gogh dataset.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2   A DDITIONAL M ODALITIES

To corroborate the universal applicability of our formulated metric, we conduct human preference
evaluations across multiple modalities including InstructPix2pix ({instruction, image}-to-image),
ControlNet ({image, text}-to-image), and AudioLDM (text-to-audio).
Human Preference Evaluation. Given the challenge of finding quantitative metrics for evaluation,
we resorted to human preference evaluation to validate our metric’s efficiency. First, we conducted
datasets composed solely of specific conditions, e.g. the dataset for ControlNet evaluation includes
100 canny edge images. We then generate 100 samples for each condition in the dataset. Subse-
quently, participants are given a condition and a pair of two images generated by the corresponding
condition: 1) A randomly selected sample, and 2) a sample with top-1 CAS from the 180 samples.
They are asked to select a sample that aligns with the condition more. Subsequently, we recorded
the ratio of instances in which participants opted for the top-ranked generated sample.
Experimental Setup in InstructPix2Pix. We selected 180 random test cases from the Instruct-
Pix2Pix dataset, each consisting of an original image and prompt for image editing. Since Instruct-
Pix2Pix is a multi-conditional diffusion model, we add a slight twist to our metric: log pθ (x|ci , cp )−
log pθ (x|ci ), where ci is the original image and cp is the editing prompt.
Experimental Setup in ControlNet Model. We evaluated two variants of image conditions: a
scribble image for Scribble ControlNet and a canny edge image for Canny Edge ControlNet. To
carry out the evaluation, we assembled 180 original images from InstructPix2pix. For each original
image, we extracted both scribble and canny edge images. We used extracted image conditions as a
test dataset (edited prompt was employed together to generate samples).
Experimental Setup in AudioLDM Model. To investigate our metric’s efficacy in text-to-audio
modalities, 180 prompts are generated by GPT-4 and used for human preference evaluation.
Results. The results in Table 3 demonstrate around or over 60% preference for our metric across
modalities. Particularly for conditions like canny edge and scribble, despite their inherent ambiguity
in alignment measurement, we observe a notable congruence with human perception. Additionally,
the results from AudioLDM demonstrate that our approach functions effectively, even when the
diffusion model output is not an image. Through these experiments, we verify that our method
successfully measures alignment across any input-output pairs of the diffusion model.
Comparison with Directional CLIP Similarity in Instruct-
                                                                         Avg. Directional CLIP similarity


                                                                         0.21
Pix2Pix In the case of IntructPix2pix, we additionally compare the
relation between CAS and directional CLIP Similarity. The direc-         0.20
tional CLIP similarity, introduced by Gal et al. (2022), measures the    0.19
cosine similarity between the embedding differentials of original
                                                                         0.18
and edited images and texts in the InstructPix2Pix model. This met-
ric is also employed for the evaluation of InstructPix2ix in Brooks      0.17
                                                                              0 25   50    75    100
et al. (2023). To compare our metric with directional CLIP simi-                    Rank
larity, we assess for average directional CLIP similarity per rank.
The outcomes in Fig. 6 indicate an inverse proportionality between Figure 6: Average direc-
our metric and directional CLIP similarity, with a higher rank in our tional CLIP similarity based
metric corresponding to greater directional CLIP similarity.          on CAS rank in the test data.


6     C ONCLUSION
We have successfully introduced a CAS, that leverages conditional probability to calculate alignment
between generated samples and its corresponding conditions. We find that the conditional proba-
bility pθ (x|c) computed from the diffusion model is biased toward probability pθ (x). By utilizing
this knowledge, we achieve success in measuring condition alignment directly from the diffusion
model. Furthermore, we present the recursive inversion which reduces the error of DDIM inversion
to within 10%. Additionally, by presenting an approach that approximates backpropagation compu-
tation with minimal error, we have also managed to reduce computation time to 16%. Through these
methodologies, our technique demonstrates high performance across various conditions without the
need for pre-trained scoring models. Our research is readily applicable across all domains utilizing
the conditional diffusion model, substantially reducing the resources dedicated to cherry-picking.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
T.-H. Oh was partially supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Plan-
ning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.2021-0-02068, Artifi-
cial Intelligence Innovation Hub; No.RS-2023-00225630, Development of Artificial Intelligence
for Text-based 3D Movie Generation; No.2022-0-00124, Development of Artificial Intelligence
Technology for Self-Improving Competency-Aware Learning Capabilities) and by the National Re-
search Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. NRF-
2021R1C1C1006799).

E THICS STATEMENT
Generative models for synthesizing images carry with them several ethical concerns, and these con-
cerns are shared by (or perhaps exacerbated in) any generative models such as ours. Generative
models, in the hands of bad actors, could be abused to generate disinformation. Generative models
such as ours may have the potential to displace creative workers via automation. That said, these
tools may also enable growth and improve accessibility for the creative industry.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We will release the code and examples used in this work.

R EFERENCES
Dreamlike Art. Dreamlike-photoreal-2.0, 2023. URL https://huggingface.co/
  dreamlike-art/dreamlike-photoreal-2.0. Accessed on 2023-11-13.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2023.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.
Laurent Dinh, David Krueger, and Yoshua Bengio. NICE: non-linear independent components esti-
  mation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
Berthy T Feng, Jamie Smith, Michael Rubinstein, Huiwen Chang, Katherine L Bouman, and
  William T Freeman. Score-based diffusion models as principled priors for inverse imaging. In
  IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Amit Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
  Stylegan-nada: Clip-guided domain adaptation of image generators. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics, 2022.
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. CLIPScore: a
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. In Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2021.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.            Classifier-free diffusion guidance.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Michael F Hutchinson. A stochastic estimator of the trace of the influence matrix for laplacian
 smoothing splines. Communications in Statistics-Simulation and Computation, 1989.
Durk P Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew G Wilson. Why normalizing flows fail to detect
  out-of-distribution data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Shahbuland Matiana, Joe Penna, and Omer Levy.
  Pick-a-pic: An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.01569, 2023.
Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Danilo Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and
  Mark D Plumbley. Audioldm: Text-to-audio generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2301.12503, 2023.
Luping Liu, Yi Ren, Zhijie Lin, and Zhou Zhao. Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion models on
  manifolds. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Dallin Mackay.  Van-gogh-diffusion, 2023. URL https://huggingface.co/
  dallinmackay/Van-Gogh-diffusion. Accessed on 2023-09-27.
Daiki Miyake, Akihiro Iohara, Yu Saito, and Toshiyuki Tanaka. Negative-prompt inversion: Fast
  image inversion for editing with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16807,
  2023.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
Utkarsh Ojha, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Towards universal fake image detectors that generalize
  across generative models. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2023.
Prompthero. Openjourney, 2023.    URL https://huggingface.co/prompthero/
  openjourney. Accessed on 2023-11-13.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Vikash Sehwag, Caner Hazirbas, Albert Gordo, Firat Ozgenel, and Cristian Canton. Generating high
  fidelity data from low-density regions using diffusion models. In IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
SG1612222023. Realistic vision v1.4, 2023. URL https://huggingface.co/SG161222/
  Realistic_Vision_V1.4. Accessed on 2023-11-13.
John Skilling. The eigenvalues of mega-dimensional matrices. Maximum Entropy and Bayesian
  Methods, 1989.
John Slegers. Epic-diffusion, 2023. URL https://huggingface.co/johnslegers/
  epic-diffusion. Accessed on 2023-11-13.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021b.
Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil, Anton Lozhkov, Pedro Cuenca, Nathan Lambert, Kashif Rasul,
  Mishig Davaadorj, and Thomas Wolf. Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models. https:
  //github.com/huggingface/diffusers, 2022.
Bram Wallace, Akash Gokul, and Nikhil Naik. Edict: Exact diffusion inversion via coupled trans-
  formations. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
Xiaoshi Wu, Keqiang Sun, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li. Better aligning text-to-image
  models with human preference. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  2023.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao
   Dong. Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05977, 2023.
Binxin Yang, Shuyang Gu, Bo Zhang, Ting Zhang, Xuejin Chen, Xiaoyan Sun, Dong Chen, and
  Fang Wen. Paint by example: Exemplar-based image editing with diffusion models. In IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
Roland S Zimmermann, Lukas Schott, Yang Song, Benjamin A Dunn, and David A Klindt. Score-
  based generative classifiers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Workshops
  (NeurIPSW), 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

         log pθ (x|c1 )     log pθ (x|c2 )       log pθ (x)       CAS(x, c1 , θ)      CAS(x, c2 , θ)
 x1         61059.39          61046.07            61011.86             47.53               34.21
 x2         59566.22          59612.24            59546.12             20.10               66.12

Table 4: The average log pθ (x|c), log pθ (x), and CAS(x, c, θ) of each 100 images x1 and x2
generated from c1 = “a woman with black hair” and c2 =“a woman with rainbow hair”.


      Employed θ                                       Image Source
    in CAS(x, c, θ)          DP2.0                OJ                SD1.5                Real
    DP2.0                    189.90             140.88               32.39              10.47
    OJ                       121.80             171.81               51.04              27.85
    SD1.5                     72.50              54.13              163.24              36.79

Table 5: Average CAS values for images from multiple sources. We measured average CAS for
100 real images from the Coco dataset and 100 images each generated using Dreamlike Pho-
toreal 2.0 (DP2.0) (Art, 2023), OpenJourney (OJ) (Prompthero, 2023), and Stable Diffusion 1.5
(SD1.5) (Rombach et al., 2022), based on 100 captions from the COCO dataset. For the CAS mea-
surement, the same diffusion models, DP2.0, OJ, and SD1.5 are employed.


A     F URTHER A NALYSIS OF CAS

A.1    A DDITIONAL INVESTIGATION INTO PROBABILITY SPACE OF THE DIFFUSION MODELS
In Sec. 4.1, we argued that 1) since the user-specified condition is usually not observed in the
training procedure of diffusion, an image x properly generated from a condition is actually out
of distribution in the training distribution, resulting in a lower measured pθ (x), 2) this effect is so
strong that it biases pθ (x|c), and 3) by debiasing the conditional probability with the probability,
i.e., CAS = log pθ (x|c) − log pθ (x), it becomes possible to measure alignment between image
and conditions. In this section, we provide a toy experiment to support these assertions. We se-
lected two prompts, one representing an unlikely scenario in the real world and the other a more
plausible scenario. The first prompt, c1 , is “a woman with black hair,” and the second, c2 , is “a
woman with rainbow hair.” Then, we generated 100 images from each prompt and measured their
average log pθ (x|c), log pθ (x), and CAS(x, c, θ). As shown in Table 4, the results satisfy all
aspects of our hypothesis: 1) E[log pθ (x1 )] > E[log pθ (x2 )], indicating that less observed condi-
tions result in a lower probability, 2) the similarity between E[log pθ (x)] and E[log pθ (x|c)] sug-
gests that log pθ (x|c) is biased by log pθ (x), and 3) E[CAS(x1 , c1 , θ)] > E[CAS(x2 , c1 , θ)] and
E[CAS(x2 , c2 , θ)] > E[CAS(x1 , c2 , θ)] demonstrate that CAS effectively measures the alignment
between images and conditions.

A.2     T HE ABILITY OF CAS TO DETECT O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION SAMPLES
In this section, we further investigate the capability of CAS to detect out-of-distribution samples
and apply this to fake detection and image generation source detection. In Table 2 our technique
significantly outperforms other methods in the Van Gogh dataset. This indicates the superior ability
of our approach to identify samples that are out-of-distribution from the training distribution of the
diffusion network. To further analyze this, we design the following experiment. We generated 200
images from each of the three different diffusion models, Dreamlike Photoreal 2.0 (DP2.0) (Art,
2023), Open Journey (OJ) (Prompthero, 2023), and Stable Diffusion 1.5 (SD1.5) (Rombach et al.,
2022). We have also prepared 200 real images. Then, we measured the average CAS of each
group of images according to the diffusion models for image generation, and CAS is computed
with respective diffusion models that are used for generating each group of images. As shown in
Table 5, CAS is significantly higher for images generated by the same diffusion model that CAS
employs. Therefore, in the Van Gogh dataset, the scores are biased towards the Van Gogh images,


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Detection                                                        Image Source
                      Category
   Type                                  Real     DP2.0/RV1.4/EPIC/SD2.1         SD1.5/OJ
                            # of
                                         100      100 per each model             None
 Source Detection      Train Samples
                            # of
                                         200      200 per each model             None
                       Test Samples
                            # of
                                         100      100 per each model             None
 Fake Detection        Train Samples
                            # of
                                         200      None                           200 per each model
                       Test Samples

Table 6: Composition of train and test data used for source detection and fake detection. For
dataset construction, we randomly sampled 300 (caption, image) pairs from the COCO valida-
tion dataset. For each caption, we generated images using six diffusion models: Dreamlike Pho-
toreal 2.0 (DP2.0) (Art, 2023), Realistic Vision 1.4 (RV1.4) (SG1612222023, 2023), EPIC diffusion
(EPIC) (Slegers, 2023), Open Journey (OJ) (Prompthero, 2023), Stable Diffusion 1.5 (SD1.5) (Rom-
bach et al., 2022), and Stable Diffusion 2.1 (SD2.1) (Rombach et al., 2022), and then divided them
into train and test sets.


                Method                                 Accuracy    Average Precision
                CLIP-ViT (LC)                            0.87            0.91
                Ours                                     0.92            0.96

Table 7: Result of fake image detection. CLIP-ViT(LC) (Ojha et al., 2023) is the current state-of-
the-art in fake detection.


 Source       Real          DP2.0          RV1.4           EPIC           SD2.1         Total
 Accuracy     0.87          0.86           0.90            0.92           0.95          0.90

                       Table 8: Result of image generation source detection.



leading to higher CAS accuracy. Furthermore, the characteristic of CAS producing high values for
in-distribution samples and low values for real images shown in Table 5 can be straightforwardly
applied to fake image detection and image generation source detection. Through a small-scale ex-
periment, we show the potential of our method to surpass the current state-of-the-art (Ojha et al.,
2023) in fake detection.
For fake detection and image generation source classification, we built a small custom dataset by
randomly sampling (image, caption) pairs from the COCO validation dataset and generating images
using various diffusion models and captions. The construction of this dataset is well described
in Table. 6. The inference process is straightforward: we measure CAS from images using four
diffusion models (DP2.0, RV1.4, EPIC and SD2.1) and feed these into a 3-Layer MLP model to
generate the prediction. During training, the diffusion model is frozen, and only the MLP is trained.
For a baseline in fake detection, we used the current state-of-the-art, CLIP-ViT (LC) (Ojha et al.,
2023), trained on the same dataset. As shown in Table. 7, this CAS ensemble MLP model achieves
an accuracy of 0.92 with only 500 training samples, surpassing the performance of CLIP-ViT (LC),
which is 0.87. It is remarkable that the model performs well even though the diffusion models
used for generating the test and training samples are different. Moreover, as shown in Table 8, the
performance of image generation source classification also reaches an accuracy of 0.90.
The characteristic of CAS measuring lower for out-of-distribution samples in the diffusion model
training distribution can be applied to fake detection models and image generation source classifica-
tion models.


                                                  14
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Model \σ                    0.1                      0.01                    0.001                    0.0001               0.00001
      SD2.1                      1.240                     0.237                   0.033                     0.020                   0.070
      DP2.0                      0.305                     0.053                   0.005                     0.008                   0.198

 Table 9: Normalized Root Mean Square Error (NRMSE) between log probability computed using
 Song et al. (2021b) and log probability computed using our method, across the Dreamlike Photoreal
 2.0 (DP2.0) (Art, 2023) and Stable Diffusion 2.1 (SD2.1) (Rombach et al., 2022).

      σ                  10−2                10−3                     10−4                 10−5                  10−6                 10−7
      Ratio               0.0                    0.0              9.16 · 10−7           9.16 · 10−06         8.85 · 10−05            0.0018

             Table 10: The proportion of each element of the estimated gradient being zero, on various σ.

                            Ground Truth               140000
                                                                               = 10 3                320000
                                                                                                                             = 10 7
            120000                                     120000                                        280000
            100000                                     100000                                        240000
                                                                                                     200000
Frequency


            80000                                         80000
                                                                                                     160000
            60000                                         60000
                                                                                                     120000
            40000                                         40000                                          80000
            20000                                         20000                                          40000
                00.000   0.025   0.050   0.075    0.100      00.000    0.025    0.050    0.075   0.100      00.000   0.025   0.050    0.075   0.100
                                                                      Estimated gradient

                            Figure 7: Histogram of elements in estimated gradient for varying σ.


 A.3             A NALYSIS ON OPTIMAL σ FOR APPROXIMATION OF EQUATION 10
 In Sec. 4.4, we provided the method to approximate z⊤ ∇x ϵθ (x, t)z, avoiding the resource-intensive
 backpropagation process:
                                             ϵθ (x + σz, t) − ϵθ (x, t)  1
                z⊤ ∇x ϵθ (x, t)z ≃ z⊤                                   = z⊤ (ϵθ (x + σz, t) − ϵθ (x, t)).                                    (11)
                                                        σ                σ
 We set σ to 10−3 which shows the best approximation performance in Table 15. However, there are
 two ambiguities: the optimal σ may vary for each diffusion model, and theoretically, a smaller σ
 should yield better performance, which does not align with our experimental results. Therefore, in
 this section, we explore finding the optimal σ and analyze the reasons behind its optimality. In our
 quest to identify the optimal σ for model performance, we extended our ablation study to include
 two additional models, SD2.1 and DP2.0. Our findings, detailed in Table 9, reveal that a σ value of
 0.001 consistently yields the most accurate predictions of log probability across these models.
 The core principle of differentiation suggests that as σ approaches zero, the Normalized Root Mean
 Square Error (NRMSE) should correspondingly decrease. Contrary to this expectation, we observed
 an increase in error when σ was set to 10−7 . This anomaly led us to investigate the underlying
 causes. This discrepancy can be attributed to the precision limitations of the float32 format. At very
 low σ values, subtraction operations lead to significant rounding errors, nullifying the computed
 gradient. This phenomenon became apparent during our analysis of gradient calculations, where we
 observed a noticeable increase in zero-valued gradient elements as σ approached zero. Our further
 analysis includes a comparison of the distribution of elements within the estimated gradient vector.
 We plot the histogram of elements in the estimated gradient, particularly focusing on the proportion
 of elements that are zero in different σ scenarios. Fig. 7 and Table 10 illustrate these findings,
 showing a distinct rise in the frequency of elements near zero. Notably, while the distribution of
 estimated gradients at σ = 10−3 is relatively similar to that of the ground truth, the distribution
 of estimated gradients at σ = 10−7 is quite different from that of the ground truth. The estimated
 gradients are concentrated near zero.


                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Image
                                        CLIP Score                   HPS       Pick Score    Ours
                                                         Reward
          EER on Pick Score dataset        0.419         0.383      0.306        0.278      0.376

                 Table 11: EER for each metric on our conducted Pick Score dataset.

 Model         InstructPix2Pix          Canny Edge                 Scribble              AudioLDM
                                        ControlNet                ControlNet
 p-value          1.74 · 10−8           3.18 · 10−18             2.16 · 10−11            3.22 · 10−7

      Table 12: Statistical significance of human preference evaluation result for each modalities.

                                                         CAS score percentile
                                     0∼25%                                                  75∼100%
    Model                                               25∼50%           50∼75%
                                    (Lowest)                                                (Highest)
    InstructPix2Pix                   0.341              0.489              0.568              0.6
    ControlNet (Canny Edge)          0.4875             0.4875               0.5              0.525
    ControlNet (Scribble)             0.425               0.45               0.55             0.575
    AudioLDM                           0.4               0.439              0.575             0.585

        Table 13: Histogram of average human scores divided based on CAS score percentiles.


This issue is a recognized challenge in numerical differentiation and stems from the inherent preci-
sion constraints of float32. Consequently, adopting a σ value of 10−3 is a widely accepted compro-
mise in addressing these computational limitations. Therefore, we can conclude that our setting of
σ = 10−3 is the promising selection.

B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

B.1     EER METRIC ON P ICKSCORE DATASET
We evaluated the Equal Error Rate (EER) of various methods, including our proposed approach,
using the Pickscore dataset. Since the task in the Pick Score dataset is slightly different from typical
binary classification, we measured EER albeit with a slight modification. For each image pair (image
1, image 2), the preferred image was assigned a score of 1, and the less preferred one a score of 0.
We then calculated the prediction scores as the difference between the scores of the two images (i.e.,
score(image 1) - score(image 2) for image 1, and vice versa for image 2). Using these predictions
and the designated human preference scores, we computed the EER for each method, providing a
nuanced comparison of their performance. As shown in Table 11, EER measured by this scheme
follows the behavior of accuracy.

B.2     A DDITIONAL RESULTS OF OTHER MODALITIES
Statistical Significance of Model Performance We conducted a binomial test on the human evalu-
ation results for a multimodal dataset to assess the probability of the models performing significantly
better than random guessing, assumed to be 50% accuracy. The p-value, which measures the prob-
ability of obtaining a result at least as extreme as the one observed under the assumption of random
guessing, was calculated for each modalities. As shown in Table 12, the p-values for all modalities
are below 0.05. This indicates that the performance on each modalities is statistically significantly
better than random chance, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method across various modalities.
Correlation Between CAS and Human Preferences In Sec. 5.2, we measured the performance
of CAS across various modalities by measuring alignments with the preference of five participants
for each test case. Based on these preferences, we analyze the correlation between CAS and mean
human preference. Dividing the CAS scores into histogram intervals based on percentiles, the corre-


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 λ                     0.8                    0.9                   1.0                   1.1
 Accuracy             0.532                0.525                   0.622                0.494

                Table 14: Accuracy of our method on Pickscore dataset, varying λ.



                             DDIM Inversion                     2nd Order Recursive Inversion
 Step         10               50             100          10              50            100
 Accuracy     0.593            0.589          0.585        0.622           0.601         0.591
 Time (s)     31.3             171.4          347.2        33.2            180.2         364.5

Table 15: Accuracy in Pick Score dataset and average computation time spent for one sample with
various settings of the inversion process.



sponding average human score is measured. As shown in Table 13, there is a tendency for the mean
human score to increase with higher CAS scores, indicating a correlation between CAS and human
preference.


C     A BLATION S TUDY

C.1    P ERFORMANCE OF CAS WITH CHOICE OF DIFFERENT λ

We conducted an ablation study of λ term on CAS(x, c, θ) = log pθ (x|c) − λ log pθ (x). Following
the experiment setting of Sec.5.1, we computed accuracy of our method on Pick Score dataset when
λ = 0.8, 0.9, 1.0, and 1.1. As shown in Table 14, the accuracy is highest when λ = 1.0.


C.2    P ERFORMANCE OF CAS USING VARIOUS INVERSION PROCESS

The accuracy of CAS in Pick Score dataset provided in Sec. 5.1 is based on the 2nd order recursive
inversion with a total step of 10. In this section, we provide the performance of CAS derived from
inversions with different hyperparameters.
The results are presented in Table 15. From the standpoint of computation time, utilizing the 2nd
order inversion is considerably more cheaper than simply increasing the steps in DDIM inversion.
This is predominantly due to the fact that the time required to compute Ep(z) [z⊤ ∇x ϵθ (x, t)z] vastly
outweighs the inversion process itself. We can roughly infer the computation time based on the
number of times the forward function of the diffusion model θ is called for computing ϵθ . If we
denote the number of steps as n, for an i-th order recursive inversion process, the forward function
is called ni times. Meanwhile, to compute Ep(z) [z⊤ ∇x ϵθ (x, t)z], the forward function is called nk
times where k is number of sampling of random variable z. This results in a total of n(i + k) calls.
However, we find that setting k to 20 is optimal for stable experimental outcomes. Therefore, it is
evident that increasing n incurs a significantly greater computational overhead than increasing k,
i.e. recursive inversion is cheaper than simply increasing the number of inversion steps. This aligns
with the results presented in Table 15.
From an accuracy standpoint, we observe the following: 1) The 2nd order recursive inversion consis-
tently outperforms the DDIM inversion, and 2) as the step size increases, accuracy diminishes. The
superior accuracy of the 2nd order recursive inversion signifies that our methodology is functioning
as anticipated. The decline in accuracy with an increased step size in DDIM inversion suggests
that merely enlarging the step size is insufficient for enhancing accuracy. In contrast, our approach
manifests a boost in accuracy.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     T HE DETAILED DERIVATIONS

D.1    T HE FULL DERIVATION OF CAS
In this section, we provide the detailed derivation of CAS in order. Please refer to Sec. 3 and Sec. 4
for the definition of symbols. Before deriving CAS, to recap, DDIM (Song et al., 2021a) is defined
as follows:
                                          √
                           √       xt − 1 − αt ϵθ (xt , t)        p
                  xt−1 = αt−1 (               √               ) + 1 − αt−1 ϵθ (xt , t).              (12)
                                                 αt
where t = 1, 2, ..., N and σt is set as 0 for all t in equation 1. To recap, the probability of generated
sample x(0) can be calculated by:
                                                           Z 1
                        log p0 (x(0)) = log p1 (x(1)) +        ∇x · fθ (x(t), t)dt,                  (13)
                                                              0
where probability flow ODE is given as follows: dx = fθ (x(t), t)dt (Song et al., 2021b). The time
t is a continuous variable whose interval is defined as [0, 1] here.
The framework for calculating CAS is well illustrated in Fig. 3, which involves: 1) undergoing
DDIM inversion for the image x and storing {ϵθ (xt , c, t)}N                         N     c      u
                                                              t=1 , {ϵθ (xt , ∅, t)}t=1 , xN and xN , 2)
applying equation 13 based on these values to compute log pθ (x) and log pθ (x|c), and 3) calculating
CAS(x, c, θ) = log pθ (x|c) − log pθ (x). As mentioned above, equation 13 is calculated under
the ODE of the diffusion process, which treats time as continuous, however, DDIM treats time as
discrete. Therefore, DDIM should be rewritten in the form of ODE. As Liu et al. (2022) did, we
replace discrete t − 1 with a continuous version t − δ and subtract xt from both sides of the equation
to get the differential form:
                                       xt                                 ϵθ (xt , t)
  xt−δ − xt = (αt−δ − αt )( √ √               √      −√ p                             p              ).
                                αt ( αt−δ + αt )          αt ( (1 − αt−δ )αt ) + (1 − αt )αt−δ
                                                                                                    (14)
Then, dividing equation 14 by δ and taking δ to zero, we can get the corresponding ODE:
                                                                                     !
                    dx          xt − xt−δ      ′       x(t)         ϵθ (x(t), t)
                         = lim             = α (t)           −                                      (15)
                           δ→
                            −0
                                                                       p
                     dt             δ                 2α(t) 2α(t) 1 − α(t)
where x(t) and α(t) are the continuous versions of {xt }N                       N
                                                               t=1 and {αt }t=1 with time interval de-
fined as [0,1]. Applying equation 15 to equation 13, we can compute the log probability in DDIM
inversion process:
                                         Z 1                                                !
                                                       ′      x(t)          ϵθ (x(t), t)
       log p0 (x(0)) = log p1 (x(1)) +        ∇x · α (t)              −        p                  dt       (16)
                                           0                 2α(t) 2α(t) 1 − α(t)
                                  Z 1                             Z 1
                                                ∇x · x(t)                     ∇x · ϵθ (x(t), t)

               = log p1 (x(1)) +       α′ (t)               dt −       α′ (t)       p             dt       (17)
                                    0             2α(t)             0         2α(t) 1 − α(t)
                                                 Z α(1)           Z 1
                                                         D                    ∇x · ϵθ (x(t), t)
                            = log p1 (x(1)) +              dα −        α′ (t)       p             dt       (18)
                                                  α(0) 2α           0         2α(t) 1 − α(t)
                                                   p            Z 1
                                                      α(0)                    ∇x · ϵθ (x(t), t)
                           = log p1 (x(1)) + log p         D−         α′ (t)       p             dt,       (19)
                                                      α(1)         0         2α(t) 1 − α(t)
where D is the dimension of image x(0). By applying this formula, we can derive both log pθ (x) and
log pθ (x|c) from the values obtained through DDIM inversion, {ϵθ (xt , t, c)}N                            N
                                                                                     t=1 , {ϵθ (xt , t, ∅)}t=1 ,
  c        u
xN and xN . When N is large, by transferring the time domain from [1, N ] to [0, 1], we can convert
xut and xct into continuous variables with respect to t as xu (t/N ) and xc (t/N ). Then, p0 (xc (0)|c)
and p0 (xu (0)) are derived as:
                                                   p           Z 1
                                                     α(0)                   ∇x · ϵθ (xu (t), ∅, t)
                  u                  u
         log p0 (x (0)) = log p1 (x (1)) + log p          D−         α′ (t)        p               dt,     (20)
                                                     α(1)        0           2α(t) 1 − α(t)
                                                   p           Z 1
                                                     α(0)                   ∇x · ϵθ (xc (t), c, t)
               c                  c
     log p0 (x (0)|c) = log p1 (x (1)|c) + log p          D−         α′ (t)        p               dt.     (21)
                                                     α(1)        0           2α(t) 1 − α(t)


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Subtracting equation 20 from equation 21, CAS can be derived as:
                                      Z 1
                      p1 (xc (1)|c)         ′     ∇x · ϵθ (xc (t), c, t) − ∇x · ϵθ (xu (t), ∅, t)
 CAS(x, c, θ) = log                 −     α   (t)                                                 dt, (22)
                       p1 (xu (1))
                                                                       p
                                       0                       2α(t) 1 − α(t)
where ∇x · ϵθ (xc (t), c, t) and ∇x · ϵθ (xu (t), ∅, t) can be computed by Skilling-Hutchinson trace
estimator (Skilling, 1989; Hutchinson, 1989), ∇x ·ϵθ (x(t), t) = Ep(z) [z⊤ ∇x ϵθ (x, t)z] with respect
to our approximation method introduced in equation 10. With the obtained values from the Skilling-
Hutchinson estimator, the numerical integration method is applied to obtain CAS.

D.2    D ETAILED EXPLANATION OF DDIM RECURSIVE INVERSION
In this section, we provide the underlying idea of the DDIM recursive inversion. To recap, the ideal
DDIM inversion is given as follows:
                                     xt = at−1 xt−1 + bt−1 ϵθ (xt , t),                                  (23)
              √
                αt           √        q
where at−1 = √αt−1 , bt−1 = ( 1 − αt − ααt−1
                                          t
                                             − αt ), and σt = 0. However, it is contradictory
to use xt itself to recover xt . Therefore, it is convention to approximate it by:
                                   x̂t = at−1 xt−1 + bt−1 ϵθ (xt−1 , t),                                 (24)
Our DDIM recursive inversion is defined as follows:
                                    x̂it = at−1 xt−1 + bt−1 ϵθ (x̂ti−1 , t)                              (25)
for i = 2, 3, ... and x̂1t = x̂t , and we denote the approximation xt ≈ x̂nt as the n-th order recursive
inversion.
To effectively illustrate the underlying idea of this DDIM resursive inversion, we consider the simple
case that: 1) x̂t , the latent derived by DDIM inversion is closer to true latent xt than xt−1 , i.e.
||xt −x̂t || < ||xt −xt−1 ||, and 2) for two random vectors u and v close to xt , if ||xt −u|| < ||xt −v||,
then ||ϵθ (xt , t) − ϵθ (u, t)|| < ||ϵθ (xt , t) − ϵθ (v, t)|| holds. Subtracting the ideal DDIM inversion
(equation 23) from 2nd order DDIM inversion (x̂2t in equation 25), the following equations can be
derived:
                              ||x̂2t − xt || = bt−1 ||ϵθ (x̂t , t) − ϵθ (xt , t)||
                                             < bt−1 ||ϵθ (xt−1 , t) − ϵθ (xt , t)||
                                             = ||x̂t − xt ||                                             (26)

by the assumptions. Assuming that ||x̂ti−1 − x|| < ||x̂ti−2 − x||, the following equations can be
derived:
                              ||x̂it − xt || = bt−1 ||ϵθ (x̂i−1
                                                            t   , t) − ϵθ (xt , t)||
                                           < bt−1 ||ϵθ (xi−2
                                                         t   , t) − ϵθ (xt , t)||
                                           = ||x̂i−1
                                                 t   − xt ||.                                            (27)
By applying equation 27 recursively on equation 26, we can expect that the error between the true
latent and predicted latent decreases, i.e., ||x̂t − xt || > ||x̂2t − xt || > ||x̂3t − xt || > ... holds. Note
that we use multiple assumptions for simplicity, which effectively illustrates the underlying idea of
the DDIM recursive inversion.

E     R ANKING E XAMPLES OF CAS

We have prepared several examples demonstrating the ranking of CAS across various modalities,
including text-to-image, image-and-instruction to image, edge-and-prompt to image, and scribble-
and-prompt to image.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Condition                High rank                 Ranked Images


“A winter wonderland
  at night, with ice
 sculptures glowing
  under the aurora
  borealis, people
 skating on a frozen
lake, and cozy igloos
serving warm, spiced
       drinks.”


          Figure 8: Text-to-image. Stable Diffusion v1.5(Rombach et al., 2022) is leveraged.



    Condition                High rank                 Ranked Images


   “A serene beach at
  sunrise, with gentle
waves, a clear sky, and
a lone figure practicing
yoga on the sand, with
  distant boats on the
       horizon.”


          Figure 9: Text-to-image. Stable Diffusion v1.5(Rombach et al., 2022) is leveraged.



    Condition                High rank                 Ranked Images


“Make it a space suit”


   Figure 10: {Image, instruction}-to-image. InstructPix2xPix (Brooks et al., 2023) is leveraged.



                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Condition              High rank                  Ranked Images


  “Add a herd of
    elephants”


  Figure 11: {Image, instruction}-to-image. InstructPix2xPix (Brooks et al., 2023) is leveraged.



   Condition              High rank                  Ranked Images


   “Digital Art -
 Superman by Kai
     Saarto”



 Figure 12: {edge, prompt}-to-image. Controlnet (Canny Edge) (Zhang et al., 2023) is leveraged.



   Condition              High rank                  Ranked Images


 “Log cabin in the
 woods with giant
 spider painting -
  Winter Scenes”


 Figure 13: {edge, prompt}-to-image. Controlnet (Canny Edge) (Zhang et al., 2023) is leveraged.



                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Condition              High rank                 Ranked Images


“South Island Braided
       Rivers”


 Figure 14: {scribble, prompt}-to-image. Controlnet (Scribble) (Zhang et al., 2023) is leveraged.


    Condition              High rank                 Ranked Images


 “Alps Photograph -
Early Winter Mood by
Nicolas Schumacher”



 Figure 15: {scribble, prompt}-to-image. Controlnet (Scribble) (Zhang et al., 2023) is leveraged.


                                               22
