Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NTERPRETING E QUIVARIANT R EPRESENTATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Latent representations are used extensively for downstream tasks, such as visual-
         ization, interpolation or feature extraction of deep learning models. Invariant and
         equivariant neural networks are powerful and well-established models for enforc-
         ing inductive biases. In this paper, we demonstrate that the inductive bias imposed
         on the by an equivariant model must also be taken into account when using latent
         representations. We show how not accounting for the inductive biases leads to
         decreased performance on downstream tasks, and vice versa, how accounting for
         inductive biases can be done effectively by using an invariant projection of the
         latent representations. We propose principles for how to choose such a projection,
         and show the impact of using these principles in two common examples: First,
         we study a permutation equivariant variational auto-encoder trained for molecule
         graph generation; here we show that invariant projections can be designed that
         incur no loss of information in the resulting invariant representation. Next, we
         study a rotation-equivariant representation used for image classification. Here, we
         illustrate how random invariant projections can be used to obtain an invariant rep-
         resentation with a high degree of retained information. In both cases, the analysis
         of invariant latent representations proves superior to their equivariant counterparts.
         Finally, we illustrate that the phenomena documented here for equivariant neural
         networks have counterparts in standard neural networks where invariance is en-
         couraged via augmentation. Thus, while these ambiguities may be known by ex-
         perienced developers of equivariant models, we make both the knowledge as well
         as effective tools to handle the ambiguities available to the broader community.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Latent representations are used extensively in
the interpretation and design of deep learning
models. The latent spaces of VAEs (Kingma
et al., 2019) and masked autoencoders (He
et al., 2022), learned from great amounts of un-
labeled data in an unsupervised or self super-
vised manner, are prominent examples of pow-
erful latent representations. These representa-
tions are used for e.g. molecular-, chemical- or
protein discovery (Detlefsen et al., 2022); im- Figure 1: Visualizing rotated MNIST images via
age generation, synthesis (Goodfellow et al., their equivariant representation (left) hides struc-
2020) and segmentation (Kirillov et al., 2023); ture that becomes apparent using an invariant rep-
interpretability using visualization tools like resentation of the same latent codes (right).
T-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008),
UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018) or PCA on latent embeddings; or counterfactual explainability (Pa-
pernot & McDaniel, 2018). It is natural to ask for such autoencoders – we use VAEs as a running
example – to be equivariant. However, analysing equivariant latent features is no trivial task, and
may yield misguided conclusions if done incorrectly.
A geometric inductive bias can be imposed on deep learning models by requiring the model to be
either invariant or equivariant to certain transformations of the data, usually represented by a group
of symmetries (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Puny et al., 2021). In invariant models, the prediction is
unchanged when group transformations act on the model’s input. Mathematically, we formalize this


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as follows: If h : X → Y is a neural network with a group G acting on the input space X , then h is
G-invariant if h(g · x) = h(x) for all g ∈ G. In equivariant models, the prediction has an analogous
action of the group G on the target space Y, whose transformations are aligned with those acting on
the inputs – as is the case, for instance, with equivariant autoencoders. Then h is G-equivariant if
h(g · x) = g · h(x), aligning the predictions with their inputs according to the group action G.
Both invariant and equivariant networks are commonly designed with latent feature representations
                   f      k
Z, namely h : X −  →Z−    → Y, where the latent space Z has an action of G, and the feature embed-
ding f is G-equivariant. We refer to the latent representation Z as an equivariant representation.
Equivariant latent representations come with the caveat that any latent code z = f (x) ∈ Z will be
equivalent to the – often different – representation g · z = g · f (x) = f (g · x) of the transformed, but
equivalent, input g · x. Thus, each input x will be represented by the entire set G · z = {g · z|g ∈ G}
of latent vectors acted on by the group G. Different choices of g – which are typically not made by
the user but rather determined implicitly by the data collection – can lead to widely different latent
embeddings g · z, see Fig. 1. In this paper, we show how to derive invariant representations, such as
the one shown in Fig. 1, that allow faithful visualization and utilization of equivariant latent codes.

We contribute an empirical demonstration of how naı̈ve interpretation of equivariant latent spaces
can lead to incorrect conclusions about data and decreased performance of derived models. We
mathematically explain how analysis of equivariant latent representations needs to take the group
action into account. We provide explicit tools for doing so using invariant projections of latent
spaces. We evaluate their effect via widely encountered group actions on two widely used model
classes: 1) A permutation equivariant variational autoencoder (VAE) representing molecular graphs
acted on by node permutations, where we obtain isometric invariant representations of the data, and
2) an equivariant representations of a rotation-invariant image classifier, where we showcase random
invariant projections as a general and efficient tool for providing expressive invariant representations.
Finally, we show that the ambiguity of equivariant latent representation also extends to completely
standard deep learning models, where invariance is encouraged via augmentation. An empirical
example shows that even for such models, latent representations display behavior similar to that
observed in equivariant latent spaces. Thus, while these ambiguities might be known and avoided by
experienced developers of equivariant models, pointing them out and providing tools to handle them
is of high relevance to all users that encode implicit biases via either equivariance or augmentation.


2    L ATENT REPRESENTATIONS OF EQUIVARIANT MODELS ARE AMBIGUOUS

In this section, we aim to review the mathematical tools needed to discuss the equivariant represen-
tation illustrated in Fig. 1. As above, let h be a model with a latent feature embedding f :
                                                  f       k
                                           h: X −
                                                →Z−
                                                  → Y.

We consider Z to be a G-equivariant representation. That is, the feature embedding f is G-
equivariant and either: k is G-equivariant (e.g. as in an autoencoder or a segmentation network)
or k is a G-invariant predictor (e.g. as in a classification or regression task).
Typically, f and k are themselves complex models consisting of many layers – in an autoencoder
setup, f would be the encoder and k the decoder. This architecture prototypes a typical classification
or regression network built with a geometric prior in mind, and has been suggested as a general
blueprint for deep learning architectures (Bronstein et al., 2021). However, the interpretation and
utilization of the equivariant latent representation Z is non-trivial, as any two points x1 , x2 ∈ X ,
which are equal up to some group element g ∈ G, i.e. x1 = g · x2 , will not necessarily map to the
same latent representation – they may in fact map to latent representations z1 = f (x1 ) and z2 =
f (x2 ) = g·f (x1 ) which are far apart in the latent space. If standard latent space analysis methods are
applied out of the box on such equivariant representations, this can create problems with downstream
analysis, which typically relies on similar data points having nearby latent representations.
The modelling-assumption that two elements x1 and x2 are equivalent, if there exists a group el-
ement g transforming one into the other is encapsulated by the quotient space X /G, which is the
set consisting of all orbits G · x = [x] = {g · x|g ∈ G} (Bredon, 1972). While quotient spaces


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


have been used extensively in classical approaches to statistics and machine learning with geomet-
ric priors, they often come with non-Euclidean structure and singularities, severely inhibiting the
availability of tools for statistics, optimization, and learning (Feragen & Nye, 2020; Mardia & Dry-
den, 1989; Kolaczyk et al., 2020; Severn et al., 2022; Calissano et al., 2023). Equivariant models
implicitly encode the structure of quotient spaces, while, from the viewpoint of implementation and
optimization, Euclidean tools are available with all the computational advantages they may offer.
In fact, the modeling choice of picking an equivariant feature embedding f implicitly induces a
feature embedding f ′ defined on the quotient spaces of the input space X and the latent space Z:
                                                        f
                                                X               Z
                                                π               π
                                                        f′
                                            X /G                Z/G


Where π denotes the canonical projection. The induced feature embedding f ′ can be defined by via
representatives x from each orbit. That is,
                                        f ′ ([x]) = [f (x)] ∈ Z/G
for every orbit [x] ∈ X /G. The quotient latent representation Z comes with a quotient metric
defining distances between orbits:
                   d([z1 ], [z2 ]) = min ∥g1 · z1 − g2 · z2 ∥ = min ∥z1 − g · z2 ∥.
                                    g1 ,g2 ∈G                         g∈G

This perfectly illustrates the problem: the equivariant latent representation Z is analyzed using
arbitrary equivariant representatives g1 ·z1 and g2 ·z2 of the orbits [z1 ] and [z2 ], the relative distances
between the latent codes g1 · z1 and g2 · z2 , which would typically be used for downstream analysis,
are not well defined, as they depend on the group elements g1 and g2 – and may be very different
from the relative quotient distance d([z1 ], [z2 ]) within Z/G. Thus, it is key that we enforce the
modelling assumption before conducting any down-stream analysis of the data.

3    I NVARIANT ANALYSIS OF EQUIVARIANT REPRESENTATIONS
As outlined in the previous sections, the relative distance between latent equivariant representations
is ill-defined, due to the multiple equivalent representations of data. In this section, we discuss
how invariant projections of the equivariant latent representation can be used to obtain invariant
representations that give unambiguous latent embeddings.
As any equivariant function composed with an invariant function will be invariant, we can obtain
invariant representations of our latent features by passing them through an invariant function. That
is, we aim to find an invariant map s : Z → Zs , and use this to extract invariant latent features. An
obvious invariant projection is the quotient projection π : Z → Z/G – but as discussed above, the
quotient Z/G comes with severe limitations for analysis. Instead, we seek an invariant feature rep-
resentation s where the invariant latent space Zs is Euclidean. Note that any such s can necessarily
be written as a composition of π with another mapping s′ :
Proposition 1. Let s : Z → Zs be an invariant, surjective function. Then s induces a surjective
function s′ : Z/G → Zs as
                                   s′ ([z]) = s(z)    ∀[z] ∈ Z/G.                                   (1)
That is, the following diagram commutes:
                                                            s
                                                    Z           Zs
                                                        ′
                                                    π   s


                                                Z/G

As the map s is chosen post hoc, a main challenge is how to choose s and Zs to retain signal from
the quotient space Z/G while simplifying the analysis. Choosing s(z) = 0 is obviously invariant,
but will destroy any signal in Z.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Prop. 1 (proof in the appendix) highlights one of the problems of picking an arbitrary invariant map
s, as we will in general only be guaranteed that Zs is more coarse than Z/G. We refer to elements
of Z as equivariant representations and to elements of Zs as invariant representations. In general,
an invariant representation s(z) ∈ Zs does not uniquely identify the orbits of an element z ∈ Z. We
argue that the quality of the invariant s depends on whether it satisfies:

Bijectivity: If s induces a bijection s′ an immediate consequence is that all orbits of elements in
Z can be uniquely identified by the corresponding invariant representation.

Isometry: Equivariant/invariant models carry an inductive bias ensuring that elements that are
equal up to the group action are handled similarly. Adhering to this modelling assumption, latent
features of such elements should be close. When s induces an isometric function s′ , then this will
hold exactly for the invariant representations, which is isometric to the quotient representation –
i.e. elements in Z which are close up to the action of a group element will also be close in Zs .
In a special case visited below, where Zs and Z/G are isometric and Zs ⊂ Z, we will speak of Zs
as being an isometric cross section. In cases where such a cross section exists, we argue, that the
equivariant representation of the latent features should be mapped onto the cross section prior to any
subsequent analysis.

3.1   R ETRIEVING AN ISOMETRIC CROSS SECTION : L ATENT GRAPH REPRESENTATION
                                                                                 f      k
Next, we consider the special case of a permutation equivariant model h : X −   → Z −  → X , where
the group G is the symmetric group Sn of permutations on n elements, and the latent representation
is given by Z ⊆ Rn . For this particular case, we show, that we can choose an invariant map s which
induces an isometric cross section Z/G → Zs ⊂ Z. Let s : Z → Zs be defined as
                                            s(z) = σz · z,                                         (2)
where σz ∈ Sn is a permutation which ensures that
                                   zσz (1) ≤ zσz (2) ≤ ... ≤ zσz (n) .                             (3)
In other words, σz is the permutation that sorts the coordinates of z in ascending order. This permu-
tation clearly exists, since all sequences can indeed be sorted. While the sorting permuation σz need
not be unique, the sorted sequence will always be unambiguous.
The resulting map s is clearly invariant, since for all σ ∈ Sn we have that σz and z will have the
same form when sorted. Also, if we let Zs = {s(z) | z ∈ Z}, then s is surjective by definition.
These observations, combined with Proposition 1, allow us to show the following results implying
that s does indeed induce an isometric cross section s′ : Z/Sn → Zs :
Proposition 2. Let s : Z → Zs be the sorting function described above. Furthermore equip Z and
Zs with the Euclidean metric, and Z/Sn with the quotient metric. Then the induced s′ : Z/Sn → Zs
defined as in Proposition 1 is a bijection as well as an isometry. Finally Zs is a convex cone.

The realization that Zs is a convex is important, because it makes linear interpolation between
elements of Zs meaningful: Any point on the the line will be contained in the Zs as well. A proof
of Proposition 2 is included in the appendix.

3.2   W HEN NO ISOMETRIC CROSS SECTION EXISTS : R ANDOM INVARIANT LINEAR
      PROJECTION

We cannot in general design an isometric cross section s′ : Z/G → Zs ⊂ Z, and for this more
general situation we propose random invariant projections as a generic tool. Random projections are
a well known alternative to trained dimensionality reduction techniques (Candes & Tao, 2006), and
can be easily adapted to equivariant latent representations by using random invariant projections.
Random projections are often available: Ma et al. (2018); Maron et al. (2019) propose a basis for
all permutation invariant linear maps, and (Cesa et al., 2022a) describe how E(n)-equivariant and
invariant linear maps can be constructed from a basis. Initializing these layers at random, we obtain
an analogy to the random projections known from classical statistics (Candes & Tao, 2006).


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As we cannot generally invert random projection, these invariant representations do not allow
interpolation-based analysis. However, they are still highly valuable for visualization and interpre-
tation, as well as building new models and analyses directly from the invariant latent representation.

4   R ELATION TO EXISTING INVARIANT, QUOTIENT AND EQUIVARIANT
    LATENT SPACES

Having presented our methods and notation, we can now explain in detail how they relate to recent
related work. While the utility and interpretability of equivariant latent spaces is, to the best of our
knowledge, unexpored in the past, the autoencoder literature explores latent space design. Mehr
et al. (2018) design a quotient autoencoder for 3D shapes whose latents reside on the quotient space
X /G. Here, X parametrizes 3D shape and G is the group of rotations or non-rigid deformations. As
the latent space is G-invariant, shape alignment and interpolation are greatly simplified. However,
as discussed above, quotient spaces are often non-Euclidean, greatly hindering their applicability.
Graph autoencoders commonly use a permutation invariant encoder. This can be achieved by us-
ing permutation equivariant layers (e.g. graph-convolutions) eventually followed by a permutation
invariant layer Winter et al. (2021). As the composition of equivariant and invariant functions is
invariant, this ensures that the latent representation is indeed invariant to permutation of the input
nodes. This was the strategy followed e.g. in early graph VAE models Simonovsky & Komodakis
(2018); Vignac & Frossard (2021); Rigoni et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2018), where an expensive graph
alignment step was needed in order to train the model. To counteract this, newer models Hy & Kon-
dor (2023) replace the invariant latent space with equivariant ones, similar to those studied in this
paper. Similarly to the early VAE models, Winter et al. (2022) construct encoder-decoder architec-
tures; here, however, the needed alignment of outputs with inputs is learned rather than optimized.
It is important to note that mathematically – ignoring implementation challenges – all the above
                                                                   f    g
approaches are essentially equivalent. If, as above, h : X −  →Z −   → Y is a predictor with equiv-
ariant latent feature embedding f , then the quotient map π : Z → Z/G composes with f to form
a quotient latent feature embedding fquot = π ◦ f : X → Z/G as was done in Mehr et al. (2018).
The equivariant representation Z and the quotient latent representation Z/G carry exactly the same
information, only with their own individual caveats – the quotient representation Z/G will often be
non-Euclidean and cumbersome to work with, whereas – as we have seen – the equivariant repre-
sentation Z does not have well defined representatives for each data point.

                                            f             g
                                     X           Z                Y
                                                 π
                                         fquot
                                                         fproj
                                                 Z/G             Zinv

More generally, any invariant latent feature embedding finv : X → Zinv which carries enough in-
formation to enable decoding back onto X , as in (Winter et al., 2022), can necessarily be written
as a composition fproj ◦ fquot of a quotient latent feature embedding fquot : X → Z/G for some
latent space Z, and a projection-like map fproj : Z/G → Zinv . Thus, any differences in perfor-
mance as observed in the experiments of Winter et al. (2022), are caused by implementation choices
rather than differences in the underlying mathematical model – invariant, quotient and equivariant
representations are, mathematically, able to carry the same information. We argue, that when taking
care to respect the group action when utilizing and interpreting the equivariant latent representation
Z, there is no good reason to avoid it.
A final existing approach to obtaining invariant and equivariant maps is using fundamental do-
mains Aslan et al. (2023). When isometric cross sections, they form fundamental domains. How-
ever, you cannot generally find isometric cross sections – indeed, the quotient space can exhibit
strongly non-Euclidean geometry Calissano et al. (2023). This explains, in part, why the quotient
itself is often not an efficient invariant representation. This also indicates that making an isometric,
or even near-isometric, mapping to the representation space mathematically impossible. Random
invariant projections, on the other hand, are in our cases designed as continuous mappings from the
equivariant feature space, and they therefore preserve some local geometric structure.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The first two principal components of the training data for the equivariant (top) and invari-
ant representation (bottom). Each column illustrates a specific molecular property.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   I SOMETRIC INVARIANT REPRESENTATIONS VIA A GRAPH VAE

We consider a permutation equivariant graph variational autoencoder (VAE) h : X → Z → X
trained for molecule generation, and evaluate the utility of its latent codes for various downstream
tasks. Each graph (V, E) ∈ X consists of a set V of (at most) n nodes with an n × dA node feature
matrix, and an n × n × dE edge feature tensor E, where n denotes the number of nodes in the graph.
A permutation g ∈ Sn acts on the graph (V, E) through its associated permutation matrix Pg :

                                      g(V, E) = (Pg V, Pg EPgT ).                                       (4)
                                                     n
The latent space of the VAE is designed as Z = R , and we let s : Z → Zs be the invariant isometry
defined by sorting function as defined in section 3.1.

Dataset. The QM9 dataset Ramakrishnan et al. (2014); Ruddigkeit et al. (2012) consists of ap-
prox. 130.000 stable, small molecules, using 80%/10%/10% for training/validation/testing. Each
molecule is represented by at most 9 heavy atoms, their bindings (edges) and selected molecular
properties. As our interest is in the permutation equivariant representation, we simplify the graphs
to contain only the atom-type (node features) and binding-type (edge features). All graphs are
padded with not-a-node and not-an-edge features to obtain the same node number for each graph.

Model. Our permutation equivariant VAE is based on linear equivariant layers as derived in Maron
et al. (2018b), combined with entry-wise non-linearities, which were used in both the encoder and
decoder. A comprehensive description of the model architecture can be found in appendix.

Visualisation. VAEs are often used to visualize disentangled latent representations (Mathieu et al.,
2019; Mitton et al., 2021). Here we show how, when working with end-to-end permutation equiv-
ariant variational autoencoders, the obtained representations may by deceiving.
The top row of Fig. 2 shows the first two principal components of the equivariant latent represen-
tation1 Z of the QM9 test set, with color representing different molecular properties. Inspecting
the equivariant latent representations in the top row incorrectly suggests no apparent structure in the
data, as molecules with similar molecular properties are by no means close in the latent space. On
   1
     Note that the equivariant representations were obtained by randomly permuting the input nodes to remove
any implicit ordering which may have been implied by the structure of the dataset.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Molecules generated from interpolating between two molecules using the equivariant
(top) and invariant (bottom) representations. Note that while the molecules decoded from z2 and
s(z2 ) differ in their embedding, they are equal up to permutation. Left: Molecules sampled along
the two interpolations. Right: Interpolation in the latent space visualized via the first two principal
components. In the equivariant representation, we visualize a straight blue line between z1 and z2 .
In the invariant representation, we visualize the linear interpolation between s(z1 ) and s(z2 ) (red),
and the equivariant linear interpolation between z1 and z2 subsequently mapped to Zs (blue).


the other hand, when inspecting the isometric invariant representation Zs plotted in the bottom row,
a different picture emerges. Here, we find a clear pattern between latent representation and molec-
ular properties, indicating that the model does indeed pick up on important structure in the data. In
other words, looking at the same latent representation using either the equivariant representation, or
its invariant projection, leads to very different conclusions about both the data and the model.

Latent space interpolation. An autoencoder enables straightforward interpolation between
molecules: Given two molecular graphs G1 , G2 ∈ X , we simply linearly interpolate between their
respective latent representations and pass the resulting latent representation to the decoder, i.e.
                          Gα = g(αf (G1 ) + (1 − α)f (G2 )),      α ∈ [0, 1]                       (5)
Here, we demonstrate how linear interpolation between latent codes z1 and z2 in the equivariant
latent space Z may yield unstable decoded molecules, while linear interpolation between s(z1 ) and
s(z2 ) in the isometric, invariant representation Z2 can remedy this issue. Note that linear interpola-
tion between s(z1 ) and s(z2 ) is indeed meaningful, as we saw in section 3 that Zs is convex.
Fig. 3 compares the equivariant interpolation s(αzi + (1 − α)zj ) to the isometric, invariant inter-
polation αs(zi ) + (1 − α)s(zj ) by visualizing 25 decoded molecules sampled along each of the
interpolating lines (left). The same two interpolating lines are compared through the lens of the
isometric, invariant representation Zs (right). We see that interpolation in the latent space yields
pathological behavior, where molecule structure varies greatly along the line, whereas interpolation
using the isometric, invariant cross section yields a far more smooth variation along the curve.


Figure 4: We investigate the pairwise Hamming distance between consecutive observation pairs
sampled along the linear interpolation. Right: Histograms over the average pairwise distance for
10000 interpolations in the equivariant (blue) and invariant (red) representations. Left: visualization
of the pairwise hamming distance along the single interpolation shown in Fig. 3.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: MAE vs k for a kNN regression model predicting molecular properties from latent repre-
sentations. We show MAE for the equivariant (blue) and isometric invariant representation (red), as
well as invariant pooling operations commonly used to summarize equivariant representations.


We confirm this tendency of difference in interpolation smoothness by computing the pairwise Ham-
ming distance between consecutive molecules sampled along the interpolating line. Fig. 4 shows
quantitatively that consecutive graphs generated by interpolating in the equivariant representation,
are less stable than those generated by interpolating in the invariant, isometric representation.

Stability of molecules in a neighbourhood. Using the test-set containing approximately 13.000
molecules, i.e. 10% of the available data, we now compare local structure of the equivariant- and in-
variant representations using a k-nearest neighbour regression model to predict molecular properties
from latent representations. We report the mean absolute error (MAE), as is the custom for QM9
Wu et al. (2018), as a function of the number of neighbours considered, for each of the properties
in figure 5. In addition to the isometric invariant representation, we also consider several invariant
pooling operations commonly used to summarize equivariant representations. It is clear that the
MAE is consistently lowest when training a predictor on the isometric invariant representations,
indicating that they are better at preserving information needed for downstream analysis.

5.2   ROTATION INVARIANT MNIST CLASSIFIER

We demonstrate random invariant projections of equivari-
ant latent features for a rotation invariant classifier trained
on MNIST LeCun & Cortes (2010) augmented by ro-
                      f        k
tation. Let h : X −  → Z −   → Y be a model where X
is the space of images acted on by the rotation group
G = SO(2). Let f be an equivariant feature embedding            Figure 6: F1 score of KNN classifier.
derived from the E(n)-equivariant architecture of (Cesa
et al., 2022a), followed by an invariant pooling layer k
and a fully connected classifier, making the architecture rotation invariant (see appendix for details).
The first two principal components of the equivariant and invariant representations are shown in
Fig. 7. We see that naively using the equivariant representation yields a plot suggesting very little
signal. However, after applying a random linear projection, the structure becomes strikingly clear.
We analyse the local structure of the representations by applying a k-nearest neighbour classifier.
Its quality is evaluated using the F1 score, see Fig. 6. Again, we see that the quality of the classifier
increases when applied to the invariant representation as opposed to the equivariant one.

6     D ISCUSSION
We have shown, for two commonly encountered types of transformations, how equivariant latent
representations can lead to inappropriate and ambiguous interpretations, as they contain multiple
representations per data point. Moreover, we have explained how equivariant latent representations
implicitly encode well defined quotient representations. We show that for a particular permutation
equivariant representation, this quotient representation Z admits an isometric cross section onto a
well-defined subset Zs , retaining all information from the quotient Z/G. More generally, we show
how random invariant projections can produce informative invariant representations.


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: The figure shows the first two principal components of the training data for the equivariant
representation (right), and the invariant representation (left). The colours represent the labels.


Is the need for post hoc analysis a problem? Post hoc methods are sometimes considered inferior
to intrinsic methods. We emphasize that the invariant representations presented here are compara-
ble to dimensionality reduction methods such as UMAP, T-SNE or PCA – which are also post-
hoc. The strength of our invariant representations is that they do not restrict the equivariant models
themselves. This allows training models with performance only in mind, still obtaining invariant
representations that are functions of the equivariant representations learned in model training.

Weaknesses & future work While choosing an invariant mapping is a natural extension of the
assumption of equivariant modeling, it may not always be clear how this map should be chosen, as
this choice may depend highly on the model architecture. Suggesting suitable high-quality invariant
mappings relevant for widely applied equivariant architectures is an obvious path for future work.

Isn’t this just an argument to avoid the mathematically cumbersome equivariant and invariant
models? Invariant and equivariant models rely on advanced mathematical machinery which make
them less accessible than standard deep learning models. One might be tempted to take our results
as an argument to just avoid these models altogether. However, this would not suffice to avoid our
illustrated problems. An alternative and common way to encourage invariance or equivariance is to
rely on the inherent flexibility of deep learning models to learn approximate invariance/equivariance
through data augmentation. Fig. 8 illustrates the effect of using augmentation to encourage rota-
tion invariance in a classification CNN trained on MNIST Deng (2012) – we see a very similar
pattern as in the previously described SO(2) invariant classifier (right). On the left, we see how an
intermediate latent representation of the CNN represents the MNIST test images when they are ro-
tated randomly (”Augmented Dataset”, left) or embedded using their original orientation (”Aligned
Dataset”, right). Since MNIST images have an orientation, they are naturally aligned with each
other, and the resulting t-SNE plot nicely separates the different digits, obtaining an effect similar to
the SO(2) invariant classifier. For most image classification problems, however, there is no natural
alignment, and a more realistic scenario is the plot on the left, where random rotations have been
applied prior to embedding. What this shows is that while a pre-embedding alignment can work
as a poor man’s invariant representation, the lack of well-defined relative distances that we saw for
strictly equivariant representations cannot be avoided by sticking to more straightforward models.


Figure 8: For the latent representation of a CNN classifier trained with rotation augmentation, ro-
tated MNIST images (left) exhibit a similar embedding behavior as the equivariant representation
of a SO(2) invariant classifier, while the image alignment given by the natural orientation of digits
provides a poor man’s analogue of the invariant representation for the SO(2) invariant classifier.



                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Benjamin Aslan, Daniel Platt, and David Sheard. Group invariant machine learning by fundamental
  domain projections. In NeurIPS Workshop on Symmetry and Geometry in Neural Representations,
  pp. 181–218. PMLR, 2023.
Glen E Bredon. Introduction to compact transformation groups. Academic press, 1972.
Michael M. Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Velickovic. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. CoRR, abs/2104.13478, 2021. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2104.13478.
Anna Calissano, Aasa Feragen, and Simone Vantini. Populations of unlabelled networks: Graph
  space geometry and generalized geodesic principal components. Biometrika, pp. asad024, 2023.
Emmanuel J Candes and Terence Tao. Near-optimal signal recovery from random projections: Uni-
  versal encoding strategies? IEEE transactions on information theory, 52(12):5406–5425, 2006.
Gabriele Cesa, Leon Lang, and Maurice Weiler. A program to build E(N)-equivariant steerable
  CNNs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=WE4qe9xlnQw.
Gabriele Cesa, Leon Lang, and Maurice Weiler. A program to build E(N)-equivariant steerable
  CNNs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022b. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=WE4qe9xlnQw.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In Maria Florina Balcan
  and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2990–2999, New York,
  New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v48/cohenc16.html.
Li Deng. The MNIST database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research [best of
  the web]. IEEE signal processing magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen, Søren Hauberg, and Wouter Boomsma. Learning meaningful representations
  of protein sequences. Nature communications, 13(1):1914, 2022.
Aasa Feragen and Tom Nye. Statistics on stratified spaces. In Riemannian geometric statistics in
  medical image analysis, pp. 299–342. Elsevier, 2020.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
 ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.
Truong Son Hy and Risi Kondor. Multiresolution equivariant graph variational autoencoder. Ma-
  chine Learning: Science and Technology, 4(1):015031, 2023.
Diederik P Kingma, Max Welling, et al. An introduction to variational autoencoders. Foundations
  and Trends® in Machine Learning, 12(4):307–392, 2019.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Eric D Kolaczyk, Linzhen Lin, Steven Rosenberg, Jackson Walters, and Jie Xu. Averages of unla-
  beled networks: geometric characterization and asymptotic behaviour. The Annals of Statistics,
  48(1):514–538, 2020.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes.                         MNIST handwritten digit database.
  http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/, 2010.           URL http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/
  mnist/.

Qi Liu, Miltiadis Allamanis, Marc Brockschmidt, and Alexander Gaunt. Constrained graph varia-
  tional autoencoders for molecule design. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 31, 2018.

Tengfei Ma, Jie Chen, and Cao Xiao. Constrained generation of semantically valid graphs via
  regularizing variational autoencoders. arxiv:1809.02630, September 2018.

KV Mardia and IL Dryden. The statistical analysis of shape data. Biometrika, 76(2):271–281, 1989.

Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Nadav Shamir, and Yaron Lipman. Invariant and equivariant graph
  networks. arxiv:1812.09902, December 2018a.

Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Nadav Shamir, and Yaron Lipman. Invariant and equivariant graph
  networks. arxiv:1812.09902, December 2018b.

Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Hadar Serviansky, and Yaron Lipman. Provably powerful graph
  networks. arxiv:1905.11136, May 2019.

Emile Mathieu, Tom Rainforth, N Siddharth, and Yee Whye Teh. Disentangling disentanglement in
  variational autoencoders. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 4402–4412. PMLR, 2019.

Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and
  projection for dimension reduction. arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.

Eloi Mehr, André Lieutier, Fernando Sanchez Bermudez, Vincent Guitteny, Nicolas Thome, and
  Matthieu Cord. Manifold learning in quotient spaces. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9165–9174, 2018.

Joshua Mitton, Hans M Senn, Klaas Wynne, and Roderick Murray-Smith. A graph VAE and graph
  transformer approach to generating molecular graphs. arxiv:2104.04345, April 2021.

Horace Pan and Risi Kondor. Permutation equivariant layers for higher order interactions. In Gus-
  tau Camps-Valls, Francisco J R Ruiz, and Isabel Valera (eds.), Proceedings of The 25th Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 151 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 5987–6001. PMLR, 2022.

Nicolas Papernot and Patrick McDaniel. Deep k-nearest neighbors: Towards confident, interpretable
  and robust deep learning. arXiv:1803.04765, 2018.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. In NIPS-W, 2017.

Omri Puny, Matan Atzmon, Heli Ben-Hamu, Ishan Misra, Aditya Grover, Edward J Smith, and
 Yaron Lipman. Frame averaging for invariant and equivariant network design. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2110.03336, 2021.

Raghunathan Ramakrishnan, Pavlo O Dral, Matthias Rupp, and O Anatole von Lilienfeld. Quantum
  chemistry structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules. Sci Data, 1:140022, August 2014.

Davide Rigoni, Nicolo Navarin, and Alessandro Sperduti. Conditional constrained graph variational
  autoencoders for molecule design. 2020 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence
  (SSCI), 2020.

Lars Ruddigkeit, Ruud van Deursen, Lorenz C Blum, and Jean-Louis Reymond. Enumeration of
  166 billion organic small molecules in the chemical universe database GDB-17. J. Chem. Inf.
  Model., 52(11):2864–2875, November 2012.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Katie E Severn, Ian L Dryden, and Simon P Preston. Manifold valued data analysis of samples of
  networks, with applications in corpus linguistics. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 16(1):368–390,
  2022.
Martin Simonovsky and Nikos Komodakis. Graphvae: Towards generation of small graphs using
 variational autoencoders. In Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning–ICANN 2018:
 27th International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Rhodes, Greece, October 4-7, 2018,
 Proceedings, Part I 27, pp. 412–422. Springer, 2018.
Erik Henning Thiede, Truong-Son Hy, and Risi Kondor. The general theory of permutation equiv-
  arant neural networks and higher order graph variational encoders. CoRR, abs/2004.03990, 2020.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.03990.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Clement Vignac and Pascal Frossard. Top-N: Equivariant set and graph generation without ex-
  changeability. arxiv:2110.02096, October 2021.
Maurice Weiler and Gabriele Cesa. General E(2)-Equivariant Steerable CNNs. In Conference on
 Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Robin Winter, Frank Noe, and Djork-Arné Clevert.    Permutation-invariant variational au-
  toencoder for graph-level representation learning.  In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer,
  Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 9559–9573. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/
  file/4f3d7d38d24b740c95da2b03dc3a2333-Paper.pdf.
Robin Winter, Marco Bertolini, Tuan Le, Frank Noé, and Djork-Arné Clevert. Unsupervised learn-
  ing of group invariant and equivariant representations. arxiv:2202.07559, February 2022.
Zhenqin Wu, Bharath Ramsundar, Evan N Feinberg, Joseph Gomes, Caleb Geniesse, Aneesh S
  Pappu, Karl Leswing, and Vijay Pande. MoleculeNet: a benchmark for molecular machine learn-
  ing. Chem. Sci., 9(2):513–530, January 2018.


A     A PPENDIX

B     P ROOFS
This section will contain the proofs of central statements used in the paper.

B.1    P ROOF OF PROPOSITION 1

First we show that s′ is well defined. Pick z1 , z2 ∈ Z and assume [z1 ] = [z2 ]. Then, by definition,
z1 ∈ [z2 ], and as a consequence, there exists some permutation σ ∈ Sn such that z1 = σz2 . We
now see that s′ ([z1 ]) = s(z1 ) = s(σz2 ) = s(z2 ) = s′ ([z2 ]), where the third equality follows from s
being invariant, and thus s′ is well defined.
We now show, that s′ is indeed surjective. Pick y ∈ Zs . Since s is surjective, we have that there
exists z ∈ Z such that s(z) = y. However, then s′ ([z]) = s(z) = y. Thus s′ is surjective.

B.2    P ROOF OF PROPOSITION 2

s′ is bijective: As a consequence of proposition 1, the function s′ is well defined, and surjective.
It remains to show that s′ is injective. Pick [z1 ], [z2 ] ∈ Z/Sn and assume [z1 ] ̸= [z2 ]. Then
[z1 ] ∩ [z2 ] = ∅, and thus there exists no permutation σ ∈ Sn such that σz1 = z2 . Assume for
contradiction that s′ ([z1 ]) = s′ ([z2 ]). Then we have that:
                         σz1 z1 = s(z1 ) = s′ ([z1 ]) = s′ ([z2 ]) = s(z2 ) = σz2 z2                     (6)
However, then z2 = (σz−1   2
                             σ  )z
                              z1 1   . But  as Sn is a group π −1
                                                                  π
                                                               z2 z1  ∈ S  n , and thus we have a contradic-
tion.


                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


s′ is an isometry: We aim to show that d([x], [y]) = dZs (s′ ([x], s′ ([y])). For all [x], [y] ∈ Z/Sn ,
where d denotes the quotient metric.
Pick [x], [y] ∈ Z/Sn . Assume without loss of generality that s(x) = x and s(y) = y, i.e. that the
coordinates of x and y are already sorted. We can assume this as the coordinates of any representa-
tive can be sorted, thus achieving representatives with the properties we seek.
It now suffices to show that for any σ ∈ Sn :
                                   n
                                   X                      n
                                                          X
                   d2Zs (x, y) =         (xi − yi )2 ≤      (xσ(i) − yi )2 = d2Zs (σx, y)               (7)
                                   i=1                    i=1

If σ is the identity permutation, then the above equation is trivially true. Also we note, that any
permutation, can be written as a product of transpositions, thus if the above inequality is true for
transpositions, then it will generalize to any permutation. Assume that σ is a transposition, that is
for 1 ≤ j ≤ k ≤ n we have that σ(j) = k, σ(k) = j and σ(i) = i for i ̸= j, k. Then
                                   n
                                   X
                 d2Zs (σx, y) =          (xσ(i) − yi )2                                                 (8)
                                   i=1
                                                                              n
                                                                              X
                              = (xk − yj )2 + (xj − yk )2 +                            (xi − yi )2 ,    (9)
                                                                        i∈{i|π(i)=i}

and therefore it now suffices to show that when xj ≤ xk and yj ≤ yk then
                       (xj − yj )2 + (xk − yk )2 ≤ (xk − yj )2 + (xj − yk )2                           (10)
That this is indeed true, can be seen by observing that xk = xj + c for some constant c ≥ 0. Then
           (xj − yj )2 + (xk − yk )2 = x2j + yj2 − 2xj yj + x2k + yk2 − 2xk yk
                                          = x2j + yj2 − 2(xk − c)yj + x2k + yk2 − 2(xj + c)yk
                                          = (xk − yj )2 + (xj − yk )2 + 2c(yj − yk )
                                          ≤ (xk − yj )2 + (xj − yk )2
where the last inequality follows as 2c(yj − yk ) ≤ 0 since c ≥ 0 and yj ≤ yk by assumption. The
assertion follows.

Zs is a convex cone: We first show that Zs is a cone, i.e. if y ∈ Zs then αy ∈ Zs for all α ≥ 0.
Assume y ∈ Zs . Then
                                     y1 ≤ y2 ≤ ... ≤ yn                                     (11)
but then clearly
                                   αy1 ≤ αy2 ≤ ... ≤ αyn                                    (12)
which means that αy ∈ Zs . Now, we show that Zs is convex. Assume x, y ∈ Zs . Then:
                            x1 ≤ x2 ≤ ... ≤ xn and y1 ≤ y2 ≤ ... ≤ yn                                  (13)
But then
                               x1 + y1 ≤ x2 + y2 ≤ ... ≤ xn + yn                                       (14)
which implies that x + y ∈ Zs . Since Zs is a cone it now follows that Zs is also convex.

C    P ERMUTATION EQUIVARIANT VAE
By Maron et al. (2018a; 2019); Thiede et al. (2020); Pan & Kondor (2022) we have that we can
                                 k         l   ′
define any linear function L : Rn ×d → Rn ×d using exactly b(k + l)dd′ known basis elements,
where b(·) denotes the Bell number. Using this result, we can define node- and edge-level linear
equivariant layers:
                                                                    2   ′
                                           LV : Rn×dv → Rn ×de                                         (15)
                                                    n2 ×de          n2 ×d′e
                                           LE : R              →R                                      (16)


                                                          13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


by using the a weighted linear combination of the known basis elements. That amounts to a total of
8dv d′v weights in the case of LV and 15de d′e weights in the case of LE . For an exact construction
LV and LE please refer to Pan & Kondor (2022). Using this construction we can define a linear
                            2            2   ′
layer LV,E : Rn×dv × Rn ×dE → Rn ×dE , by the channel-wise concatenation of L(V ) and L(E).
Note, that this concatenation does not change the equivariance property of the layer. All linear
layers of the architecture utilised in the current work is of one of these forms. Subsequently a ReLU
activation function is applied.
After each linear layer a 2D convolution with a 1 × 1 kernel size, a ReLU activation and instance
normalization is applied. Again, all operations preserve the equivariance property of the network.

Encoder: The encoder consists of a four linear layers:
       • The first layer is a hybrid layer mapping the edge- and node-representation to a matrix
         representation similar to LV,E .
       • The two subsequent layers are equivariant linear layers mapping between matrix represen-
         tations similar to the layers defined as LE .
       • The last layer, mapping to the latent representation, maps a matrix representation to a fea-
         ture vector representation. In the current work we choose the number of latent channels to
         be 1.
Each of the linear layers, except for the last layer, are followed by 2D convolutions, ReLU activations
and instance normalization as described above.

Decoder:     The decoder is likewise constructed using four linear layers:
       • The first layer maps the latent feature vector to a matrix representation similar to LV .
       • The two subsequent layers map are equivariant linear layers mapping between matrix rep-
         resentations.
       • The last layer is then the concatenation of a linear layer mapping between matrix repre-
         sentations (the reconstructed edge-matrix), and a linear layer mapping to a feature vector
         representation (the reconstructed node-matrix). The reconstructed edgematrix is enforced
         to be symmetric by adding the transpose of itself.
Again, following each layer except the last, we apply ReLU activations and instance normalization.
In the last layer, a pointwise softmax is applied.

Training details: The model was trained using the negative evidence lower bound (ELBO) as is
standard for VAEs. A learning rate of 0.0001 and a batch-size of 32 was chosen. The model was
trained for 1000 epochs. The QM9 dataset was obtained through the pytorch-geometric library Fey
& Lenssen (2019).

D    ROTATION INVARIANT MNIST- CLASSIFIER
The SO(2) invariant MNIST classifier is constructed using the tools provided in the ESCNN library
provided by Weiler & Cesa (2019); Cesa et al. (2022b). That is, the model consists of 6 SO(2)
steerable planar convolutions each of which is followed by batch-normalization and the FourierELU
activation function. Each steerable planar convolution uses two irreducible representations to de-
scribe the output type; one invariant and one equivariant. The first two planar convolutions contains
16 feature maps, the next two 32 feature maps and the last two 64 feature maps. After each pair of
planar convolutions a pooling layer is applied, and after the last convolution pooling is done over
the spatial dimension to ensure invariance. Lastly, an invariant classifier is appended to the model.
This is implemented using specifying a convolution using a kernel size of 1 × 1, and using the trivial
representation to describe the output type, followed by a fully-connected classification network.

Training details: The model was trained using a cross-entropy loss. A learning rate of 0.01 and
a batch-size of 128 was chosen. The model was trained for 100 epochs. The MNIST dataset was
obtained through the pytorch libraryPaszke et al. (2017).


                                                  14
