Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I S T HIS THE S UBSPACE YOU A RE L OOKING FOR ? A N
I NTERPRETABILITY I LLUSION FOR S UBSPACE ACTI -
VATION PATCHING

 Aleksandar Makelov & Georg Lange ∗                                      Atticus Geiger
 SERI MATS                                                               Linguistics Department
 Constellation Offices                                                   Stanford University
 Berkeley, California, USA                                               Stanford, CA 94305, USA
 aleksandar.makelov@gmail.com                                            atticusg@stanford.edu
 georglange4@gmail.com

 Neel Nanda
 neelnanda27@gmail.com



                                                A BSTRACT
            Mechanistic interpretability aims to attribute high-level model behaviors to spe-
            cific, interpretable learned features. It is hypothesized that these features manifest
            as directions or low-dimensional subspaces within activation space. Accordingly,
            recent studies have explored the identification and manipulation of such subspaces
            to reverse-engineer computations, employing methods such as activation patching.
            In this work, we demonstrate that naı̈ve approaches to subspace interventions can
            give rise to interpretability illusions.
            Specifically, even if patching along a subspace has the intended end-to-end causal
            effect on model behavior, this effect may be achieved by activating a dormant
            parallel pathway using a component that is causally disconnected from the model
            output. We demonstrate this in a mathematical example, realize the example em-
            pirically in two different settings (the Indirect Object Identification (IOI) task and
            factual recall), and argue that activating dormant pathways ought to be prevalent
            in practice. In the context of factual recall, we further show that the illusion is re-
            lated to rank-1 fact editing, providing a mechanistic explanation for previous work
            observing an inconsistency between fact editing performance and fact localisation.
            However, this does not imply that activation patching of subspaces is intrinsically
            unfit for interpretability. To contextualize our findings, we also show what a suc-
            cess case looks like in a task (IOI) where prior manual circuit analysis informs
            an understanding of the location of a feature. We explore the additional evidence
            needed to argue that a patched subspace is faithful.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive (Vaswani et al., 2017; De-
vlin et al., 2019; OpenAI, 2023; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), and often surprising (Wei
et al., 2022), capability gains. However, they are still widely considered ‘black boxes’: their suc-
cesses – and failures – remain largely a mystery. It is thus an increasingly pressing scientific and
practical question to understand what LLMs learn and how they make predictions.
This question is in the realm of machine learning interpretability, an important but notoriously slip-
pery concept. Desiderata for interpretability are often not stated precisely, and it is easy to develop
an illusory perception of understanding (Lipton, 2016; Adebayo et al., 2018; Bolukbasi et al., 2021).
Mechanistic interpretability (MI) is a subfield of interpretability that seeks to avoid these pitfalls by
developing a rigorous low-level understanding of the learned algorithms behind a model’s computa-
tions. Specifically, MI frames these computations as collections of narrow, task-specific algorithms
    ∗
        Equal contribution; full version at https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17030


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


– circuits (Olah et al., 2020; Geiger et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023) – whose operations are grounded
in concrete, atomic building blocks akin to variables in a computer program (Olah, 2022) or causal
model (Vig et al., 2020; Geiger et al., 2023a). MI has found applications in several downstream
tasks: removing toxic behaviors from a model while otherwise preserving performance by mini-
mally editing model weights (Li et al., 2023b), changing factual knowledge encoded by models in
specific components to e.g. enable more efficient fine-tuning in a changing world (Meng et al.,
2022a), improving the truthfulness of LLMs at inference time via efficient, localized inference-time
interventions in specific subspaces (Li et al., 2023a) and studying the mechanics of gender bias in
language models (Vig et al., 2020).
A central question in MI is: what is the proper definition of ‘building blocks’(Olah, 2022)? Many
initial mechanistic analyses have focused on mapping circuits to collections of model components
(Wang et al., 2023; Heimersheim & Janiak). A workhorse of these analyses is activation patch-
ing1 (Vig et al., 2020; Geiger et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022a; Wang et al., 2023), which swaps
component activations between examples and looks for task-relevant changes in model outputs.
However, a plethora of empirical evidence suggests that the features LLMs represent and use lie in
linear subspaces of component activations (Nanda, 2023a; Li et al., 2021; Abdou et al., 2021; Grand
et al., 2018). Furthermore, phenomena like superposition and polysemanticity (Elhage et al., 2022)
suggest that these subspaces are not easily enumerable, like individual neurons, but can rather be
identified with a continuous space of arbitrary rotations – so searching for them can be non-trivial.
This raises the question: can we carry over the success of activation patching from component-level
analysis to finding the precise subspaces corresponding to features?
Indeed, recent works such as Geiger et al. (2023b); Wu et al. (2023) have begun identifying inter-
pretable subspaces using gradient descent, with training objectives created using subspace activation
patching. While this kind of end-to-end optimization has promise, we show that it is prone to a kind
of interpretability illusion. Specifically, instead of robustly localizing a variable that is used by the
model in a wide range of contexts, setting the value of a subspace can fabricate such a variable by
activating a dormant pathway in the model via exploiting a causally disconnected feature (Figure 1).
Our results suggest this effect is strongest when overfitting to a small dataset. Our contributions can
be summarized as follows:

       • In Section 3, we construct a distilled mathematical example of the illusion;
       • In Section 4, we find a realization of this phenomenon ‘in the wild’, in the context of
         the indirect object identification task (Wang et al., 2023), where a 1-dimensional subspace
         of MLP activations found using DAS (Geiger et al., 2023b) can seem to encode position
         information about names in the sentence;
       • To contextualize our results, in Section 5 we also show how DAS can be used to find
         subspaces that faithfully represent a feature in a model’s computation. Specifically, we
         find a 1-dimensional subspace encoding the same position information in the IOI task, and
         validate its role in model computations via experiments beyond end-to-end causal effect.
         We argue that activation patching on subspaces of the residual stream is safer and less prone
         to illusions.
       • Going beyond the IOI task, in Section 6 we also exhibit this phenomenon in the setting
         of fact editing (Meng et al., 2022a). We show that 1-dimensional activation patches imply
         equivalent rank-1 model edits (Meng et al., 2022a). In particular, this shows that rank-1
         model edits can also be achieved by activating a dormant pathway in the model, without
         relying on the presence of a fact in the weight being edited. This suggests a mechanistic
         explanation for the observation of (Hase et al., 2023) that rank-1 model editing works
         regardless of whether the fact is present in the weights being edited.
       • in Section 7, we end with arguments and evidence for why this interpretability illusion
         ought to be prevalent in real-world language models.


2    R ELATED W ORK
   1
     also known as ‘interchange intervention’ (Geiger et al., 2020) and related to, but distinct from ‘resample
ablation’ (Chan et al.) or ‘causal tracing’ (Meng et al., 2022a)


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Discovering and causally intervening on


                                                                                        dormant direction


                                                                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                                                                 (v
representations with activation patch-


                                                                                                                                                 g
                                                            or


                                                                                                                                               on
                                                             th
ing. Activation patching (Vig et al., 2020;


                                                                                                                                          al
                                                               og


                                                                                                                                           h
                                                                 on


                                                                                                                                         tc
Geiger et al., 2020) is a widely used causal


                                                                    al


                                                                                                                                      pa
                                                                       c


                                                                                                                                  to
                                                                      om
intervention, whereby the model is run


                                                                                                                             n
                                                                           pl


                                                                                                                           io
                                                                           em


                                                                                                                         ct
on an input A, but chosen activations are


                                                                                                        re
                                                                             en


                                                                                                     di
                                                                                tv
‘patched in’ from input B. Motivated by                example to patch from                                         example to patch into


                                                                                    ⊥
causal mediation analysis (Pearl, 2001), ac-                                                                  causally disconnected direction
                                                                                1                                                 2
tivation patching has been used to localize
model components causally involved in var-


                                                                                                            result of the patch
ious behaviors, such as gender bias (Vig
et al.), factual recall (Meng et al., 2022a),                                   1 + 2
multiple choice questions (Lieberum et al.,
2023), arithmetic (Stolfo et al., 2023) nat-
ural language reasoning (Geiger et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2023; Geiger et al.,         Figure 1: The key mathematical phenomenon behind
2023b; Wu et al., 2023), code (Heimer-          the activation patching illusion (see Appendix Figure
sheim & Janiak), and (in certain regimes)       26 for a step-by-step explanation). By setting the pro-
topic/sentiment/style of free-form natural      jection of an example’s activation (green, right) along
language (Turner et al., 2023).                 a vector (red, top-right) to equal another’s (green, left)
Activation patching is an area of active re-    projection, we obtain a vector orthogonal to both ac-
search, and many recent works have ex-          tivations (blue, down). This can give counterintuitive
tended the method, with patching paths be-      results when the original and new directions have fun-
tween components (Goldowsky-Dill et al.,        damentally different roles in a model’s computation.
2023), automating the finding of sparse sub-
graphs (Conmy et al., 2023), fast approxi-
mations (Nanda, 2023b), and automating the verification of hypotheses (Chan et al.). In particular, a
wide range of interpretability work (Mikolov et al., 2013; Conneau et al., 2018; Tenney et al., 2019;
Burns et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023) suggests the linear representation hypothesis: models encode
features as linear subspaces of component activations that can be arbitrarily rotated with respect to
the standard basis (due to phenomena like superposition, polysemanticity (Arora et al., 2018; Elhage
et al., 2022) and lack of privileged bases (Smolensky, 1986; Elhage et al., 2021)). Motivated by this,
recent work such as Geiger et al. (2023b); Wu et al. (2023); Lieberum et al. (2023) has general-
ized activation patching to operate only on linear subspaces of features rather than patching entire
components (heads, layers and neurons). Our work contributes to this research direction by demon-
strating both (i) a common illusion to avoid when looking for such subspaces and (ii) a detailed case
study of successfully localizing a binary feature to a 1-dimensional subspace.
Factual recall. A well-studied domain for discovering and intervening on learned representations
is the localization and editing of factual knowledge in language models (Geva et al., 2023; Meng
et al., 2022b; Wallat et al., 2020; Dai et al., 2022; Hernandez et al., 2023). A work of particular
note is Meng et al. (2022a), which localizes and edits factual information with a rank-1 intervention
on model weights. However, recent work has shown that rank-1 editing can work even on weights
where the fact supposedly is not encoded (Hase et al., 2023), and that editing a single fact often fails
to have its expected common-sense effect on logically related downstream facts (Cohen et al., 2023;
Zhong et al., 2023). We contribute to this line of work by showing a formal and empirical connection
between activation patching along 1-dimensional subspaces and rank-1 model editing. In particular,
rank-1 model edits can work by creating a dormant pathway of an MLP layer, regardless of whether
the fact is stored there. This provides a mechanistic explanation for the discrepancy observed in
Hase et al. (2023).
Interpretability illusions. Despite the promise of interpretability, a common theme in the field
is identifying ways that techniques may lead to misleading conclusions about of model behavior
(Lipton, 2016). In computer vision, Adebayo et al. (2018) show that a popular class of pixel attri-
bution methods is not sensitive to whether or not the model used to produce is has actually been
trained or not. In Geirhos et al. (2023), the authors show how a circuit can be hardcoded into a
learned model so that it fools interpretability methods; this bears some similarity to our illusion.
In natural language processing, Bolukbasi et al. (2021) show that interpreting single neurons with



                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


maximum activating dataset examples may lead to conflicting results across datasets due to subtle
polysemanticity (Elhage et al., 2022).

3       A C ONCEPTUAL V IEW OF THE I LLUSION
Activation patching. Activation patching (Vig et al., 2020; Geiger et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023;
Chan et al.) is an interpretability technique that intervenes upon model components, forcing them
to take on values they would have taken if a different input were provided. For instance, consider
a model that has knowledge of the locations of famous landmarks, and completes e.g. the sentence
A = ‘The Eiffel Tower is in’ with ‘Paris’. How can we find which component of the model is
responsible for knowing that ‘Paris’ is the right completion? Activation patching approaches this
question by (i) running the model on A, (ii) storing the activation of a chosen component c, and (iii)
running the model on e.g. B = ‘The Colosseum is in’, but with the activation of c taken from A. If
we find that the model outputs ‘Paris’ instead of ‘Rome’ in step (iii), this suggests that component c
is important for the task of recalling the location of a landmark.
Subspace Activation Patching. The linear representation hypothesis proposes that linear subspaces
of vectors will be the most interpretable model components. To search for such subspaces, we can
adopt a natural generalization of full component activation patching which only patches the values
of a subspace U (while leaving the projection on its orthogonal complement U ⊥ unchanged). This
was proposed in Geiger et al. (2023b), and closely related variants appear in Turner et al. (2023);
Nanda et al. (2023); Lieberum et al. (2023).
For the purposes of exposition, we now restrict our discussion to activation patching of a 1-
dimensional subspace (i.e. a direction) represented by a unit vector v. In this case, the subspace
U is the 1-dimensional subspace spanned by the vector v 2 . If actA , actB ∈ Rd are the activations
of a model component C on examples A, B and pA = v > actA , pB = v > actB are their projections
along v, patching from A into B along v results in the patched activation

                                       actpatched
                                          B       = actB + (pA − pB )v                                          (1)

Intuition. When will the update in equation 1 change the model’s output in the intended way? Intu-
itively, two properties are necessary: v must be activated differently by the two prompts (otherwise
pA ≈ pB and the patch has no effect), and v must be causally connected to the model’s outputs
(otherwise, if e.g. v is in the nullspace of downstream model components, changing the activation
along v won’t change model predictions). A direction v faithful to the model’s computation will
simultaneously have these two properties.
The crux of the illusion is that v may obtain each of the two properties from two unrelated directions
in activation space, as shown in Figure 1. Specifically, we can form v = vdisconnected + vdormant , where
vdisconnected distinguishes between the two prompts, but is in the nullspace of all downstream model
components; and vdormant can in principle steer the model in the way intended by the patch, but is
not activated differently by the two prompts. By patching along the sum of these directions, the
variation in the disconnected part activates the dormant part, which then achieves the causal effect;
this is illustrated in Figure 13 .
Formalization. Let M : X → O be a machine learning model that on input x ∈ X outputs a
vector y ∈ O of probabilities over a set of output classes. Let D be a distribution over X , and C
be a component of M, such that for x ∼ D the hidden activation of C is a vector cx ∈ Rd . For a
subspace UC ⊂ Rd , we let ux be the orthogonal projection of cx onto UC . Finally, let MUC ←uy (x)
be the result of running M with the input x and setting the subspace UC patched to uy .
We say U is causally disconnected if MUC ←u0 (x) = M(x) for all u0 ∈ U . In other words, setting
the value of a causally disconnected subspace to any vector has no effect on model outputs. We say
U is dormant if MUC ←uy (x) ≈ M(x) with high probability over x, y ∼ D, but given x ∼ D,
there exists u such that MUC ←u (x) 6≈ M(x). In other words, a dormant subspace is approximately
    2
     We remark that the illusion also applies to higher-dimensional subspaces (see Appendix A.1 for details).
    3
     By contrast, patching along either of the two components individually has no effect: setting only the
projection along vdisconnected to any value has no effect on outputs by definition; and patching only along vdormant
will have a weak effect because both examples activate it similarly.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      160         Input
                              ABB (no intervention)
                      140     BAB (no intervention)
                              patch BAB -> ABB
                              patch ABB -> BAB
                      120
Number of examples

                                                                              Patching                 FLDD         Interchange
                      100                                                     subspace                                accuracy
                      80                                                      full MLP                     -8%             0.0%
                      60
                                                                              vMLP                       46.7%             4.2%
                                                                              vMLP rowspace              13.5%             0.2%
                      40                                                      vMLP nullspace                0%             0.0%
                      20                                                      full residual stream      123.6%            54.8%
                                                                              vresid                    140.7%            74.8%
                       0
                            10.0 7.5      5.0    2.5 0.0   2.5   5.0   7.5    vresid rowspace           127.5%            63.1%
                                                                              vresid nullspace           13.9%             0.4%
                                Activation projection                         vgrad                     111.5%            45.1%
                                                                              vgrad rowspace             106.47           40.6%
Figure 3: Projections of the output of the                                    vgrad nullspace             2.2%             0.0%
MLP layer on the gradient direction vgrad
before (blue/orange) and after (green/red)                                   Table 1: Effects of activation patching of full compo-
the activation patch along vMLP . Here and                                   nents and 1-dimensional subspaces on the IOI task:
elsewhere, ‘ABB’ denotes prompts where                                       fractional logit diff (higher means less successful
the IO name comes first, and ‘BAB’ de-                                       patch; 100% means no change) and interchange ac-
notes prompts where the S name comes                                         curacy (fraction of predictions flipped; higher means
first.                                                                       more successful patch).


causally disconnected on the data distribution, but can have substantial causal effect if set to out of
distribution values. We present a minimal concrete example of the illusion in the language of these
concepts in Appendix A.3, where we also discuss a concrete hypothesis to test for the illusion.


4                    T HE I LLUSION IN THE I NDIRECT O BJECT I DENTIFICATION TASK

4.1                  P RELIMINARIES

In Wang et al. (2023), the authors analyze how the decoder-only transformer language model GPT-2
Small (Radford et al., 2019) performs the indirect object identification task. In this task, the model
is required to complete sentences of the form ‘When Mary and John went to the store, John gave a
bottle of milk to’ (with the intended completion in this case being ‘ Mary’). We refer to the repeated
name (John) as S, the subject, and the non-repeated name (Mary) as IO, the indirect object. We
use the same model GPT-2 Small, with a dataset that spans 216 names, 144 objects (e.g., ‘bottle of
milk’) and 75 places (e.g., ‘store’) and three templates, split equally between a train and test set (see
Appendix B for more details).
Wang et al. (2023) suggest the model uses the algorithm ‘Find the two names in the sentence, detect
the repeated name, and predict the non-repeated name’ to do this task. In particular, they find a set
of four heads in layers 7 and 8 – the S-Inhibition heads – that output the signal responsible for
not predicting the repeated name. The dominant part of this signal is of the form ‘Don’t attend to
the name in first/second position in the first sentence’ depending on where the S name appears (see
Appendix A in Wang et al. (2023) for details). This signal is added to the residual stream4 at the last
token position, and is then picked up by another class of heads in layers 9, 10 and 11 – the Name
Mover heads – which incorporate it in their queries to shift attention to the IO name and copy it to
the last token position, so that it can be predicted (Appendix Figure 21).

    4
      We follow the conventions of Elhage et al. (2021) when describing internals of transformer models. The
residual stream at layer k is the sum of the output of all layers up to k − 1, and is the input into layer k.


                                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   F INDING S UBSPACES M EDIATING NAME P OSITION I NFORMATION

Given these findings, a natural next question is: how, precisely, do the S-Inhibition heads commu-
nicate the positional signal to the name mover heads? In particular, ‘don’t attend to the first/second
name’ is plausibly a binary feature represented by a 1-dimensional subspace. In this subsection, we
present several methods to look for such a subspace.
Gradient of name mover attention scores. The three name mover heads identified in Wang et al.
(2023) will attend to one of the names, and the model will predict whichever name is attended to.
The position feature matters mechanistically by determining whether they attend to IO over S. So we
can take the gradient of the difference of attention scores of these heads on the S and IO names. For
a given IOI example, we expect this gradient will encode the position signal, and some of the name
signal. By averaging gradients over the entire distribution, we expect the name signal to average out,
and the position signal to be reinforced. Motivated by this, we compute a direction vgrad as follows.
We take the average gradient of the difference of attention scores of the three name mover heads
between the positions where the S and IO names are, average this over 2000 samples from our test
distribution, and normalize the resulting vector to have unit `2 norm.
Distributed alignment search. Instead of taking the gradient in specific attention heads informed
by previous work, we can also directly optimize for a direction that mediates the position signal. This
is the approach taken by DAS (Geiger et al., 2023b). In our context, DAS optimizes for an activation
subspace which, when activation patched from prompt B into prompt A, makes the model behave
as if the relative position of the IO and S names in the sentence is as in prompt B. Specifically,
we train DAS to maximize the difference between the logits of the name that should be predicted
if this patch succeeded, and the other name. We find that relatively small sample sizes (e.g., 500)
are sufficient. This approach is based purely on whether the model outputs the correct answer, and
does not make any assumptions about the role of name mover heads. We let vMLP and vresid be
1-dimensional subspaces found by DAS in the layer 8 MLP activations and layer 8 residual stream
output at the last token, respectively.

4.3   D EMONSTRATING THE I LLUSION FOR THE vMLP D IRECTION

Methodology. In this section, we perform all patches between examples that only differ in the
variable we want to localize in the model, i.e. the position of the S and IO names in the first
sentence. That is, we patch from e.g. ‘Then, Mary and John went to the store. John gave a book to’
into ‘Then, John and Mary went to the store. John gave a book to’, and vice-versa. We report all
metrics on a test set that is not used to train the interventions that require training. We consider the
following activation patching interventions:

       • full MLP: patching the hidden activation of the 8-th MLP layer at the last token.
       • vMLP : patching along the direction vMLP found in Subsection 4.2.
       • vMLP nullspace: patching along the causally disconnected component of vMLP . This is the
                                nullspace
         orthogonal projection vMLP       of vMLP on the nullspace ker Wout of the down-projection
         Wout of the MLP layer.
       • vMLP rowspace: patching along the causally relevant component of vMLP . This is the
                                rowspace
         orthogonal projection vMLP      of vMLP on the rowspace of Wout . Note that we have the
                                              nullspace    rowspace
         orthogonal decomposition vMLP = vMLP           + vMLP      .
       • full residual stream: patching the entire activation of the residual stream at the last token
         after layer 8 of the model. This is indicated as the location of vresid in Figure 21.

All activation patches have the goal of making the model output the S name instead of the IO
name. Accordingly, we use the logit difference between the logits assigned to the IO and S names
to measure how well a patch performs. Formally, let logitIO (x) , logitS (x) denote the last-token
logits output by the model for the IO and S names respectively on input x. The logit difference
logitdiff (x) := logitIO (x) − logitS (x) measures the confidence of the model for the IO name
over the S name (it is the log-odds between the two names assigned by the model). It averages
≈ 3.3 over the IOI distribution, and is positive for almost all examples (99%+). Similarly, for
an activation patching intervention P , let logitP            P
                                                 IO (x), logitS (x) be the corresponding logits when


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


run on x with P applied, with logitdiff P (x) := logitP                P
                                                         IO (x) − logitS (x). Our main metric is the
average fractional logit difference decrease (FLDD) due to a patching intervention P , given by
                               P
FLDDP (x) = 1 − logitdiff        (x)
                       logitdiff(x) . This metric is zero when the patch has no effect on the logit
difference on average, and values above 100% suggest that the patch more often than not makes the
model prefer the S name over the IO name. We also report the interchange accuracy, which is
the fraction of prompts for which the IO name is assigned a higher logit than the S name, but the
intervention P reverses this.
Results. Metrics are shown in Table 1. Through these metrics and additional experiments, we
exhaustively confirm the mechanics of the illusion.
T HE CAUSALLY DISCONNECTED COMPONENT OF vMLP DRIVES THE EFFECT. While patching the
vMLP direction has a significant effect on the FLDD metric (46.7%), this effect is greatly diminished
when we remove the component of vMLP in ker Wout whose activations are (provably) causally
disconnected from model predictions (13.5%), or when we patch the entire MLP activation (−8%,
actually increasing confidence). By contrast, performing analogous ablations on vresid leads to very
similar numbers (140.7%/127.5%/123.6%; we refer the reader to Section 5 for details on the vresid
experiments). This confirms our hypothesis from Section 4.
PATCHING vMLP ACTIVATES A DORMANT PATHWAY THROUGH THE MLP. To corroborate these
findings, in Figure 3, we plot the projection of the MLP layer’s contribution to the residual stream
on the gradient direction vgrad before and after patching, in order to see how it contributes to the
attention of name mover heads. We observe that in the absence of intervention, the MLP output is
weakly sensitive to the name position information, whereas after the patch this changes significantly.
F URTHER VALIDATIONS OF THE ILLUSION . We observe that the disconnected-dormant decom-
position from the illusion approximately holds: the causally disconnected component of vMLP (the
one in ker Wout ) is significantly more activated by the position information than the component in
             ⊥
(ker Wout ) , which is the one driving the causal effect (Appendix Figure 20); in this sense, the
causally relevant component is ‘dormant’ relative to the causally diconnected one. While the contri-
bution of the vMLP patch to logit difference may appear relatively small, in Appendix B.4 we argue
that this is significant for a single component. Finally, in Appendix B.5, we show that we can find
a direction within the post-gelu activations that has an even stronger effect on the model’s behavior,
even when we replace the MLP weights with random matrices.
5    F INDING AND VALIDATING A FAITHFUL D IRECTION M EDIATING NAME
     P OSITION IN THE IOI TASK
As a counterpoint to the illusion, in this section we demonstrate a success case for subspace acti-
vation patching and DAS by revisiting the directions vgrad and vresid defined in Subsection 4.2, and
arguing they are faithful to the model’s computation to a high degree. Specifically, we subject these
directions to the same tests we used for the illusory direction vMLP and arrive at significantly dif-
ferent results. Through this and additional validations, we demonstrate that these directions possess
the necessary and sufficient properties of a successful activation patch – being both correlated with
input variation and causal for the targeted behavior – in an irreducible way.
Ruling out the illusion. Let WQname movers ∈ R768×192 be the stacked query matrices of the name
mover heads. We use this matrix as a proxy to determine the causally disconnected subspace of
the 768-dimensional residual stream. In Table 1, we show the fractional logit difference and inter-
change accuracy when patching vresid and vgrad , as well as their components along ker WQname movers
(denoted ‘nullspace’) and its orthogonal complement (denoted ‘rowspace’). We observe that the
non-nullspace metrics are broadly similar; in particular, removing the causally disconnected compo-
nent of vresid does not greatly diminish the effect of the patch in terms of the logit difference metrics
(as it does for vMLP ). We also find that vresid is predominantly in (ker WQname movers )⊥ (and so is vgrad ,
but this is to be expected by its definition).
Importantly, since the residual stream activation where vresid and vgrad are patched is a full bottleneck
for the model’s computation, it is not possible for these directions to be causal but dormant (in the
sense of Section 3): there can be no earlier model component that activates this direction in a way
that avoids the patch via a skip connection (unlike for the vMLP direction). Indeed, in Figure 7 in
Appendix C we show that the vresid direction gets written to by the S-Inhibition heads, and in Figure


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


19 in Appendix F.2, we show they strongly discriminate between the prompts where the IO name
comes first/second. See C for additional experiments validating these subspaces.
6     FACTUAL R ECALL
Given a fact expressed as a subject-relation-object triple (s, r, o) (e.g., s = ‘Eiffel Tower’, r =
‘is in’, o = ‘Paris’), we say that a model M ‘recalls’ the fact (s, r, o) if M completes a prompt
expressing just the (s, r) pair (e.g., ‘The Eiffel Tower is in’) with o. In this section, we show that
the interpretability illusion can also be exhibited for the factual recall capability of language models,
a much broader setting than the IOI task. In particular, we can fit DAS to any such pair of facts
and perform an activation patch that changes recall. We further show that the illusory subspace is
equivalent to a rank one edit to the weights that changed the recalled fact.

6.1   F INDING I LLUSORY 1-D IMENSIONAL PATCHES FOR FACTUAL RECALL

Let us be given two facts (s, r, o) and
(s0 , r, o0 ) for the same relation that a                                   1.0
model recalls correctly, with correspond-                                               Method
                                                                                   DAS

                                                 Fraction of facts changed
ing factual prompts A expressing (s, r)                                            Full MLP patch
                                                                             0.8   DAS rowspace component
and B expressing (s0 , r) (e.g., r =
‘is in’, A = ‘The Eiffel Tower is in’, B =
‘The Colosseum is in’). In this subsection,                                  0.6
we patch from B into A, with the goal of
changing the model’s output from o to o0 .                                   0.4

More precisely, we patch from the last token    0.2
of s0 in B to the last token of s in A (prior
work has shown that the fact is retrieved on    0.0
s (Geva et al., 2023) ), and we again use            0    5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
DAS Geiger et al. (2023b) to optimize for                       Intervention layer
a direction that maximizes the logit differ-
ence between o0 and o. We use the first 1000 Figure 4: Fraction of successful fact patches un-
examples from the C OUNTER FACT dataset der three interventions: patching along the direction
(Meng et al., 2022a), and filter from them found by DAS (blue), patching the component of the
40 pairs of facts across 8 relations that the DAS direction in the rowspace of Wout (green), and
model recalls correctly. We use GPT-2 XL patching the entire hidden MLP activation (orange).
(1.5B parameters) for experiments.
Similar to Section 4, we compare the effect
of these patches to a full MLP patch, and a patch of only the rowspace component. Results are shown
in figure 4. We find a stronger version of the same qualitative phenomena we observed with the IOI
illusory direction: (i) the directions we find have a strong causal effect (successfully changing o
to o0 ), but (ii) this effect disappears when we ablate the component in the nullspace of Wout , and
(iii) patching the entire MLP activation instead has a negligible effect on the difference in logits
between the correct and incorrect objects. We further observe that the difference in last-token subject
activations is significantly aligned with the causally disconnected component of the subspaces found
(cosine similarity ∼ 0.9, Appendix Figure 12). This implies that it is weakly aligned with the
rowspace component (cosine similarity ∼ 0.4); hence, the rowspace component is relatively dormant
compared to the causally disconnected component. Further experiments confirming the illusion are
in Appendix D.2.

6.2   1-D IMENSIONAL FACT PATCHES I MPLY E QUIVALENT R ANK -1 FACT E DITS

Finally, we show that the existence of an activation patch as in Subsection 6.1 implies the existence
of a seemingly different intervention with similar effect: a rank-one model edit to the weights of the
MLP layer. Proposed in Meng et al. (2022a), rank-1 editing modifies the Wout weight of a single
MLP layer to make a model that recalls (s, r, o) recall (s, r, o0 ) instead, while minimally modifying
the model otherwise. This finding suggests a mechanistic explanation for the discrepancy between
fact localization and fact editing observed in prior work (Hase et al., 2023). Namely, illusory sub-
spaces where fact editing can ‘work’ may exist even in layers not storing the fact, by virtue of the


                                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


residual stream containing a causally disconnected but sensitive to the subject direction and a causal
for the object direction to be combined in an MLP layer.
In more detail, Meng et al. (2022a) propose a specific rank-1 model edit, ROME, which takes as
input a vector k ∈ RdM LP representing the subject (e.g. an average of last-token representations
of the subject) and a vector v ∈ Rdmodel which, when output by the MLP layer, will cause the
model to predict a new object for the factual prompt. ROME modifies the MLP weight by setting
   0
Wout  = Wout + ab> , where a ∈ Rdmodel , b ∈ RdM LP are chosen so that Wout
                                                                          0
                                                                             k = v, and the MLP’s
output is otherwise minimally changed. Without loss of generality, the first condition implies that
a = v − Wout k and b> k = 1; the second condition is then modeled by minimizing the variance
of b> x when x ∼ N (0, Σ) for an empirical estimate Σ ∈ RdM LP ×dM LP of the covariance of MLP
activations (see Lemma D.1 in Appendix D for details and a proof).
Intuitively, a fact patch as in subsection 6.1 should have a corresponding ROME edit with the same
effect. Specifically, suppose that we are in the setup of 6.1, and uA , uB are the last subject token
post-GELU activations for prompts A and B; then uA takes the role of k, and the patched output
of the MLP layer takes the role of v. Indeed, in Appendix D.4 we show that, for any direction
                                                                             0
v ∈ RdM LP in the MLP’s activation space, there exists a rank-1 edit Wout        = Wout + ab> which
results in the same output for the MLP layer at the last subject token of A as activation-patching from
uB into uA along v; the formal statement and proof are given in D.4, where we also derive how to
make such an edit minimally change the model, following the optimization objective of ROME.
While this shows that the patch implies a rank-1 edit with the same behavior at the token being
patched, the rank-1 edit is applied permanently to the model, which means that it (unlike the activa-
tion patch) applies to every token. Thus, it is not a priori obvious whether the rank-1 edit will still
succeed in making the model predict o0 instead of o. To this end, in Appendix D.2, we evaluate em-
pirically how using the rank-1 edit from Lemma D.2 instead of the activation patch changes model
predictions, and we find negligible differences.
7   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
Do we expect this illusion to be prevalent? We only exhibit our illusion empirically in two settings,
IOI and factual recall, but we believe it is likely prevalent in practice. We do not prove this, but hope
to illustrate it with an informal argument. Specifically, we expect the illusion to occur whenever
we have an MLP M which is not used in the model’s computation on a given task, but is between
two components A and B which are used and compose with each other via some direction v in
the residual stream (i.e., v is communicated via the skip connections of intervening layers). This is
a common structure that has been frequently observed in the mechanistic interpretability literature
(Lieberum et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Olsson et al., 2022; Geva et al., 2021): circuits contain
components composing with each other separated by multiple layers, and circuits have often been
observed to be sparse, with most components (including most MLP layers) not playing a significant
role.
An empirically informed mechanistic argument for the illusion. The MLP M between A and
B (MLP-in-the-middle) set up leads to the existence of both a dormant causal direction vdormant
and a correlated yet causally disconnected direction vdisconnected , as follows. A vector u ∈ RdM LP
in the MLP’s activation space will be causally relevant if Wout u = v; since the internal dimension
of the MLP layer is larger than that of the residual stream (4× for popular architectures), Wout is
typically full rank (see Appendix E.1 for empirical evidence), and such a u will exist. In particular,
                               +
we can take vdormant = Wout      v, and since we assume M is not a part of the computation, this
direction should not be significantly correlated with the feature being patched. A vector u ∈ RdM LP
will be correlated if it can linearly recover the concept in question from the MLP’s activations
gelu(Win xresid ). Because M occurs after A, the feature is linearly recoverable from xresid by
using v as a probe, and hence is recoverable from Win xresid as well (again, empirically Win is full-
rank). In theory, the gelu non-linearity could completely destroy the information, but empirically
(see Appendix E.1 and E.2), it seems to merely add noise, so the feature remains linearly recoverable,
giving us vdisconnected .
Takeaways and recommendations. As we have seen, optimization-based methods using subspace
activation patching can find both faithful and illusory features with respect to the model’s computa-
tion. We recommend running such methods in activation bottlenecks such as the residual stream, as
well as using validations beyond end-to-end evaluation to ascertain the precise role of such features.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank the Stanford Existential Risk Initiative’s Machine Learning Alignment and
Theory Scholars (SERI MATS) program (Summer 2023 Cohort) for supporting this research, and
to Atticus Geiger for many helpful and insightful discussions. We would also like to thank the
anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback.

R EFERENCES
Mostafa Abdou, Artur Kulmizev, Daniel Hershcovich, Stella Frank, Ellie Pavlick, and Anders
 Søgaard. Can language models encode perceptual structure without grounding? a case study
 in color. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.06129, 2021.

Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian J. Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been
  Kim. Sanity checks for saliency maps. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo
  Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, pp.
  9525–9536, 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/
  294a8ed24b1ad22ec2e7efea049b8737-Abstract.html.

Sanjeev Arora, Yuanzhi Li, Yingyu Liang, Tengyu Ma, and Andrej Risteski. Linear algebraic struc-
  ture of word senses, with applications to polysemy. Transactions of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics, 6:483–495, 2018.

Tolga Bolukbasi, Adam Pearce, Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin
  Wattenberg. An interpretability illusion for BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07143, 2021.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Collin Burns, Haotian Ye, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Discovering latent knowledge in lan-
  guage models without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03827, 2022.

Lawrence Chan, Adria Garriga-Alonso, Nix Goldowsky-Dill, Ryan Greenblatt, Jenny Ni-
  tishinskaya, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Buck Shlegeris, and Nate Thomas.   Causal scrub-
  bing: A method for rigorously testing interpretability hypotheses. Alignment Fo-
  rum. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/JvZhhzycHu2Yd57RN/
  causal-scrubbing-a-method-for-rigorously-testing.

Roi Cohen, Eden Biran, Ori Yoran, Amir Globerson, and Mor Geva. Evaluating the ripple effects of
  knowledge editing in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12976, 2023.

Arthur Conmy, Augustine N Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-
  Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.14997, 2023.

Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume Lample, Loı̈c Barrault, and Marco Baroni. What
  you can cram into a single $&!#* vector: Probing sentence embeddings for linguistic proper-
  ties. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2126–2136, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1198. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  P18-1198.

Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge neurons
  in pretrained transformers. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8493–8502, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.581. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.581.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
  guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Min-
  nesota, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Gan-
  guli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal
  Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris
  Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021.
  URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish,
  Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy models of super-
  position. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022. URL https://transformer-circuits.
  pub/2022/toy_model/index.html.
Atticus Geiger, Kyle Richardson, and Christopher Potts. Neural natural language inference
  models partially embed theories of lexical entailment and negation. In Proceedings of
  the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP,
  pp. 163–173, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.blackboxnlp-1.16. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
  2020.blackboxnlp-1.16.
Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard, and Christopher Potts. Causal abstractions of neural
  networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:9574–9586, 2021.
Atticus Geiger, Christopher Potts, and Thomas Icard. Causal abstraction for faithful model interpre-
  tation. Ms., Stanford University, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04709.
Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah D Goodman. Finding
  alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural representations. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.02536, 2023b.
Robert Geirhos, Roland S Zimmermann, Blair Bilodeau, Wieland Brendel, and Been Kim. Don’t
  trust your eyes: on the (un) reliability of feature visualizations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04719,
  2023.
Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers
 are key-value memories. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
 Natural Language Processing, pp. 5484–5495, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic,
 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.446. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.446.
Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
 associations in auto-regressive language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14767, 2023.
Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Chris MacLeod, Lucas Sato, and Aryaman Arora. Localizing model
  behavior with path patching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05969, 2023.
G Grand, I Blank, F Pereira, and E Fedorenko. Semantic projection: Recovering human
  knowledge of multiple, distinct object features from word embeddings. arxiv. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1802.01241, 2018.
Peter Hase, Mohit Bansal, Been Kim, and Asma Ghandeharioun. Does localization inform editing?
  surprising differences in causality-based localization vs. knowledge editing in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04213, 2023.
Stefan Heimersheim and Jett Janiak. A circuit for Python docstrings in a 4-layer attention-only trans-
  former. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/u6KXXmKFbXfWzoAXn/
  a-circuit-for-python-docstrings-in-a-4-layer-attention-only.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evan Hernandez, Belinda Z. Li, and Jacob Andreas. Inspecting and editing knowledge representa-
  tions in language models, 2023.
Belinda Z Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Implicit representations of meaning in neural
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00737, 2021.
Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-time
  intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03341,
  2023a.
Maximilian Li, Xander Davies, and Max Nadeau. Circuit breaking: Removing model behaviors
 with targeted ablation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05973, 2023b.
Tom Lieberum, Matthew Rahtz, János Kramár, Geoffrey Irving, Rohin Shah, and Vladimir Miku-
  lik. Does circuit analysis interpretability scale? evidence from multiple choice capabilities in
  chinchilla. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09458, 2023.
Zachary C. Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1606.03490.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex J Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in GPT. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022a.
Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex Andonian, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Mass editing
  memory in a transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07229, 2022b.
Tomás Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Gregory S. Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Distributed
  representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In Christopher J. C. Burges, Léon
  Bottou, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 26: 27th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2013.
  Proceedings of a meeting held December 5-8, 2013, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States, pp.
  3111–3119, 2013. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2013/hash/
  9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Abstract.html.
Neel Nanda. Actually, othello-gpt has a linear emergent world representation. 2023a.
Neel Nanda.  Attribution patching: Activation patching at industrial scale, 2023b.
  URL       https://www.neelnanda.io/mechanistic-interpretability/
  attribution-patching.
Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent linear representations in world models
  of self-supervised sequence models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00941, 2023.
Chris Olah.       Mechanistic interpretability, variables, and the importance of inter-
  pretable bases.    https://www.transformer-circuits.pub, 2022.  URL https://www.
  transformer-circuits.pub/2022/mech-interp-essay.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson
  Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Ka-
  plan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. In-context learning and induction heads. Trans-
  former Circuits Thread, 2022. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/
  in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Judea Pearl. Direct and indirect effects. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Uncer-
  tainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI’01, pp. 411–420, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2001. Morgan
  Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN 1558608001.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
P. Smolensky. Neural and conceptual interpretation of PDP models. In Parallel Distributed Pro-
   cessing: Explorations in the Microstructure, Vol. 2: Psychological and Biological Models, pp.
   390–431. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1986. ISBN 0262631105.
Alessandro Stolfo, Yonatan Belinkov, and Mrinmaya Sachan. Understanding arithmetic reasoning
  in language models using causal mediation analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15054, 2023.
Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. BERT rediscovers the classical NLP pipeline. In
  Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
  4593–4601, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/P19-1452. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1452.
Alex Turner, Lisa Thiergart, David Udell, Gavin Leech, Ulisse Mini, and Monte MacDi-
  armid. Activation addition: Steering language models without optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.10248, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
  Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
  Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp.
  5998–6008, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
  3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Simas Sakenis, Jason
  Huang, Yaron Singer, and Stuart Shieber. Causal mediation analysis for interpreting neural nlp:
  The case of gender bias. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.12265.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Simas Sakenis, Jason
  Huang, Yaron Singer, and Stuart Shieber. Causal mediation analysis for interpreting neural nlp:
  The case of gender bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12265, 2020.
Jonas Wallat, Jaspreet Singh, and Avishek Anand. BERTnesia: Investigating the capture and
  forgetting of knowledge in BERT. In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on
  Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 174–183, Online, November 2020.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.blackboxnlp-1.17. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.blackboxnlp-1.17.
Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt.
  Interpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=NpsVSN6o4ul.
Ziheng Wang, Jeremy Wohlwend, and Tao Lei. Structured pruning of large language mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 6151–6162, Online, 2020. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.496. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  emnlp-main.496.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Christopher Potts, and Noah D Goodman. Interpretability at scale:
  Identifying causal mechanisms in alpaca. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08809, 2023.
Zexuan Zhong, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Potts, and Danqi Chen.
  Mquake: Assessing knowledge editing in language models via multi-hop questions, 2023.



                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR S ECTION 3
A.1   T HE I LLUSION FOR H IGHER -D IMENSIONAL S UBSPACES

In the main text, we mostly discuss the illusion for activation patching of 1-dimensional subspaces
for ease of exposition. Here, we develop a more complete picture of the mechanics of the illusion
for higher-dimensional subspaces.
Let C be a model component taking values in Rd , and let U ⊂ Rd be a linear subspace. Let V be a
matrix whose columns form an orthonormal basis for U . If the C activations for examples A and B
are actA , actB ∈ Rd respectively, patching U from A into B gives the patched activation
            actpatched
               B       = actB + V V > (actA − actB ) = (I − V V > )actB + V V > actA
For intuition, note that V V > is the orthogonal projection on U , so this formula says to replace the
orthogonal projection of actB on U with that of actA , and keep the rest of actB the same.
Generalizing the discussion from Section 3, for the illusion to occur for subspace S, we need S to
be sufficiently aligned with a causally disconnected subspace Vdisconnected that is correlated with
the feature being patched, and a dormant but causal subspace Vdormant which, when set to out of
distribution values, can achieve the wanted causal effect. For example, a particularly simple way in
which this could happen is if we have let Vdisconnected , Vdormant be 1-dimensional subspaces (like
in the setup for the 1-dimensional illusion), and we form S by combining Vdisconnected + Vdormant
with a number of orthogonal directions that are approximately constant on the data with respect to
the feature we are patching. These extra directions effectively don’t matter for the patch (because
they are cancelled by the actA − actB term). Given a specific feature, it is likely that such weakly-
activating directions will exist in a high-dimensional activation space. Thus, if the 1-dimensional
illusion exist, so will higher-dimensional ones.

A.2   I LLUSORY 1-D IMENSIONAL PATCHES ARE A PPROXIMATELY E QUAL PARTS C AUSALLY
      D ISCONNECTED AND D ORMANT

In this subsection, we prove a quantitative corollary of the model of our illusion that suggests that
we should expect illusory patching directions to be of the form v = √12 (vdisconnected + vdormant )
for unit vectors kvdisconnected k2 = kvdormant k2 = 1. In other words, we expect the best illusory
patches to be formed by combining a disconnected and illusory direction with equal coefficients,
like depicted in Figure 1:
Lemma A.1. Suppose we have two distributions of input prompts DA , DB . In the terminology
of Section 3, let vdisconnected ⊥ vdormant be unit vectors such that the subspace spanned by
vdisconnected is a causally disconnected subspace, and the subspace spanned by vdormant is strongly
dormant, in the sense that the projections of the activations of all examples Dsource ∪ Dbase onto
vdormant are equal to some constant c.
Suppose we form v = vdisconnected cos α + vdormant sin α as a unit-norm linear combination of
the two directions. Then the magnitude of the expected change in projection along vdormant when
patching from xA ∼ DA into xB ∼ DB is maximized when α = π4 , i.e. cos α = sin α = √12 .

Proof. Recall that the patched activation from xA into xB along v is
                                  actpatched
                                     B       = actB + (pA − pB )v                                  (2)
              >               >
where pA = v actA , pB = v actB are the projections of the two examples’ activations on v. The
change along vdormant is thus

           >
          vdormant   actpatched
                        B       − actB   = (pA − pB ) sin α = (v > actA − v > actB ) sin α
              >
           = vdisconnected (actA − actB ) cos α sin α
                                    >               >
where we used the assumption that vdormant  actA = vdisconnected actB . Hence, the expected change
is
                                  >
                     cos α sin α vdisconnected EA∼DA ,B∼DB [actA − actB ] .
The function f (α) = cos α sin α for α ∈ [0, π/2] is maximized for α = π/4, concluding the
proof.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   C ONCRETE MATHEMATICAL EXAMPLE OF THE ILLUSION

A Toy Illusion. For a distilled example of the illusion, consider a network A that takes in a real
valued input x ∈ R, computes a three dimensional hidden representation h = W1T x, and then a
real valued output y = W2T h. In this example, we consider the network’s hidden layer to be a
single ‘component’, represented as a 3-dimensional vector space of activations. Define the weights
to be W1 = [1 0 1] and W2 = [0 −2 1] and observe that the network computes the identity
function (see Figure 18 in Appendix F.1 for an illustration). While the 3rd hidden neuron clearly
mediates this effect, surprisingly, patching the direction along the sum of the first two neurons does
as well, despite the fact that the 1st neuron is causally disconnected, and the 2nd is dormant.
Consider Figure 18. It should be obvious that the hidden unit H3 fully mediates the information
flow from input to output, and that H2 is dormant while H3 is disconnected. However, it may
be surprising that the linear subspace of H1 and H2 defined by the unit vector [ √12 , − √12 ] also
fully mediates the information flow, despite it consisting of dormant and disconnected directions.
Activation patching on this subspace leverages the information stored in the disconnected subspace
in order to activate the dormant subspace by fixing it to an out of distribution value. In this way,
activation patching on a subspace can activate a ‘dormant parallel circuit’.
A concrete hypothesis. Based on this discussion, we can also postulate a specific hypothesis we
can test for. Specifically, our hypothesis is that there exist pre-trained transformer language models
M , pairs of distributions Dbase and Dsource over inputs to M (with associated ground-truth next-
word predictions for inputs in Dbase ∪ Dsource ), and 1-dimensional subspaces S of post-GELU
activations of MLP layers in these models, such that activation patching from xsource ∼ Dsource
into xbase ∼ Dbase along S has a strong effect of shifting probability from the expected completion
of xbase to that of xsource , but this effect is significantly diminished when activation patching is
performed along the component of S orthogonal to the nullspace of the down-projection Wout of
the MLP layer. In this example, the nullspace component of S is the causally disconnected subspace,
and we hypothesise it is possible the remaining component is dormant.



B     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR S ECTION 4

B.1   DATASET, M ODEL AND E VALUATION D ETAILS FOR THE IOI TASK

We use GPT2-Small for the IOI task, with a dataset that spans 216 single-token names, 144 single-
token objects and 75 single-token places, which are split 1 : 1 across a training and test set. Every
example in the data distribution includes (i) an initial clause introducing the indirect object (IO, here
‘Mary’) and the subject (S, here ‘John’), and (ii) a main clause that refers to the subject a second
time. Beyond that, the dataset varies in the two names, the initial clause content, and the main clause
content. Specifically, use three templates as shown below:

           Then, [ ] and [ ] had a long and really crazy argument. Afterwards, [ ] said to
          Then, [ ] and [ ] had lots of fun at the [place]. Afterwards, [ ] gave a [object] to
           Then, [ ] and [ ] were working at the [place]. [ ] decided to give a [object] to

and we use the first two in training and the last in the test set. Thus, the test set relies on unseen
templates, names, objects and places. We used fewer templates than the IOI paper Wang et al.
(2020) in order to simplify tokenization (so that the token positions of our names always align), but
our results also hold with shifted templates like in the IOI paper.
On the test partition of this dataset, GPT2-Small achieves an accuracy of ≈ 91%. The average
difference of logits between the correct and incorrect name is ≈ 3.3, and the logit of the correct
name is greater than that of the incorrect name in ≈ 99% of examples. Note that, while the logit
difference is closely related to the model’s correctness, it being > 0 does not imply that the model
makes the correct prediction, because there could be a third token with a greater logit than both
names.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2   D ETAILS FOR C OMPUTING THE G RADIENT D IRECTION vGRAD

For a given example from the test distribution and a given name mover head, we compute the gra-
dient of the difference of attention scores from the final token position to the 3rd and 5th token in
the sentence (where the two name tokens always are in our data). We then average these gradients
over a large sample of the full test distribution and over the three name mover heads, and finally
normalize the resulting vector to have unit `2 norm.
We note that there is a ‘closed form’ way to compute approximately the same quantity that requires
no optimization. Namely, for a single example we can collect the keys kS , kIO to the name mover
heads at the first two names in the sentence (the S and IO name). Then, for a single name mover
head with query matrix WQ , a maximally causal direction v in the residual stream at the last token
position after layer 8 will be one such that WQ v is in the direction of kS −kIO , because the attention
score is simply the dot product between the keys and queries. We can use this to ‘backpropagate’
to v by multiplying with the pseudoinverse WQ+ . This is slightly complicated by the fact that we
have been ignoring layer normalization, which can be approximately accounted for by estimating
the scaling parameters (which tend to concentrate well) from the IOI data distribution. We note that
this approach leads to broadly similar results.


B.3   T RAINING D ETAILS FOR DAS

To train DAS, we always sample examples from the training IOI distribution as described in Ap-
pendix B. We sample equal amounts of pairs of base (which will be patched into) and source (where
we take the activation to patch in from) prompts where the two names are the same between the
prompts, and pairs of prompts where all four names are distinct. We optimize DAS to maximize
the logit difference between the name that should be predicted if the position information from the
source example is correct and the other name.
For training, we use a learned rotation matrix as in the original DAS paper (Geiger et al.,
2023b), parametrized with torch.nn.utils.parametrizations.orthogonal. We use
the Adam optimizer and minibatch training over a training set of several hundred patching pairs. We
note that results remain essentially the same when using a higher number of training examples.


B.4   D ISCUSSION OF THE M AGNITUDE OF THE I LLUSION

While the contribution of the vMLP patch to logit difference may appear relatively small, we note
that this is the result of patching a direction in a single model component at a single token position.
Typical circuits found in real models (including the IOI circuit from Wang et al. (2023)) are often
composed of multiple model components, each of which contribute. In particular, the position
signal itself is written to by 4 heads, and chiefly read by 3 other heads. As computation tends to
be distributed, when patching an individual component accuracy may be a misleading metric (eg
patching 1 out of 3 heads is likely insufficient to change the output), and a fractional logit diff
indicates a significant contribution. By contrast, patching in the residual stream is a more potent
intervention, because it can affect all information accumulated in the model that is communicated
to downstream components.


B.5   R ANDOM ABLATION OF MLP WEIGHTS

How certain are we that MLP8 doesn’t actually matter for the IOI task? While we find the IOI paper
analysis convincing, to make our results more robust to the possibility that it does matter, we also
design a further experiment.
Given our conceptual picture of the illusion, the computation performed by the MLP layer where
we find the illusory subspace does not matter as long as it propagates the correlational information
about the position feature from the residual stream to the hidden activations, and as long as the
output matrix Wout is full rank (also, see the discussion in 7). Thus, we expect that if we replace the
MLP weights by randomly chosen ones with the same statistics, we should still be able to exhibit
the illusion.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Specifically, we randomly sampled MLP weights and biases such that the norm of the output acti-
vations matches those of MLP8. As random MLPs might lead to nonsensical text generation, we
don’t replace the layer with the random weights, but rather train a subspace using DAS on the MLP
activations, and add the difference between the patched and unpatched output of the random MLP
to the real output of MLP8. This setup finds a subspace that reduces logit difference even more than
the vMLP direction.
This suggests that the existence of the vMLP subspace is less about what information MLP8 contains,
and more about where MLP8 is in the network.



C    A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR S ECTION 5

Which model components write to the vresid direction? To test how every attention head and MLP
contributes to the value of projections on vMLP , we sampled activations from head and MLP outputs
at the last token position of IOI prompts, and calculated their dot product with vresid (Figure 7). We
found that the dot products of most heads and MLPs was low, and that the S-inhibition heads were
the only heads whose dot product differed between different patterns ABB and BAB. This shows
that only the S-inhibition heads write to the vresid direction (as one would hope). Importantly, this
test separates vresid from the interpretability illusion vM LP . While patching vMLP8 also writes to
vresid8 (i.e. vMLP8 Wout ≈ vresid8 ), the MLP layer does not write this subspace on the IOI task (see
Figure 3). This further supports the observation that the vMLP patch activates a dormant pathway in
the model.
Generalization beyond the IOI distribution. We also investigate how the subspace generalizes.
We sample prompts from OpenWebText-10k and look at those with particularly high and low ac-
tivations in vsinhib . Representative examples are shown in Figure 8 together with the name movers
attention at the position of interest, how the probability changes after subspace ablation, and how
the name movers attention changes.
Stability of found solution. Finally, we note that solutions found by DAS in the residual stream are
stable, including when trained on a subset of S-inhibition heads (see Figure 5).


Figure 5: Cosine Similarity between learned position subspaces in the S-inhibition heads is high
even when using only a subset of S-inhibition heads for training


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           20
                                                      ABB
                                                      ABA
                                           10



                     Subspace Activation
                                            0


                                           10


                                           20


                                           30
                                            <|endoftext|>Then        , {S1 or IO} and {S1 or IO} had     lots   of     fun      at   the {place}   .   {S2}     gave   a   {object}   to
                                                                                                                     Position


Figure 6: The IOI position subspace activates at words that predict a repeated name. S-inhibition
subspace activations for different IOI prompts per position

                                                 Layer 5                                       Layer 6                                   Layer 7                                  Layer 8
              4


              2


              0
Dot Product


              2


              4

                                                ABB
              6                                 BAB
                                                S-Inhibition heads
                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11                   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
                                                                         mlp


                                                                                                                     mlp


                                                                                                                                                              mlp


                                                                                                                                                                                                mlp
                             Head                                                          Head                                        Head                                    Head


Figure 7: S-Inhibition heads but not MLP8 write to the position subspace in the residual stream that
is causally connected to the name movers on the IOI task


D                 A DDITIONAL DETAILS FOR S ECTION 6

D.1                 T RAINING D ETAILS FOR FACT PATCHING (S ECTION 6.1)

We use the first 1000 examples from the C OUNTER FACT dataset (Meng et al., 2022a). We filter
the facts which GPT2-XL correctly recalls. Out of the remaining facts, for each relation we form
all pairs of distinct facts, and we sample 5 such pairs from each relation with at least 5 facts. This
results in a collection of 40 facts spanning 8 different relations.
To train DAS, due to the computational difficulty of the problem, instead of optimizing a rotation
matrix like in Geiger et al. (2023b), we directly optimize for a single unit vector using projected
gradient descent, where after each gradient update we normalize the vector to have unit norm again.

D.2                 A DDITIONAL FACT PATCHING EXPERIMENTS

In figure 11, we show the distribution of the fractional logit difference metric (see Subsection 4.2 for
a definition) when patching between facts as described in Subsection 6.1. Like in the related Figure
4, we observe that, while patching along the directions found by DAS achieves strongly negative
values (indicating that the facts are very often successfully changed by the patch), the interventions
that replace the entire MLP layer or only the causally relevant component of the DAS directions
have no such effect.
Next, we observe that the nullspace component of the patching direction is the one similar to the
variation in the inputs (difference of last-token activations at the two subjects). Specifically, in
Figure 12, we plot the (absolute value of the) cosine similarity between the difference in activations
for the two last subject tokens, and the nullspace component of the DAS direction. We note that


                                                                                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


this similarity is consistently significantly high (note that it can be at most 1, which would indicate
perfect alignment).
Finally, we observe that the nullspace component of the patching direction is a non-trivial part of
the direction in Figure 13, where we plot the distribution of the `2 norm of this component.

D.3    R ANK -1 M ODEL E DITING AS AN O PTIMIZATION P ROBLEM

We now review the ROME method from Meng et al. (2022a) and show how it can be characterized
as the solution of a simple optimization problem. Following the terminology of 6.2, let us have an
MLP layer with an output projection Wout , a key vector k ∈ RdM LP and a value vector v ∈ Rdmodel .
In Meng et al. (2022a), equation 2, the formula for the rank-1 update to Wout is given by
                                  0                            k > Σ−1
                               Wout  = Wout + (v − Wout k) > −1                                    (3)
                                                              k Σ k
where Σ is an empirical estimate of the uncentered covariance of the pre-Wout activations. We derive
the following equivalent characterization of this solution (which may be of independent interest):
Lemma D.1. Given a matrix Wout ∈ Rdmodel ×dM LP , a key vector k ∈ RdM LP and a value vector
v ∈ Rdmodel , let Σ   0, Σ ∈ RdM LP ×dM LP be a positive definite matrix (specifically, the uncentered
empirical covariance), and let x ∼ N (0, Σ) be a normally distributed random vector with zero mean
                                                          0
and covariance Σ. Then, the ROME weight update is Wout       = Wout + ab> where a ∈ Rdmodel , b ∈
  dM LP
R        solve the optimization problem
                                      0                                       0
                     min trace(Covx [Wout x − Wout x])            subject to Wout k = v.
                      a,b

In other words, the ROME update is the update that causes Wout to output v on input k, and
minimizes the total variance of the extra contribution of the update in the output of the MLP layer
under the assumption that the pre-Wout activations are normally distributed with covariance Σ5 .

Proof. Using Ex [xx> ] = Σ and the cyclic property of the trace, we see that
                                            0
                               trace(Covx [Wout x − Wout x]) = kak22 b> Σb
We must have ab> k = v −W k, so without loss of generality we can rescale a, b so that a = v −W k.
Then, we want to solve the problem
                                      min b> Σb      subject to b> k = 1
                                        b
which we can solve using Lagrange multiplies. The Lagrangian is
                                                1
                                      L(b, λ) = b> Σb − λb> k
                                                2
and the derivative w.r.t. b is Σb − λk = 0, which tells us that b is in the direction of Σ−1 k. Then the
                                                                                      > −1
constraint b> k = 1 forces the constant of proportionality, and we arrive at b = kk> ΣΣ−1 k

D.4    S TATEMENT AND PROOF FOR DERIVING RANK -1 EDITS FROM SUBSPACE PATCHES

Lemma D.2. Given prompts A and B, two token positions tA , tB , and an MLP layer with output
projection weight Wout ∈ Rdmodel ×dM LP , let uA , uB ∈ RdM LP be the respective (post-nonlinearity)
activations at these token positions in this layer. If v is a direction in the activation space of the MLP
                                         0
layer, then there exists a ROME edit Wout    = Wout +ab> such that the activation patch from uB into
uA along v and the edit result in equal outputs of the MLP layer at token tA when run on prompt A.
Moreover, the ROME edit is given by
                 a = (uB − uA )> v Wout v and any b that satisfies b> uA = 1.


                     −1
Choosing b = uTΣΣ−1uAuA minimizes the change to the model (in the sense of Meng et al. (2022a))
                 A
over all such rank-1 edits.
   5
     Note that in practice Wout may be singular or poorly conditioned, because the layer normalization encour-
ages features to sum to zero, which could to some extent also persist after a non-linearity. If this is the case, all
our results apply with Σ+ instead of Σ−1 .


                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. The activation after patching from B into A along v is u0A = uA + ((uB − uA )> v)v, which
means that the change in the output of the MLP layer at this token will be
                            Wout u0A − Wout uA = ((uB − uA )> v)Wout v
The change introduced by a fact edit at this token is
                  0
                      uA − Wout uA = ab> uA = b> uA             (uB − uA )> v Wout v

                 Wout
and the two are equal because b> uA = 1.
To find the b that minimizes the change to the model, we minimize the variance of b> x when
x ∼ N (0, Σ) subject to b> uA = 1. The variance is equal to b> Σb, so we have a constrained
(convex) minimization problem
                                      1
                                min b> Σb subject to b> uA = 1
                                      2
The rest of the proof is the same as in Lemma D.1. Namely, we can solve this optimization problem
using Lagrange multiplies. The Lagrangian is
                                                 1 >
                                     L(b, λ) =     b Σb − λb> uA
                                                 2
and the derivative w.r.t. b is Σb − λuA = 0, which tells us that b is in the direction of Σ−1 uA . Then
the constraint b> uA = 1 forces the constant of proportionality.

In this appendix, we collect some useful notes on the rank-1 model editing (ROME) method from
Meng et al. (2022a).
Lemma D.3 (Alternative characterization of rank-1 model editing via variance minimization).

D.5    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS COMPARING FACT PATCHING AND RANK -1 EDITING

In Figure 14, we plot the distributions of the logit difference between the correct object for a fact
and the object we are trying to substitute when patching the 1-dimensional subspaces found by DAS,
and performing the equivalent rank-1 weight edit according to Lemma D.2. We observe that the two
metrics quite closely track each other, indicating that the additional effects of using a weight edit (as
opposed to only intervening at a single token) are negligible.
Similarly, in Figure 15, we show the success rate of the the two methods in terms of making the
model output the object of the fact we are patching from. Again, we observe that they quite closely
track each other.

E     W HY D O W E E XPECT THE I LLUSION TO BE P REVALENT IN P RACTICE ?
E.1   MLP WEIGHTS ARE FULL - RANK MATRICES

In figure 16, we plot the 100 smallest singular values of the MLP weights in GPT2-Small for all 12
layers. We observe that they the vast majority are bounded well away from 0. This confirms that
both MLP weights are full-rank transformations.

E.2   F EATURES IN THE RESIDUAL STREAM PROPAGATE TO HIDDEN MLP ACTIVATIONS

Intuition. Suppose we have two classes of examples that are linearly separable in the residual
stream. The transformation from the residual stream to the hidden MLP activations is a linear map
followed by a nonlinearity, specifically x 7→ gelu(Win x). As we observed in E.1, the Win matrix
is full-rank, meaning that all the information linearly present in x will also be so in Win x. Even
better, since Win maps x from a dmodel -dimensional space to a dM LP = 4dmodel -dimensional
space, this should intuitively make it much easier to linearly separate the points, because in a higher-
dimensional space there are many more linear separators. On the other hand, the non-linearity has an
opposite effect: by compressing the space of activations, it makes it harder for points to be separable.
So it is a priori unclear which intuition is decisive.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Empirical validation. However, it turns out that empirically this is not such a problem. To test this,
we run the model GPT2-Small on random samples from its data distribution (we used OpenWebText-
10k), and extract 2000 activations of an MLP-layer after the non-linearity. We train a linear regres-
sion with `2 -regularization to recover the dot product of the residual stream immediately before the
MLP-layer of interest and a randomly chosen direction. We repeat this experiment with different
random vectors and for each layer. We observe that all regressions are better than chance and explain
a significant amount of variance on the held-out test set (R2 = 0.71±0.17, MSE = 0.31±0.18, p <
0.005). Results are shown in Figure 17 (right) (every marker corresponds to one regression model
using a different random direction).
The position information in the IOI task is really a binary feature, so we are also interested in
whether binary information in general is linearly recoverable from the MLP activations. To test this,
we sample activations from the model run on randomly-sampled prompts. This time however, we
add or subtract a multiple of a random direction v to the residual stream activation u, and calculate
the MLP activations using this new residual stream vector u0 :
                                    u0 = u + y × z × kuk2 × v
where y ∈ {−1, 1} is uniformly random, z is a scaling factor we manipulate, and v is a randomly
chosen direction of unit norm. For each classifier, we randomly sample a direction v that we either
add or subtract (using y) from the residual stream. The classifier is trained to predict y. We rescale
v to match the average norm of a residual vector and then scale it with a small scalar z.
Then, a logistic classifier is trained on 1600 samples. Again, we repeat this experiment for different
v and z, and for each layer. We observe that the classifier works quite well across layers even with
very small values of z (still, accuracy drops for z = 0.0001). Results are shown in Figure 17 (right),
and Table 2.
                         Table 2: Mean Accuracy for Different Values of z

                                        z      Mean Accuracy
                                     0.0001        0.69
                                      0.001         0.83
                                       0.01        0.87
                                       0.1         0.996


F     S UPPLEMENTARY F IGURES
F.1   A DDITIONAL F IGURES FOR S ECTION 3

F.2   A DDITIONAL F IGURES FOR S ECTION 4


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    F IGURES ADDED DURING REVISION

                                Baseline        Patched
                                96 Rudi        92 Emma
                                2 Him          4 them
                                1 …            3 …
                                1 Emma         1 Rudi


                                           +


                              Name
                              Mover


                                           +
                               MLP
                                                     𝐯
                     𝐯

                                           +



                                S-
                              Inhib
  Emma

  Emma
   Rudi


   says
   and


                                           to
    …


Figure 21: Schematic of the IOI circuit and interven-
tions. GPT2-small predicts the correct name by S-
inhibition heads writing positional information to the
residual stream which is used by the name movers to
copy the non-duplicated name (green arrows). Lo-
cation of subspace interventions vresid and vMLP are
marked. Patching the illusory subspace vMLP adds a
new path (red) along the established one that is used
to flip positional information when patched.


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        OpenWebText-10k and    Logit Difference   Attention of Name Movers
                         Subspace Activation                         at 2nd last position
                          <|endoftext|>
                                 An
                            Oklahoma
                              senate
                               panel
                             approved
                                   a
                                 bill
                              Monday
                                  to
                              prevent
                                 city
                                 and
                              county
                           governments
                                from
                                 out
                               doing
                               state
                                laws
                                  on
                           employment
                                 and
                   10          public
                         accommodations
                    0             .

                   10           The
                                 bill
                              initially
                            prevented
                                local
                           governments
                                from
                               going
                              further
                                than
                                 any
                               state
                                 law
                                  .
                                  A
                            committee
                            substitute
                             focused
                                  it
                                  on
                           employment
                                 and                                      Original
                               public                                     Mean Ablated
                         accommodations


       Figure 8: The IOI position subspace generalizes to arbitrary OpenWebText prompts



                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     OpenWebText-10k and Logit Difference   Attention of Name Movers
                      Subspace Activation                      at 2nd last position
                          morning
                             late
                             last
                           month
                               ,
                             Rays
                              ha
                             wn
                          Chandler
                             and
                              her
                             wife
                            Avery
                          Chandler
                            pulled
                             into
                              the
                           parking
                              lot
                               at
                              the
                               7
                   10         30
                             Mid
                    5       town
                          building
                    0        and
                            began
                    5      walking
                          towards
                   10         the
                          entrance
                               .



                            Baby
                               ,
                              you
                              see
                              the
                             news
                            trucks
                               ?

                            Rays
                             ha
                             wn
                            asked                                    Original
                            Avery                                    Mean Ablated
                              .


                                                 Figure 9



                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        OpenWebText-10k and Logit Difference   Attention of Name Movers
                         Subspace Activation                      at 2nd last position
                                  AB
                                  key
                                  two
                                times
                                  you
                                  will
                                  see
                                 that
                                  will
                               appear
                                   all
                                  the
                              programs
                                    /
                               scripts
                                 that
                               begins
                                 with
                                   gn
                                ome
                                    -
                                   co
                             characters
                   10             and
                                 that
                                  are
                    0              on
                              synaptic
                                   or
                   10               in
                                  our
                            repositories
                                 from
                               source
                                    .
                                  list
                                    .
                                 This
                                    is
                               helpful
                                when
                                  you
                                  don
                                   't
                             remember
                               exactly
                                  the
                                name
                                   of
                                     a
                              program                                  Original
                                   or                                  Mean Ablated
                               maybe


                                                 Figure 10



                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        0


                        Fractional logit difference
                                                        5

                                                       10

                                                       15

                                                       20                                        Method
                                                                                         DAS
                                                                                         Full MLP patch
                                                       25                                DAS rowspace component
                                                            0   5   10      15    20   25 30 35 40 45
                                                                         Intervention layer

Figure 11: Fractional logit difference distributions under three interventions: patching along the
direction found by DAS (blue), patching the component of the DAS direction in the rowspace of
Wout (green), and patching the entire hidden MLP activation (orange).


                                                      1.0
                        Absolute cosine similarity


                                                      0.8

                                                      0.6

                                                      0.4

                                                      0.2

                                                      0.0
                                                            0   5   10     15    20    25   30     35     40   45
                                                                         Intervention layer

Figure 12: Distribution of the absolute value of the cosine similarity between the nullspace compo-
nent of the DAS fact patching directions and the difference in activations of the last tokens of the
two subjects.


                                                      1.0
                        Norm of nullspace component


                                                      0.8

                                                      0.6

                                                      0.4

                                                      0.2

                                                      0.0
                                                            0   5   10     15    20    25   30     35     40   45
                                                                         Intervention layer

Figure 13: Distribution of the norm of the nullspace component of the DAS direction across inter-
vention layers.



                                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                10
                                                                 0


                                     Logit difference
                                                                10
                                                                20
                                                                30
                                                                40
                                                                50
                                                                                                                       Method
                                                                60                                                  rank-1 model edit
                                                                                                                    1-dimensional patch
                                                                70
                                                                     0        5   10      15        20   25       30 35 40 45
                                                                                       Intervention layer

Figure 14: Comparison of logit difference between 1-dimensional fact patches and their derived
rank-1 model edits


                                                               1.0                                                     Method
                                                                                                                   rank-1 model edit
                                     Fact patch success rate


                                                                                                                   1-dimensional patch
                                                               0.8

                                                               0.6

                                                               0.4

                                                               0.2

                                                               0.0
                                                                     0        5   10     15         20   25       30   35     40     45
                                                                                       Intervention layer

Figure 15: Comparison of fact editing success rate between 1-dimensional fact patches and their
derived rank-1 model edits


                      4.0                                                                                6

                      3.5
                                                                                                         5
                      3.0
     Singular value


                                                                                                         4
                      2.5
                      2.0                                                                                3
                      1.5
                                                                                                         2
                      1.0
                                                                                                         1
                      0.5
                      0.0                                                                                0
                            0   20                              40       60       80          100             0        20       40        60   80   100

                                Index (decreasing)                                                                     Index (decreasing)

Figure 16: Smallest 100 singular values of the Win (left) and Wout (right) MLP weights by layer in
in GPT2-Small



                                                                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 17: Recovering residual stream features linearly from hidden MLP activations: classification
(left) and regression (right).


                 H3 := x                                                        H3 := x


  X∈R            H2 := 0          Y := h3 − 2h2                                        √                  √           √
                                                                 X∈R           H2 := x/ 2     Y := h3 +       2h2 +       2h1


                 H1 := x                                                               √
                                                                              H1 := −x/ 2



(a) The network A that computes the iden-
tity function. The hidden unit H3 stores the                  (b) The network A except the weights have
value of the input and passes this to the out-                been transformed such that the hidden units
put, while the unit H2 is dormant and H3                      H2 and H3 are viewed under the coordinate
is disconnected. However, the linear sub-                     vectors [ √12 , − √12 ] and [ √12 , √12 ]. When
space of H2 and H3 defined by the unit vec-                   we generalize activation patching to arbitary
tor [ √12 , − √12 ] fully mediates the informa-               subspaces, we are forced to consider this
tion flow from input to output just like the                  transformed network to be analytically iden-
unit H3 .                                                     tical toA.

Figure 18: Diagrams of small linear networks illustrating a concrete instantiation of the interpretabil-
ity illusio, alongside a subspace faithful to a model’s computation.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                pattern          70     pattern
                          60                                          ABB                    ABB
                                                                      BAB                    BAB
     Number of examples

                                                                                 60
                          50
                                                                                 50
                          40
                                                                                 40
                          30
                                                                                 30
                          20                                                     20

                          10                                                     10

                           0                                                      0
                                    10    5   0   5   10   15    20    25               20    15   10   5   0   5      10   15

                                         Activation projection                                 Activation projection

Figure 19: Projections of dataset examples’ activations in the residual stream after layer 8 onto the
vresid direction found by DAS and the vgrad direction which is the gradient for difference in attention
of the name mover heads to the two names.


                                Projection onto nullspace component                    Projection onto rowspace component
                          140
                                                                pattern          500                                pattern
                                                                      ABB                                               ABB
                          120                                         BAB                                               BAB
     Number of examples


                                                                                 400
                          100

                          80                                                     300

                          60
                                                                                 200
                          40
                                                                                 100
                          20

                           0                                                      0
                                1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0                1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0

                                         Activation projection                                 Activation projection

Figure 20: Projections of dataset examples onto the two components of the illusory patching di-
rection found in MLP8: the nullspace (irrelevant) component (left), and the rowspace (dormant)
component (right).


                                                                            29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     dormant direction


                                                                                                                                     dormant direction


                                                                                                                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                                                                                                                (v
                                                                                                                                                                                               g
                                                                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                                                                                                                           al
                                                                                                                                                                                       h
                                                                                                                                                                                       tc
                                                                                                                                                                                      pa
                                                                                                                                                                                 to
                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                               io
                                                                                                                                                                      ct
                                                                                                                                                    re
                                                                                                                                                  di
                                                                                                  example to patch from                                           example to patch into
                                                         causally disconnected direction                                                                   causally disconnected direction


Figure 22: Consider a 2-dimensional subspace                                                    Figure 23: Suppose we have two examples
of model activations, with an orthogonal ba-                                                    (green) which differ in their projection on the
sis where the x-axis is causally disconnected                                                   causally disconnected direction (and have zero
(changing the activation along it makes no dif-                                                 projection on the dormant direction, by defini-
ference to model outputs) and values on the y                                                   tion). Let’s consider what happens when we
axis are always zero for examples in the data                                                   patch from the example on the left into the
distribution (a specical case of a dormant di-                                                  example on the right along the 1-dimensional
rection).                                                                                       subspace v spanned by the vector (1, 1) (red)
                                     dormant direction


                                                                                                                                     dormant direction
                                                                                 )
                                                                              (v


                                                                                                                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                                                                                                                (v
                                                                              g
       or


                                                                                                                                                                                                g
                                                                                                       or
                                                                          on
        th


                                                                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                                        th
                                                                         al
          og


                                                                                                                                                                                           al
                                                                                                          og
                                                                     h
             on


                                                                                                                                                                                       h
                                                                     tc


                                                                                                             on


                                                                                                                                                                                       tc
               al


                                                                    pa


                                                                                                               al


                                                                                                                                                                                      pa
                  co


                                                               to


                                                                                                                  co


                                                                                                                                                                                 to
                    m


                                                              n


                                                                                                                    m
                       pl


                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                                           io


                                                                                                                       pl


                                                                                                                                                                               io
                        em


                                                          ct


                                                                                                                        em


                                                                                                                                                                      ct
                                                         re
                            en


                                                                                                                                                    re
                                                  di


                                                                                                                            en


                                                                                                                                                  di
                             tv


  example to patch from                                         example to patch into
                                                                                                                             tv


                                                                                                  example to patch from                                           example to patch into
                                 >


                                                                                                                                 ⊥


                                                         causally disconnected direction                                                                   causally disconnected direction
                             1                                  2                                                            1                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                         result of the patch


                                                                                                                             1 + 2


Figure 24: To patch along v from the left into
the right example, we match the value along v                                                   Figure 25: This results in the patched activa-
from the left one, and leave the value along v ⊥                                                tion 1 + 2 , which points completely along the
unchanged. In other words, we take the com-                                                     dormant direction. In this way, the variation of
ponent of the left example along v ( 1 ) and                                                    activations along the causally disconnected x-
sum it with the v ⊥ component ( 2 ) of the orig-                                                axis results in activations along the previously
inal activation.                                                                                dormant y-axis

               Figure 26: A step-by-step illustration of the phenomenon shown in Figure 1.


                                                                                           30
