Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UBWORD EMBEDDING FROM BYTES AGAINST
EMBEDDING - BASED ATTACKS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         NLP models have grown as a powerful technology and impact our social life like
         never before, along with rising concerns in practical applications including privacy
         invasion and high computational cost. While federated learning alleviates these
         problems, attackers can still recover the private training data of victim clients by
         leveraging the transmitted model parameters and gradients. Protecting against such
         attacks of private information leakage remains an open challenge. We propose
         Subword Embedding from Bytes (SEB) as a novel solution that can protect privacy
         while maintaining efficiency and accuracy. Our experiments demonstrate that
         SEB can effectively protect against embedding-based attacks, which recover the
         sentences in a batch of text data, based on the gradients in federated learning. As a
         defense, SEB does not compromise the model’s accuracy. We also verify that SEB
         obtains comparable and even better results over traditional subword embedding
         methods in machine translation, sentiment analysis, and language modeling.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Natural Language Processing (NLP), such as Large Language Models (LLMs) and Machine Trans-
lations (MT), has made noticeable advancements in performance over the last decades, which is
partially attributed to the availability of larger datasets and richer computational resources. Since most
data are from users, their privacy concerns play an increasingly critical role. Federated learning (FL)
offers a promising approach for preserving user data privacy, enabling training shared models across
multiple clients without transferring the data to a central server. However, data leakage attack is
a severe problem in federated learning. Although only the model updates are sent to the central
server, sensitive information can be leaked through the model updates so that adversaries can use
them to reconstruct the original data, compromising the user’s privacy. Figure 1(a) demonstrates
an FL framework, and Figure 1(b) shows how embedding-based attacks work as in Gupta et al.
(2022). In the illustrated example, the attacker extracts all candidate words in a batch of data from
the embedding gradients and can easily reconstruct the text with beam search and reordering.
The reason why the original text can be easily reconstructed is that most NLP models are typically
based on word/subword tokenization such as Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al., 2015; Kudo &
Richardson, 2018). There is a one-to-one mapping between a word/subword and an embedding vector.
When a vector is updated, we can directly look up the corresponding word/subword. Therefore, we
aim to design a one-to-many mapping between words/subwords and embedding vectors to increase
the difficulty of the simple lookup. An intuitive idea is applying the byte embedding method because
the same bytes are repeatedly used for multiple subwords. Thus, retrieving input subwords with the
updated byte embeddings is harder, which makes the byte embedding in NLP models a potential
defense. As shown in Figure 1(c), although the attacker extracts a bag of bytes, the candidate
subword number is much larger than using subword embeddings. Therefore, the search space is the
whole vocabulary and the recovery is more random.
Although previous work shows byte-based models can reduce vocabulary size compared to the
subword models Xue et al. (2022); Shaham & Levy (2021); Zhang & Xu (2022), directly applying
existing byte encodings to enhance privacy and efficiency faces two major challenges: First, the
lack of explicit word boundaries makes it difficult to disambiguate between words and similar byte
sequences. Smaller textual granularity cannot show the semantic meaning of each word leading to a


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              Attacker                               Attacker                    Reconstructed text:
                                                                         Reconstructed text:
           Private batch data                                                                                                    Lucius lives in Tokyo now.
                                                                         Tom lives in New York.
        Tom lives in New York.          Gradients
        He is 20 years old.                                    Model                                  Model     46, 48, 50,
                                          Model                            "New",                                                    "Liberty", "Lab",
                ...                                                                                             67, 69, 72,
                                        parameters                           "is",                                                       "Outside",
                                                                                                                76, 78, 80,           "Lucius", "left",
                                                                            "He",
                                                                                                                83, 84, 89,
                      ...                                                 "years",
                                                                                                                91, 93, 97,
                                                                                                                                         "airports",
                                                              Gradient      "old",                   Gradient                       "Jimmie", "Tokyo",
                                                                                      Beam search               100, 101,
           Private batch data                                               "20",                                                      "in","sleepy",
                                                                                       and reorder              105, 107,
                                                                           "lives",                                                  "Canada", "71",
                                         Gradients                           "in",
                                                                                                                108, 109,                "is", "fine",
         This patient has heart
                                                                           "York",                              110, 111,           "##cian","##ture",
         disease.
                                          Model                            "Tom",                               114, 115,              "now", "lives"
                 ...
                                        parameters                            "."                               118, 119,                  ...
                                                                                                                121
                                                                    Bag-of-Words Extraction                Bag-of-Bytes Extraction Bag-of-Words Extraction
                     Clients                         Server


                                  (a)                                       (b)                                               (c)

Figure 1: An attack example of recovering text in FL. (a): An FL framework. (b) and (c): Recovering
text using embedding gradients of subwords and bytes.


less interpretable and analyzable model. Second, byte-based models tend to be more computationally
expensive, as input sequences become much longer after byte tokenization.
To address these challenges in byte-based models, we propose to encode subwords with bytes and
aggregate the byte embeddings to obtain a single subword embedding. This approach allows us to
preserve the advantages of a small vocabulary and maintain the original subword boundaries with
the same sequence length. The procedure consists of three steps: (1) Construct a mapping between
subwords and bytes. (2) Convert the input text into a byte sequence. (3) Retrieve the corresponding
byte embeddings and aggregate them back into subword embeddings using a feed-forward network,
while ensuring that the subword boundaries are maintained. By adopting this approach, we can
leverage the privacy protection provided by bytes while preserving the semantic meaning of the input
sequence without increasing its length.
Our main contributions are:

• We introduce a novel and universal text representation method SEB, which achieves a constant
  vocabulary size (e.g., 256) without increasing the input sequence length.
• We verify that the proposed SEB can protect NLP models against data leaking attacks on privacy-
  sensitive information from the gradients of embeddings in federated learning. To the best of our
  knowledge, our work is the first one to study privacy preservation with byte representations in
  federated learning.
• We demonstrate that SEB achieves comparable and even superior performance in various NLP
  tasks compared to subword baselines with less space complexity and better privacy preservation.

2   R ELATED WORK
Attacks and defenses in language model Contrary to the belief that gradient sharing is safe in
federated learning, many works show that it is possible to infer private information about the training
data from the shared gradients (Zhu et al., 2019; Zhu & Blaschko, 2021; Deng et al., 2021; Balunovic
et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2022). Some recent works consider the reconstruction as an optimization
task (Zhu et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2021; Balunovic et al., 2022). The attacker updates its dummy
inputs and labels to minimize the distance between the gradients that the victim uploaded and the
gradients the attacker calculated based on its dummy inputs and labels. Gupta et al. (2022) shows that
the attackers can reconstruct a set of words with the embedding gradients, then apply beam search
and reorder with a pretrained language model for input recovery.
One potential strategy to mitigate the gradient inversion attack described in Zhu et al. (2019);
Deng et al. (2021); Balunovic et al. (2022) is to encrypt the communicated gradients or make them
not directly inferable. However, encryption of the gradients requires special setups and could be
costly to implement. Moreover, it does not provide effective protection against server-side privacy
leakage (Aono et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2021; Fang & Qian, 2021). Differential privacy is another
approach to protect against privacy attacks, but it may have an impact on model performance (Zhu
et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021). While Zhang & Wang (2021)


                                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


proposed a secure federated learning framework that can prevent privacy leakage based on gradient
reconstruction, it does not effectively address the retrieval of a bag of words from the embedding
matrix gradients, as proposed in Gupta et al. (2022).

Subword-level and byte-level language models Subword-based models are widely used in NLP
tasks, where subwords are typically the smallest units of input. These models take a sequence of
subwords based on subword tokenization methods such as BPE, WordPiece, and SentencePiece (Sen-
nrich et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2016; Kudo & Richardson, 2018). Despite their great performance,
subword-based models still have some limitations. For instance, they cannot handle out-of-vocabulary
subwords and require language-specific tokenizers for languages such as Chinese, Korean, and
Japanese. Another challenge is the high space complexity of the large size of the embedding matrix
when the vocabulary size is very large.
One possible solution to address these issues is to use byte tokens as inputs and outputs, as demon-
strated in many recent works (Shaham & Levy, 2020; Zhang & Xu, 2022; Xue et al., 2022). UTF-8
is a universal standard for almost all language writing systems, making it possible to represent all
languages using a fixed and shared byte vocabulary. Therefore, there will be no out-vocabulary words
and the language-specific tokenizer is unnecessary. In addition, as the total number of bytes in UTF-8
is 256, the embedding matrix for byte vocabulary is much smaller than most subword vocabularies,
reducing the number of parameters in the embedding layer and saving memory space.

Subword-level model with character- or byte-level fusion The naive character-based and byte-
based models often result in longer input sequences compared to the subword-based model, which
increases the time complexity. To make the model efficient, several recent papers have explored
character-level or byte-level fusion. For example, (Tay et al., 2021) propose CHARFORMER, using
a soft gradient-based subword tokenization module to obtain “subword tokens”. It generates and
scores multiple subword blocks, aggregates them to obtain subword representation, and then performs
downsampling to reduce the sequence length. Although CHARFORMER is faster than vanilla
byte-based or character-based models, it does not maintain the subword boundaries, which can limit
the interpretability ability of the model. Sreedhar et al. (2022) propose Local Bytes Fusion (LOBEF)
to aggregate local semantic information and maintain the word boundary. However, it does not reduce
the sequence length, making training and inference time-consuming.

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   S UBWORD - LEVEL AND BYTE - LEVEL TOKENIZATION

Tokenization is an essential process in NLP. It splits input text into a sequence of tokens, which
can be subwords or bytes. The resulting sequence of tokens is fed into various NLP models such
as Transformer, convolutional neural network (CNN), and recurrent neural network (RNN) for
further processing. The following example shows an input text “comedy film” and its subword token
sequence with BPE and byte token sequence with UTF-8.

• Input text: “comedy film” with 11 characters.
• Subword tokenization with BPE: “com”, “##edy”, “film”.
• Byte tokenization with UTF-8: 99, 111, 109, 101, 100, 121, 32, 102, 105, 108, 109 (11 bytes).

3.2   F EDERATED L EARNING

In federated learning (FL), multiple clients jointly train a model using their private data but without
sharing the data. Assume we have N clients, C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cN }, and a server s, in an FL system.
The jointly trained model is f with parameters ✓. The clients’ private data are D1 , D2 , . . . , DN
and the objective function is L. To make it easier to illustrate the computation and communication
operations of FL, We assume all the clients participate in each communication and clients use
FedSGD (McMahan et al., 2017) to update the model parameters.
In each communication round t, server s first sends the model parameters ✓t to all clients. Then
each client ci compute ti = r✓t L✓t (Bi ), the gradients of current model f✓t , based on a randomly


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                             "Hello" "World"
      Transformer                      MLP

    Subword Embedding                                  "Hello Word"        14               ...                                      "Hello" "World"
                                  Aggregate Byte
                                  Representation                            3
                                                        Subword
                                                        Tokenizer           10
 Subword Token Sequence
                                 Byte Embedding/                            4               ...
                                 One-hot Encoding
                                                                           10
                                                      "Hello" "World"
    Subword Tokenizer                                                       4               ...
                                                                                            ...
                                Byte Token Sequence                        14
                                                      Byte Tokenizer
                                                                           15
      Input Sequence               Byte Tokenizer                                                                                       Subword
                                                                          Byte    Byte embedding matrix
                                                                        sequence (one-hot encoding matrix)    Aggregation      FFN     embeddings

                          (a)                                                                           (b)

Figure 2: (a): An overview of the transformer model with SEB. (b): An example of calculating
subword embeddings with byte embedding.


sampled data batch Bi ⇢ Di and | Bi |. After local computation, the clients send the gradients
  1 , 2 , . . . , N to server and server s aggregate all the gradients and update the model:
  t   t           t


                                                            N
                                                            X                             N
                                                                                          X
                                         ✓t+1 = ✓t      ⌘               t
                                                                        i =✓
                                                                             t
                                                                                      ⌘           r✓t L✓t (Bi ).                                (1)
                                                            i=1                           i=1

Here, Equation (1) is the gradient descent, and ⌘ is the learning rate.

3.3      T HREAT M ODEL

Adversary’s capabilities and objective In this paper, we follow the attack settings in Gupta et al.
(2022) under client-server architecture. The optimized model is a language model L, parameterized
by ✓. This scenario makes the attacker white box access to the gradients r✓t L✓t (Bi ) sent by the
victim client ci . ✓t is the model parameter that the server sends to the clients at any communication
round t. From parameters ✓t and gradients r✓t L✓t (Bi ), the attacker can get the information of the
vocabulary V and the embedding matrix W to retrieve which tokens are updated. The goal of the
attacker is to recover at least one sentence from Bi , based on r✓t L✓t (Bi ) and ✓t .

Attack model This paper does not address the issue of gradient leakage attacks, which aim to
obtain private data by minimizing the difference between gradients derived from a dummy input and
the actual gradients of the victim’s data. This is because several methods have already been proposed
to mitigate this particular attack (Zhu et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2020). Instead, our
focus is on a specific attack model introduced in Gupta et al. (2022), for which effective defenses
have yet to be explored. In this model, the attacker attempts to reconstruct sentences from the victim’s
training batches through a three-step process: (1) extracting candidate tokens from the gradients, (2)
applying beam search with a pre-trained Language Model, such as GPT-2, to reconstruct the input
sentence, and (3) reordering the subword tokens to achieve the best possible reconstruction.


4      P ROPOSED M ETHOD

Our goal is to develop a subword embedding approach that requires a smaller byte embedding
matrix while maintaining subword boundaries. A smaller byte embedding matrix can save space and
potentially protect against attacks based on the embedding gradients in federated learning. Preserving
subword boundaries and keeping the subword sequence maintains the model’s time efficiency. This
raises two main challenges: 1) how to convert subwords into a byte sequence? and 2) how to obtain
subword embeddings using byte representations?
In this section, we describe our proposed Subword Embedding from Bytes (SEB) method. Figure 2
shows an overview of SEB, including byte sequence for input text, byte embeddings, aggregation of
byte embeddings, and a feed-forward network to output the subword embedding. We will introduce
the details of each part and analyze the complexity in the following sections.


                                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1   C ONSTRUCTION OF SUBWORD TO BYTE SEQUENCE MAPPING

UTF-8 encoding results in different sequence lengths for subwords. In real practice, all byte sequences
need to be padded to the same length, making the byte sequence of the subword even longer. Instead
of using the existing byte encoding system, we define our subword to byte sequence mapping
M : Vw ! (Vb )n . Vw and Vb are subword and byte vocabularies with size of Vw and Vb , respectively.
(Vb )n is a sequence of n bytes in Vb . Here the byte vocabulary size Vb and the number of bytes n to
represent a subword are hyperparameters. In this way, every subword is represented with the same
length, getting rid of the longer byte sequence with padding.
To construct the mapping, for every subword wi 2 Vw , we randomly sample n bytes with replacement
from Vb to obtain the byte sequence (bi1 , bi2 , . . . , bin ). If the byte sequence already exists in M,
we repeat the sampling until a unique byte sequence is obtained. For example, we set Vb = 64 and
n = 4. A subword “Hello” can be represented with (14, 3, 10, 4), shown in Figure 2(b).
We analyze the probability p that two subwords are mapped to the same byte sequence. With the
byte vocabulary size Vb and the number of bytes per subword n, the probability p = 1/(Vb )n . For
example, if Vb = 16 and n = 4 then p = 1.5 ⇥ 10 5 . For Vb = 128 and n = 8 in our experiment,
p = 1.39 ⇥ 10 17 , which means there is almost no possibility to map two words into the same
subword sequence. Therefore, SEB is highly expressive for representing subwords.

4.2   S UBWORD EMBEDDING BASED ON BYTE REPRESENTATION

Raw byte sequences as input result in longer lengths, leading to higher space and time complexity
(Dai et al., 2019; Sukhbaatar et al., 2019). Different from these models, our method tokenizes the text
into a sequence of bytes while preserving the subword boundary. We first tokenize the original text
into subwords using a common subword tokenization method, such as BPE. Then, we token each
subword into a byte sequence with the mapping we designed above and aggregate byte representations
back to subword embeddings. The two detailed algorithms are in Appendix, Algorithm 1 and 2.
Assume the byte embedding matrix is B 2 RVb ⇥d , where d is the embedding size. Give an input text
S, we first tokenize S into a subword sequence (w1 , w2 , . . . , wm ). Then we further use the mapping
M defined above to tokenize this sequence into a byte sequence (b11 , . . . , b1n , . . . , bm1 , . . . , bmn )
with mn bytes. We retrieve the byte embeddings E 2 Rmn⇥d for these bytes from B.
To get a subword embedding, adding the byte representations for every n bytes in E is a simple way.
However, this approach does not consider the position of each byte within the subword. Inspired
by the idea that incorporating positional information can improve model performance for subword
tokens, we induce positional information for byte sequences of subwords by concatenation. This
enables the model to capture the position of each byte within the subword and obtain a more accurate
and informative representation of the subword. Given the retrieved byte embeddings E 2 Rmn⇥d ,
we reshape E to Ẽ 2 Rm⇥nd in a row-major order, which is equivalent to concatenation. Then, an
FFN is applied to project Ẽ into the dimension d0 of the original subword embedding for a specific
                                          0
language model: E0 = FFN(Ẽ) 2 Rm⇥d . Note that, the byte embedding matrix B can be either a
real-valued or one-hot embedding matrix because the vocabulary size is small for bytes. We compare
the performances for both embedding methods in experiments.

4.3   C OMPLEXITY ANLYSIS

To demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed SEB, Table 1: Complexity for conventional sub-
we summarize the space and time complexity of each word embeddings, byte embedding, and our
embedding method in Table 1. Here, the column proposed SEB.
“Memory” represent the memory usage for each em-
bedding, and the column “Time" shows the time com-   Embedding Memory           Time
plexity in Transformer attention. For simplicity, we
let d0 = d and use one linear layer as FFN in SEB    Subword    O(Vw d)         O(m2 d)
which contains nd parameters.
                  2                                  Byte       O(V b d)        O(c2 m2 d)
                                                              SEB (Ours)             2
                                                                              O((nd + Vb )d)     O(m d)
In terms of space complexity, subword embeddings
typically have an exponentially large vocabulary size Vw , exceeding 104 , while byte embeddings
typically have a dictionary size of no more than 256. For the proposed SEB, the number of parameters


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a) Batch size = 1             (b) Batch size = 4            (c) Batch size = 16

Figure 3: The distribution of subword number, unique subword number, and unique byte number in a
batch when batch size is 1, 4, 16. The vocabulary sizes of subwords and bytes are 50K and 256.


in embedding is O(nd2 + Vb d) = O((nd + Vb )d), including the FFN and byte embedding matrix.
In practice, nd + Vb ⌧ Vw . As a result, both byte embeddings and our proposed SEB significantly
reduce the memory cost required for embeddings. In B.5, we show the analysis for space complexity
in our experiments. Regarding time complexity, we analyze the attention in the widely used Trans-
former Vaswani et al. (2017). Given the sequence length m, byte embedding is more time-consuming
since the input length is c times longer than subword embedding. Here c is the average ratio between
the lengths of byte and subword sequences. Based on the statistics Shaham & Levy (2020), c is
usually around 5. However, our proposed SEB maintains the same time efficiency as conventional
subword embeddings because we preserve the subword sequence along with its boundaries.

5     E XPERIMENT
We conduct experiments to demonstrate the advantages of SEB in reducing space complexity,
maintaining time efficiency, and preserving privacy for NLP models in federated learning. In all
experiments, we set Vb = 256 and n = 8, which is sufficient to prevent encoding two subwords into
the same byte sequences. We use a 2-layer FFN in the proposed SEB.

5.1   E XPERIMENTS ON PRIVACY PROTECTION

Dataset, attack task, and evaluation metrics We followed the settings in the FILM attack (Gupta
et al., 2022). The dataset is WikiText-103 Merity et al. (2016). For the attack task, we use GPT-2
base Radford et al. (2019) with 117M parameters to recover the input batches. The ROUGE-1/2/L
F-Scores Lin (2004) are used to evaluate the similarity between the recovered and original text.

Quantitative analysis of defense We first show that it is difficult
to retrieve a bag of candidate subwords in SEB with Figure 3 and
4. In Figure 3, we present the distributions of the subword number,
unique subword number, and unique byte number in a client’s
batch of data. We observe that even a single sample contains over
120 unique bytes on average, while only having approximately 25
unique subwords. In Figure 4, we present the average coverage of
subwords for a subset of bytes. Based on Figure 4, 120 bytes cover
about 50K subwords. It means recovery is a random generation
using almost the entire vocabulary.
Additionally, Figure 5 shows the FILM attack performances using Figure 4: The average coverage
various batches on WikiText-103, with subword embedding and of subwords given a random set
SEB. As the candidate subwords are almost the whole vocabulary, of bytes with GPT-2 tokenizer.
beam search takes huge memory which is not executable on our
device. To show the defense performance, we loose the constraints and randomly sample 7,000
subwords, combined with the subwords in the original text. We randomly select 5 tested batches for
each batch size and take the average ROUGE F-Scores. When batch size is 1, ROUGE-1/2/L scores
are close to 1 for attacks with subword embedding, indicating a nearly perfect recovery. However,
these scores are quite low when using SEB, showing the effectiveness of SEB to defend the attacks
based on embedding gradients.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Figure 5: Recovery performance for batch size 1, 2, 4, 8 on WikiText-103.

Table 2: The best recovered sentences by FILM using subword embedding and BSE with batch size
1. Text in green are successfully recovered phrases and words.


             Original Sentence                       Best Recovered Sentence
 Subword     The historic rainfall caused sev-       The rainfall caused several historic dams to fill throughout
             eral dams to fill throughout north-     northeast Mexico.
             east Mexico.
 SEB         Pujols is a highly regarded hitter      He is a professional who has a very high degree of abil-
             who has shown a "combination            ity, and always takes great advice, without ever assuming
             of contact hitting ability, patience,   power" ("Pivotal Decision Making With Your Head". Re-
             and raw power"                          trieved 12 Dec 2007 16 Mar)


Qualitative analysis of defense To intuitively show the difference between the recovered sentences
of FILM using subword embedding and the proposed SEB, we select the best-recovered sentences of
these two methods based on the ROUGE-L F-score and list the results in Table 2. In the recovered
sentence with the subword embedding, all words are successfully retrieved and have a very close
order to the original sentence. However, with SEB, only a few words are retrieved, and many of
them are stop words. The results show that SEB can prevent the attacker from recovering private
information in the original sentence even though the batch only contains one sentence.

5.2     E XPERIMENT ON PERFORMANCE

To provide a more comprehensive assessment of our proposed technique’s applicability and per-
formance across different NLP tasks, we conduct experiments on machine translation, sentiment
analysis, and Language Modeling (LM) tasks. The enviormental settings are described in B.1

5.2.1    T RANSLATION
Dataset and evaluation metrics In the translation task, we consider two datasets, one is the
medium-size IWSLT14 (Cettolo et al., 2014) dataset and a large scale dataset WMT14 Bojar et al.
(2014). We follow the settings as prior work (Shaham & Levy, 2020; Zhang & Xu, 2022) and
translate German (de) to English (en) in IWSLT14 (Cettolo et al., 2014). The translation of WMT
is English (en) to German (de) and the preprocessing is the same as Fairseq (Ott et al., 2019). We
use SacreBLEU, case-sensitive, with the 13a tokenizer Post (2018) as the evaluation metric. A
detailed description of preprocessing, model architecture, and hyperparameter settings can be found
in Appendix B.2.

Main results For IWSLT14, we run 5 trials and report the average performance with the standard
deviation. We show the translation results of Transformer with subword embedding and SEB in Table
3. The hidden dimension of the two-layer FFN is 2048 for IWSLT because we try to keep the total
parameters of SEBco the same as the original Transformer. For WMT, the hidden dimension of FFN
is 4096. Here, we test three variants of SEB when aggregating the byte embedding back to subword
embedding: added real-valued embedding (SEBar ), concatenated real-valued embedding (SEBcr ),
and concatenated one-hot embedding (SEBco ). In this experiment, the dimensions of real-valued
and one-hot vectors are 512 and 256. Table 3 shows that SEBcr and SEBco can achieve better
performances than subword embedding. Concatenating the one-hot vectors yields better results
even with fewer model parameters than concatenating byte embedding. Therefore, we can conclude


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: BLEU score of IWSLT14 and WMT14. SEBar and SEBcr : SEB with added and concate-
nated real-valued embeddings, respectively. SEBco : SEB with concatenated one-hot byte embeddings.

                        Datasets      Embeddings        # Params   BLEU
                                      Subword           5.2M       34.54 ± 0.10
                                      SEBar             4.3M       34.64 ± 0.15
                        IWSLT14
                                      SEBcr             9.6M       35.32 ± 0.15
                                      SEBco             5.2M       35.44 ± 0.10
                                      Subword           22.3M      26.0
                        WMT14
                                      SEBco             6.3M       26.0


Figure 6: Results on embedding parameters, vocabulary size, and number of bytes per subword. Left:
The BLEU scores versus hidden dimension in FFN and embedding parameters. Right: Comparison
of mean BLEU scores for different byte vocabulary sizes and different numbers of bytes per subword.


that SEB is a better alternative to using large subword embeddings. Additionally, based on the
comparison between SEBar and SEBcr , we find that concatenation is better than the simple adding
of byte embeddings. This is expected as Section 4.2 because adding does not consider the positional
information of bytes. The result of WMT14 shows the same performance as the subword-based
model but with a smaller size of embedding parameters. It is important to emphasize that while
privacy is improved, our model achieves the same or better accuracy than the baseline methods.

Sensitivity analysis on FFN hidden units In this experiment, we test the sensitivity of SEBco on
FFN hidden units, because it is one of the major factors for embedding parameters. Here, we set
different FFN hidden units as {128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096}, with the total embedding parameter
numbers of 0.3M, 0.7M, 1.3M, 2.7M, 5.2M, and 10.5M, respectively. The number of embedding
parameters and translation BLEU scores are shown in the left of Figure 6. When the numbers of
hidden units are 256, 512, and 1024, SEBco can obtain better performance with fewer parameters.
Although the model can still achieve better performance when hidden units are larger than 2048, it
does not have advantages over the original transformer on model size.

Sensitivity analysis on Vb and n To investigate the Table 4: Embedding parameter number for
impact of the byte vocabulary size Vb and number of different Vb and n.
bytes per subword n, we set Vb as 64, 128, 256 and n
as 4, 8, 16. Based on the previous experiment, we set
                                                              Byte Tokens       Byte Vocabulary Size
the hidden units in the 2-layer FFN to 1024 in SEBco ,
                                                              per Subword
which provides good performance with a small scale                              64       128       256
of parameters. We first report the model size in terms              4         0.79M 1.05M 1.57M
of embedding parameter numbers in Table 4. All                      8         1.05M 1.57M 2.62M
of the settings have smaller embedding parameter                   16         1.57M 2.62M 4.72M
numbers than the original Transformer. We further
demonstrate the translation performance with these
settings in Figure 6 (right). It indicates that increasing n leads to better model performance for a fixed
Vb . This is because increasing n results in more possible positions per byte token, which provide more
information in the aggregated vector. Similarly, when we fix n and increase Vb , the increased byte


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


vocabulary diversity makes the aggregated vector more expressive. Therefore, increasing the byte
vocabulary size and the number of byte tokens per subword can improve the model expressiveness
leading to improved performance. Furthermore, Figure 6 (right) and Table 4 show that models with
similar amounts of parameters have similar performance, even with different Vb and n. In conclusion,
as long as Vb and n ensure that SEBco has sufficient expressive ability, the model performance is
more closely related to the number of parameters than to specific Vb and n.

5.2.2   S ENTIMENT ANALYSIS
Dataset and evaluation metrics We use IMDb Maas et al. (2011) and SST2 Socher et al. (2013)
datasets provided by Hugging Face. The detailed preprocessing of the dataset is shown in Ap-
pendix B.2. We use the accuracy for evaluation which is a routine in prior work Minaee et al. (2019);
Yenter & Verma (2017). The implementation details are in Appendix B.3.

Main results We compare the same BiLSTM models Table 5: Results on Sentiment analysis.
with subword embedding and SEBco . The classification
accuracies are shown in Table 5. The results show that
                                                                         IMDb (%) SST2 (%)
SEBco can replace the conventional subword embedding
without hurting the model performance. For SST2, SEBco        Subword 85.6 ± 0.5 81.2 ± 0.7
even has better performance. The reason for that is the       SEBco      85.8 ± 0.2 82.5 ± 0.7
parameters of the conventional subword embedding layer
in BiLSTM take a large portion of the model parameters,
making the model easily overfitting. In this experiment, SEBco has smaller embedding parameters,
which can address overfitting. We show that SEB also learns the semantic meaning of subword in B.4.

5.2.3   L ANGUAGE M ODELING
Dataset and evaluation metrics We use the same data Table 6: Perplexity of language model-
as Fairseq did for the language modeling tasks. The dataset ing for subword embedding and SEB.
we use is WikiText-103. We use the same preprocessing
and training settings as the official Fairseq does. The
                                                                         # Paramters Perplexity
number of samples for training, testing, and validation are
1801350, 3760, and 4358 respectively. We evaluate the         Subword       13.7M       30.84
language modeling performance with perplexity.                 SEBco        10.5M       30.55

Main results For language modeling (LM), our pro-
posed method achieved better performance on perplexity
while using a smaller size of parameters. The results are shown in Table 6, which demonstrate that
our method SEBis an effective and efficient alternative to the traditional subword embedding.


6   C ONCLUSION

Summary This paper introduces SEB, Subword Embedding of Bytes, a novel subword embedding
method that defends against privacy leakage attacks based on embedding gradients in federated
learning. Unlike traditional approaches that learn a large subword embedding matrix, SEB uses
smaller byte embeddings or byte one-hot encoding and aggregates byte representations to obtain
subword embeddings. With SEB, attackers cannot retrieve a small set of subwords and generate
private text, even with a well-trained large language model. Our extensive experiments show that SEB
is effective for machine translation without sacrificing performance or efficiency. Additionally, we
demonstrate that SEB makes it difficult for attackers to recover private text with embedding gradients
in federated learning.

Limitations and future work Limited to the computation resources, we only experiment with
moderate datasets and two tasks, machine translation, and sentiment analysis. The efficiency and
effectiveness of our proposed method on large language models as well as other natural language
processing tasks still need exploration. What’s more, the generalization ability of SEB is not discussed
in this work. Therefore, in the future, we will keep working on these aspects.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yoshinori Aono, Takuya Hayashi, Lihua Wang, Shiho Moriai, et al. Privacy-preserving deep learning
  via additively homomorphic encryption. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
  13(5):1333–1345, 2017.

Mislav Balunovic, Dimitar Dimitrov, Nikola Jovanović, and Martin Vechev. Lamp: Extracting text
 from gradients with language model priors. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 35:7641–7654, 2022.

Ondřej Bojar, Christian Buck, Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow, Philipp Koehn, Johannes Level-
  ing, Christof Monz, Pavel Pecina, Matt Post, Herve Saint-Amand, Radu Soricut, Lucia Specia, and
  Aleš Tamchyna. Findings of the 2014 workshop on statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
  ings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pp. 12–58, Baltimore, Maryland,
  USA, June 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/v1/W14-3302. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/W14-3302.

Mauro Cettolo, Jan Niehues, Sebastian Stüker, Luisa Bentivogli, and Marcello Federico. Report on
 the 11th iwslt evaluation campaign. In Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Spoken
 Language Translation: Evaluation Campaign, pp. 2–17, 2014.

Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime G Carbonell, Quoc Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. In Proceedings of the
  57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2978–2988, 2019.

Jieren Deng, Yijue Wang, Ji Li, Chenghong Wang, Chao Shang, Hang Liu, Sanguthevar Rajasekaran,
   and Caiwen Ding. Tag: Gradient attack on transformer-based language models. In Findings of the
   Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 3600–3610, 2021.

Haokun Fang and Quan Qian. Privacy preserving machine learning with homomorphic encryption
  and federated learning. Future Internet, 13(4):94, 2021.

Samyak Gupta, Yangsibo Huang, Zexuan Zhong, Tianyu Gao, Kai Li, and Danqi Chen. Recovering
  private text in federated learning of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08514, 2022.

Yangsibo Huang, Samyak Gupta, Zhao Song, Kai Li, and Sanjeev Arora. Evaluating gradient
  inversion attacks and defenses in federated learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:7232–7241, 2021.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Taku Kudo and John Richardson. Sentencepiece: A simple and language independent subword
  tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 66–71, 2018.

Xuechen Li, Florian Tramer, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Large language models can be
  strong differentially private learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05679, 2021.

Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization
  Branches Out, pp. 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013.

Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
  Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 142–150,
  Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL http:
 //www.aclweb.org/anthology/P11-1015.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843, 2016.

Shervin Minaee, Elham Azimi, and AmirAli Abdolrashidi. Deep-sentiment: Sentiment analysis
  using ensemble of cnn and bi-lstm models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.04206, 2019.

Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, Alexei Baevski, Angela Fan, Sam Gross, Nathan Ng, David Grangier,
 and Michael Auli. fairseq: A fast, extensible toolkit for sequence modeling. In Proceedings of
 NAACL-HLT 2019: Demonstrations, 2019.

Matt Post. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores. In Proceedings of the Third Conference
 on Machine Translation: Research Papers, pp. 186–191, Belgium, Brussels, October 2018. As-
 sociation for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
 W18-6319.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare words with
  subword units. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909, 2015.

Uri Shaham and Omer Levy. Neural machine translation without embeddings. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2008.09396, 2020.

Uri Shaham and Omer Levy. Neural machine translation without embeddings. In Proceedings of the
  2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, pp. 181–186, 2021.

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng, and
  Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank.
  In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  1631–1642, Seattle, Washington, USA, October 2013. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D13-1170.

Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, Xiangpeng Wan, Yu Cheng, and Junjie Hu. Local byte fusion for neural
 machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11490, 2022.

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Édouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin. Adaptive attention span
  in transformers. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 331–335, 2019.

Yi Tay, Vinh Q Tran, Sebastian Ruder, Jai Gupta, Hyung Won Chung, Dara Bahri, Zhen Qin,
  Simon Baumgartner, Cong Yu, and Donald Metzler. Charformer: Fast character transformers via
  gradient-based subword tokenization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.12672, 2021.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.

Wenqi Wei, Ling Liu, Margaret Loper, Ka-Ho Chow, Mehmet Emre Gursoy, Stacey Truex, and
 Yanzhao Wu. A framework for evaluating gradient leakage attacks in federated learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2004.10397, 2020.

Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
  Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, et al. Google’s neural machine translation sys-
  tem: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144,
  2016.

Linting Xue, Aditya Barua, Noah Constant, Rami Al-Rfou, Sharan Narang, Mihir Kale, Adam
  Roberts, and Colin Raffel. Byt5: Towards a token-free future with pre-trained byte-to-byte models.
  Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:291–306, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Yenter and Abhishek Verma. Deep cnn-lstm with combined kernels from multiple branches for
  imdb review sentiment analysis. In 2017 IEEE 8th Annual Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics and
  Mobile Communication Conference (UEMCON), pp. 540–546, 2017. doi: 10.1109/UEMCON.
  2017.8249013.
Xuefei Yin, Yanming Zhu, and Jiankun Hu. A comprehensive survey of privacy-preserving federated
  learning: A taxonomy, review, and future directions. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(6):
 1–36, 2021.
Mengjiao Zhang and Shusen Wang. Matrix sketching for secure collaborative machine learning. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12589–12599. PMLR, 2021.
Mengjiao Zhang and Jia Xu. Byte-based multilingual NMT for endangered languages. In Proceedings
 of the 29th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 4407–4417, Gyeongju,
 Republic of Korea, October 2022. International Committee on Computational Linguistics. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.388.
Junyi Zhu and Matthew Blaschko. R-gap: Recursive gradient attack on privacy. Proceedings ICLR
  2021, 2021.
Ligeng Zhu, Zhijian Liu, and Song Han. Deep leakage from gradients. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                               12
