Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N THE E QUIVALENCE OF G RAPH C ONVOLUTION AND
M IXUP
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         This paper investigates the relationship between graph convolution and Mixup tech-
         niques. Graph convolution in a graph neural network involves aggregating features
         from neighboring samples to learn representative features for a specific node or
         sample. On the other hand, Mixup is a data augmentation technique that generates
         new examples by averaging features and one-hot labels from multiple samples. One
         commonality between these techniques is their utilization of information from mul-
         tiple samples to derive feature representation. This study aims to explore whether
         a connection exists between these two approaches. Our investigation reveals that,
         under two mild conditions, graph convolution can be viewed as a specialized form
         of Mixup that is applied during both the training and testing phases. The two
         conditions are: 1) Homophily Relabel - assigning the target node’s label to all its
         neighbors, and 2) Test-Time Mixup - Mixup the feature during the test time. We
         establish this equivalence mathematically by demonstrating that graph convolution
         networks (GCN) and simplified graph convolution (SGC) can be expressed as a
         form of Mixup. We also empirically verify the equivalence by training an MLP
         using the two conditions to achieve comparable performance. The code can be
         found at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/GraphConv_is_Mixup-F470.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Wu et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020) have recently been recognized
as the de facto state-of-the-art algorithm for graph learning. The core idea behind GNNs is neighbor
aggregation, which involves combining the features of a node’s neighbors. Specifically, for a target
node with feature xi , one-hot label yi , and neighbor set Ni , the graph convolution operation in GCN
is essentially as follows:                                         !
                                                  1 X
                                    (x̃, ỹ) =             xk , yi ,                                (1)
                                                |Ni |
                                                    k∈Ni
In parallel, Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) is proposed to train deep neural networks effectively, which
also essentially generates a new sample by averaging the features and labels of multiple samples:
                                   N           N                   N
                                                      !
                                   X          X                    X
                       (x̃, ỹ) =     λi xi ,    λi yi , s.t.         λi = 1,                    (2)
                                  i=1         i=1                   i=1
where xi /yi are the feature/label of sample i. Mixup typically takes two data samples (N = 2).
Equation (1) and Equation (2) highlight a remarkable similarity between graph convolution and
Mixup, i.e., the manipulation of data samples through averaging the features. This similarity prompts
us to investigate the relationship between these two techniques as follows:
                    Is there a connection between graph convolution and Mixup?
In this paper, we answer this question by establishing the connection between graph convolutions and
Mixup, and further understanding the graph neural networks through the lens of Mixup. We show
that graph convolutions are intrinsically equivalent to Mixup by rewriting Equation (1) as follows:
                              !                                   !                               !
               1 X                   X 1              X 1           λi = |N1 | X         X
(x̃, ỹ) =            xk , yi =                  xk ,          yi       = i      λi xk ,     λi yi ,
            |Ni |                          |Ni |         |Ni |
                 k∈Ni               k∈Ni            k∈Ni                     k∈Ni        k∈Ni


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



      (a) Three-sample Mixup
                                 Feature          Label
            y0              x0              y0
            y1              x1              y1            x̃                , ỹ
           y2               x2             , y2
       (b) Graph convolution (target node is              )
                            x0
                            x1             , y0           x̃                , ỹ
                            x2
           y0                                                      Graph Convolution

                Assign y0         to all neighbors                          Equal
                       (Homophily Relabel)
      y0         y0                                                      Mixup
                            x0               y0
                            x1               y0           x̃                , ỹ
                            x2             , y0
           y0                                                                          (d) GCN ≈ Mixup
       (c) Mixup with Homophily Relabel

Figure 1: Graph convolution is Mixup. (a) illustrates the basic idea of Mixup: averaging the features
and one-hot labels of multiple samples ( , , ). (b) shows the graph convolution operation where
the feature of the target node ( ) is the weighted average of the features of all its neighbors. (b) →
(c) shows that graph convolution is Mixup if we assign the label (      ) of the target node ( ) to all
of its neighbors ( , ). (d) shows that Mixup is empirically equivalent to GCN.

where xi and yi are the feature and label of the target node ni . This equation states that graph
convolution is equivalent to Mixup if we assign the yi to all the neighbors of node ni in set Ni
To demonstrate the equivalence between graph convolutions and Mixup, we begin by illustrating that
a one-layer graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016b) can be transformed into an
input Mixup. A two-layer GCN can be expressed as a hybrid of input and manifold Mixup (Verma
et al., 2019). Similarly, simplifing graph convolution (SGC) (Wu et al., 2019) can be reformulated as
an input Mixup. We thus establish the mathematical equivalence between graph convolutions and
Mixup, under two mild and reasonable conditions: 1) assign the target node’s label to neighbors
in the training time (referred to as Homophily Relabel); 2) perform feature mixup in the test time
(referred to as Test-Time Mixup).
We further investigate the conditions required for the equivalence between graph convolution and
Mixup, focusing on the effect of Homophily Relabel and Test-Time Mixup. To explore Homophily
Relabel, we demonstrate that training an MLP with Homophily Relabel (called HMLP) is equivalent
to training GCN in terms of prediction accuracy. This finding provides a novel perspective for
understanding the relationship between graph convolution and Mixup and suggests a new direction
for designing efficient GNNs. To investigate Test-Time Mixup, we train GNNs without connection
information, perform neighbor aggregation during inference, and find that this approach can achieve
performance comparable to traditional GNNs. This result reveals that Test-Time Mixup can be a
powerful alternative to traditional GNNs in some scenarios, and suggests that Mixup may have a
broader range of applications beyond traditional data augmentation. Our investigation on Homophily
Relabeling and Test-Time Mixup provides valuable insights into the theoretical properties of GNNs
and their potential applications in practice. We highlight our contributions as follows:
   • We establish for the first time connection between graph convolution and Mixup, showing that
     graph convolutions are mathematically and empirically equivalent to Mixup. This simple yet
     novel finding potentially opens the door toward a deeper understanding of GNNs.
   • Given that both graph convolution and Mixup perform a weighted average on the features of
     samples, we reveal that graph convolution is conditionally equivalent to Mixup by assigning the
     label of a target node to all its neighbors during training time (Homophily Relabel). Also, we
     also reveal that in the test time, graph convolution is also Mixup (Test-Time Mixup).
   • Based on Homophily Relabel and Test-Time Mixup, we propose two variants of MLPs based on
     the Mixup strategy, namely HMLP and TMLP, that can match the performance of GNNs.
Related Work. Graph neural networks are widely adopted in various graph applications, including
social network analysis (Fan et al., 2019), recommendation (Wei et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2022; Cai


                                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2022), knowledge graph (Cao et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023), molecular
analysis (Sun et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023a; ZHANG et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Corso et al.,
2023; Liao & Smidt, 2023; Xia et al., 2023; Hladiš et al., 2023), drug discovery (Sun et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2023c), link prediction (Chamberlain et al., 2023; Cong et al., 2023) and others (Chen
et al., 2023a). Understanding the generalization and working mechanism of graph neural networks
is still in its infancy (Garg et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023a; Yang et al., 2023; Baranwal et al.,
2023). The previous work attempts to understand graph neural networks from different perspectives,
such as signal processing (Nt & Maehara, 2019; Bo et al., 2021; Bianchi et al., 2021), gradient
flow (Di Giovanni et al., 2022), dynamic programming(Dudzik & Veličković, 2022), neural tangent
kernels (Yang et al., 2023; Du et al., 2019; Sabanayagam et al., 2022) and influence function (Chen
et al., 2023b). There is also a line of works that analyzes the connection between GNNs and
MLPs (Baranwal et al., 2023; Han et al., 2022b; Yang et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2023), which is similar
to the proposed method in Section 3. In this work, we understand graph neural networks through
a fresh perspective, Mixup. We believe that this work will inspire further research and lead to the
development of new techniques to improve the performance and interpretability of GNNs.
In parallel, Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) and its variants (Verma et al., 2019; Yun et al., 2019;
Kim et al., 2020; 2021) have emerged as a popular data augmentation technique that improves
the generalization performance of deep neural networks. Mixup is used to understand or improve
many machine learning techniques. More specifically, deep neural networks trained with Mixup
achieve better generalization (Chun et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Chidambaram et al., 2022),
calibration (Thulasidasan et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2022a), and adversarial robustness (Pang et al.,
2019; Archambault et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Lamb et al., 2019). Mixup are also used to
explain ensmeble (Lopez-Paz et al., 2023). See more related work in Appendix A.
The Scope of Our Work. This work not only provides a fresh perspective for comprehending Graph
Convolution through Mixup, but also makes valuable contributions to the practical and theoretical
aspects of graph neural networks, facilitating efficient training and inference for GNNs when dealing
with large-scale graph data. It’s important to note that certain complex GNN architectures, such as
attention-based graph convolution (Veličković et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018; Javaloy et al., 2023),
may not lend themselves to a straightforward transformation into a Mixup formulation due to the
intricacies of their convolution mechanisms. In our discussion, we explore how these GNNs can also
be considered as a generlized Mixup in Section 2.4.

2       G RAPH C ONVOLUTION IS M IXUP
In this section, we reveal that the graph convolution is essentially equivalent to Mixup. We first
present the notation used in this paper. Then we present the original graph convolution network
(GCN) (Kingma & Ba, 2015) and simplifying graph convolutional networks (SGC) (Wu et al., 2019)
can be expressed mathematically as a form of Mixup. Last, we present the main claim, i.e., graph
convolution can be viewed as a special form of Mixup under mild and reasonable conditions.
Notations. We denote a graph as G(V, E), where V is the node set and E is the edge set. The number
of nodes is N = |V| and the number of edges is M = |E|. We denote the node feature matrix as
X = {x1 , x2 , · · · , xN } ∈ RN ×d , where xi is the node feature for node ni and d is the dimension of
features. We denote the binary adjacency matrix as A ∈ {0, 1}N ×N , where Aij = 1 if there is an
edge between node ni and node nj in edge set E, and Aij = 0 otherwise. We denote the neighbor set
of node ni as Ni , and its 2-hop neighbor set as Ni2 . For the node classification task, we denote the
prediction targets of nodes as one-hot labels Y ∈ {0, 1}N ×(C−1) , where C is the number of classes.
For graph convolution network, we use Ã = D−1 A as the normalized adjacency matrix1 , where
D ∈ RN ×N is the diagonal degree matrix of A, and Dii denotes the degree of node ni . We use
ãi ∈ R1×N , i-th row of Ã, as the normalized adjacency vector of node ni .

2.1       P RELIMINARIES

Graph Convolution. Graph Convolution Network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016a), as the pioneering
work of GNNs, proposes Ŷ = softmax(Ã · σ(Ã · X · W1 ) · W2 ), where W1 and W2 are the
                                                                                                   1       1
    1
        Our following analysis can be easily generalized to other normalization methods, such as D− 2 AD− 2 .


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


trainable weights of the layer one and two, respectively. Simplifying Graph Convolutional Networks
(SGC) (Wu et al., 2019) is proposed as Ŷ = softmax(Ã · Ã · X · W). In this work, we take these
two widely used GNNs to show that graph convolution are essentially Mixup.
Mixup. The Mixup technique, introduced by Zhang et al. (2018), is a simple yet effective data
augmentation method to improve the generalization of deep learning models. The basic idea behind
Mixup is to blend the features and one-hot labels of a random pair of samples to generate synthetic
samples. The mathematical expression of the two-sample Mixup is as follows:
            (x̃, ỹ) = (λxi + (1 − λ)xj , λyi + (1 − λ)yj ) = (λ1 xi + λ2 xj , λ1 yi + λ2 yj ),       (3)

where λi + λj = 1. Based on the two-sample Mixup, the multiple-sample Mixup is presented in
Equation (2). The mathematical expression presented above demonstrates that Mixup computes a
weighted average of the features from multiple original samples to generate synthetic samples.

2.2     C ONNECTING G RAPH C ONVOLUTION AND M IXUP

We demonstrate that graph convolution, using GCN and SGC as examples, is conditionally Mixup. To
do this, we mathematically reformulate the expressions of GCN and SGC to a Mixup form, thereby
illustrating that graph convolutions are indeed Mixup.
One-layer GCN is Mixup We begin our analysis by examining a simple graph convolution neural
network (Kipf & Welling, 2016a) with one layer, referred to as the one-layer GCN. We demonstrate
that the one-layer GCN can be mathematically understood as an implementation of the input Mixup
technique. The expression of the one-layer GCN is given by: Ŷ = softmax(Ã · X · W) where
W ∈ RD×C is the trainable weight matrix. Let us focus on a single node ni in the graph. The
predicted one-hot label for this node is given by ŷi = softmax(ãi · X · W), where ãi ∈ R1×N , i-th
row of Ã, is the normalized adjacency vector of node ni . Ni is the neighbors set of node ni . We
make the following observations:
  • ãi · X results in a weighted sum of the features of the neighbors of   Pnode ni , which is the
    multiple-sample Mixup. Explicitly, we can rewrite ãi · X to x̃ = |N1 i| k∈Ni xk .
  • If we assign node ni ’s label to all its neighbors, the label yi of node ni can be interpreted as a
    weighted average of the labels of its neighboring
                                                  P nodes, which is equivalent to performing Mixup
    on the labels. Thus we have ỹ = yi = |N1i | k∈Ni yk .
From the previous observations, we can see that one-layer GCN synthesizes a new Mixup sample for
node ni by mixing up its neighbors’ features and one-hot labels, which is defined as follows:
                                                                   !
                                         1 X            1 X
                            (x̃, ỹ) =            xk ,           yk .                         (4)
                                        |Ni |          |Ni |
                                                k∈Ni           k∈Ni
Therefore, we conclude that a one-layer GCN is a Mixup machine, which essentially synthesizes a
new sample by averaging its neighbors’ features and one-hot labels.
Two-layer GCN is Mixup We extend our analysis to consider a two-layer GCN. The expression
for two-layer GCN is given by Ŷ = softmax(Ã · σ(Ã · X · W1 ) · W2 ), Let us focus on node ni
in the graph. For the first layer of the two-layer GCN, we have hi = Relu(ãi · X · W1 ) ∈ R1×d ,
where ãi ∈ R1×N is the normalized adjacency vector of node ni . The first layer is the same as the
one-layer GCN as discussed above, which can be regarded as a multiple-sample input Mixup.
For the second layer of the two-layer GCN, we have ŷi = Softmax(ãi HW2 ) ∈ R1×C , H ∈ RN ×d
is the hidden representation of all nodes obtained from the first layer, and W2 ∈ Rd×C is the weight
matrix. The predicted one-hot label for node ni , ŷi , is obtained through a softmax activation function.
The 2-nd layer can be regarded as multiple-sample manifold Mixup (Verma et al., 2019) in the
following:
      • ãi · H is the multiple-sample Mixup of the hidden  representation of the neighbors of node ni .
        We rewrite the ãi · H to x̃ = ãi · H = |N1i | k∈Ni hk .
                                                       P

Therefore, we conclude that a multi-layer GCN is a hybrid of input Mixup (first layer) and manifold
Mixup (second layer).


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SGC is Mixup The 2-layer SGC architecture is represented by the following expression, Ŷ =
softmax(Ã · Ã · X · W). Similar to one-layer GCN, for the node ni in a 2-layer SGC, we have
                        ŷi = softmax(ã2i · X · W), L = Cross-Entropy(ŷi , yi ),                     (5)
where ã2i ∈ R1×N is the adjacency vector within 2-hop neighbors of node ni . The 2-hop neighbor
set of node ni is represented by Ni2 , Hereby we have
      • ã2i · X is the multiple Mixup of the features of the neighbors of node ni . We rewrite the ãi · X
        to x̃ = ã2i · X = |N12 |   k ∈ Ni2 xk .
                                  P
                             i

From the above, we have a Mixup of samples for node ni is
                                                                
                                        1   X         1    X
                         (x̃, ỹ) =  2        xk ,           yk  .                                   (6)
                                      |Ni |  2
                                                    |Ni2 |  2
                                                k∈Ni              k∈Ni

Thus we conclude that an SGC is an input Mixup machine.

2.3     G RAPH C ONVOLUTION IS (Conditionally) M IXUP

It is straightforward to derive the Mixup form of 1-layer, 2-layer GCN, and SGC as discussed above.
This leads to the conclusion that 1-layer, 2-layer GCN, and SGC can all be reformulated in the form
of Mixup. This establishes a mathematical connection between graph neural networks and the Mixup
method. Building on these findings, in this section, we introduce our main contribution as follows:
     Main Results
    Graph convolution is Train- and Test-Time Mixup, under two mild and reasonable conditions:
    Homophily Relabel and Test-time Mixup.

The two primary differences between GNNs and Mixup are as follows:
    • Homophily Relabel In the training time, if we assign the label of the target node to all its
      neighbors, the Graph Neural Network can be naturally rewritten as a form of Mixup.
    • Test-Time Mixup In the test time, the GNNs perform feature mixing on the nodes and then use
      the mixed feature for the inference.
Both of the above conditions are mild and reasonable and have practical implications for GNN design
and analysis. The Homophily Relabel operation can be understood as imposing the same label on the
target node and all its neighbors, which corresponds to the homophily assumption for graph neural
networks. The homophily assumption posits that nodes with similar features should have the same
label, which is a common assumption in many real-world graph applications. On the other hand,
Test-time Mixup can be understood as Mixup at the test time by mixing the features from neighbors
for prediction. We examine the above differences in depth in Section 3 and Section 4.

2.4     D ISCUSSION

Comparison to Other Work. Hereby, we compare our work and previous work. Yang et al. (2023);
Han et al. (2022b) propose to train an MLP and transfer the converged weight from MLP to GNN,
which can achieve comparable performance to GCN. In this work, these two methods are all included
in part of our work, Test-Time Mixup. Different from previous work, we provide a fresh understanding
of this phoneme by connecting graph convolution to Mixup and also derive a TMLP Appendix C.2 to
implement Test-Time Mixup. Baranwal et al. (2022) understand the effect of graph convolution by
providing a rigorous theoretical analysis based on a synthetic graph. Different form this work, our
work understands graph convolution with a well-studied technique, Mixup.

3      I S Homophily Relabel E QUIVALENT TO GCN S T RAINING ?
In this section, we conduct experiments to examine the Homophily Relabel proposed in Section 2.3.
The empirical evidence substantiates our claims, emphasizing the significant effect of Homophily


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Relabel on GNNs. This understanding can facilitate the design of an MLP equivalent that competes
with the performance of GNNs. Note that we explore the transductive setting in our experiments.

3.1   Homophily Relabel Y IELDS A T RAINING -E QUIVALENT MLP TO GCN
                                                                                     x0            x1
We utilize the simple example graph to demonstrate the calculation of the            y0 = [1, 0]   y1 = [0, 1]
loss function in a GCN in the transductive setting. The example graph,
in Figure 2, comprises three nodes. The blue and red nodes belong to the
training set, while the gray node belongs to the test set. In the transductive
                                                                                                   xi
scenario, the loss function is computed for the entire graph during the
training phase, incorporating both the training and test nodes. In our             Figure 2: The example
simple example graph, the loss function will be calculated on the blue             graphs. xi is the tar-
and red nodes with their actual labels. Notably, the prediction for the gray       get node, The loss of xi
node, despite it being part of the test set, will also contribute to the overall   that connected two nodes
loss calculation in the transductive setting. For node ni , the prediction         with different labels.
(p0 , p1 ), the loss of the example graph will be as follows

            LG = cross-entropy(Y, Ŷ) = cross-entropy(y0 , yˆ0 ) + cross-entropy(y1 , yˆ1 )
               = −y00 log(p0 ) − y01 log(p1 )−y10 log(p0 ) − y11 log(p1 )
                                                                                                             (7)
               = −1 ∗ log(p0 ) − 0 ∗ log(p1 )−0 ∗ log(p0 ) − 1 ∗ log(p1 )
               = −1 ∗ log(p0 )−1 ∗ log(p1 ) = −2 ∗ (0.5 ∗ log(p0 )+0.5 ∗ log(p1 )).

where y00 /y01 is the 0th/1st elements in the one-hot label y0 for node n0 . The above analysis shows
that the actual training label for target node ni is (0.5, 0.5). From the Mixup perspective, in an
ideally well-trained model utilizing a two-sample Mixup, the following approximation will hold
f (λk x + (1 − λk )xk ) ≈ λk f (x) + (1 − λk )f (xk ), If we regard the neighbor aggregation as Mixup,
we can easily derive that

                x0 + xi         1                              x1 + xi       1
      ŷ0 = f               = (f (x0 ) + f (xi )) , ŷ1 = f               = (f (x1 ) + f (xi )) . (8)
                    2           2                                 2          2
From the above two equations, we can see that f (xi ) are trained with the labels of all its neighbors
x0 and x1 . Thus in the next, we propose explicitly training the nodes in the test set with the label of
their neighbors if they are in the training set. In our example graph, we explicitly train the gray node
with label (0.5, 0.5)

HMLP       Based on the above analysis, we proposed Homophily Relabel MLP (HMLP), which achieves
comparable performance of GCN for via training a MLP as a backbone with Homophily Rela-
bel. In detail, the proposed method HMLP has two major steps: 1) relabel all the nodes in the
graph with the mixed label Ŷ = A · Y. 2) train an MLP on all the nodes with Ŷ on relabeled
graph, only using node features. We illustrate our proposed HMLP with the example graph in
Figure 2. 1) we relabel all the nodes using Homophily Relabel, the node with new label will be
(x0 , (1, 0)), (x1 , (0, 1)), (xi , (0.5, 0.5)) 2) then train the HMLP with these data samples. The test
sample will be (xi , ?) during the test time. Note that the backbone of HMLP is an MLP.

3.2   C AN HMLP ACHIEVE C OMPARABLE P ERFORMANCE TO GCN?

To verify the proposed HMLP can achieve compara-
                                                        Table 1: Performance comparison of GCN
ble performance to the original GCN, we train the
                                                        and HMLP.
one-layer GCN (GCN-1), two-layer GCN (GCN-2),
SGC, and HMLP on the training set and report the Datasets            MLP       GCN        HMLP
test accuracy based on the highest accuracy achieved Cora         73.57±0.98 88.04±1.26 86.42±1.78
on the validation set. We experimented with different CiteSeer 71.90±1.69 75.69±1.36 75.94±1.54
data splits of train/validation/test (the training data PubMed 86.90±0.74 87.94±0.64 88.34±0.48
ratio span from 10% − 90%), and we also conducted Average            77.45     83.89      83.57
experiments with the public split on Cora, CiteSeer,
and PubMed datasets. We present the results in Table 1 and Figure 4. Additionally, we also present
the training and test curves of the MLP. GCN and HMLP in Figure 3.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: The performance comparison of the GCN, MLP and HMLP (Ours). The x-axis represents
the ratio of training data, and the y-axis represents the accuracy of classification. The results show that
our proposed method (HMLP) achieves comparable performance to GCN. Note that the architecture
of our method in train and test time are both MLP. More experimental results on other datasets and
GNNs are presented in Appendix C.1.

From the results in Table 1 and Figure 4, ➊ HMLP
achieves comparable performance to GCN when
the data training data split ratio is large. For the
Figure 4, the performance of HMLP is significantly
better than MLP, and on par with GCN, especially
when the training data ratio is large. The results
also show that when the training data ratio is small,
HMLP performs worse than GCN. The training and
test curves show that HMLP achieve the same test Figure 3: The training and test curves of GCN
curves (red and green lines in the right subfigure) and HMLP.
even though the training curve are not the same. This may be because the labels of nodes are changed.


4     H OW D OES Test-time Mixup A FFECT GCN I NFERENCE ?

In this section, we aim to investigate how Test-time Mixup affects the GCN inference process. We
conduct an empirical study to understand the functionality of Test-time Mixup (neighbor aggregation
during the test time). To this end, we propose an MLP involving Test-time Mixup only (TMLP).
TMLP The proposed method TMLP follows the steps: 1) we train an MLP using only the node features
of the training set. 2) we employ the well-trained MLP for inference with neighbor aggregation
during testing. This paradigm has also been investigated in previous works (Han et al., 2022b;
Yang et al., 2023). We call this method TMLP. We illustrate the TMLP with the example graph in
Figure 2. Specifically, we train the following training examples, (x0 , (1, 0)), (x1 , (0, 1)). Note that
the backbone of TMLP is an MLP. In the following, we explore the performance of TMLP.

4.1   H OW TMLP P ERFORM C OMPARED TO GCN?

In the section, we conducted experiments to verify the effect of Test-Time Mixup. In the experiments,
during the training, we only use the node feature to train an MLP, and then during the test time, we
use the well-trained MLP with the neighbor aggregation to perform the inference. We present the
results of varying training data ratio in Figure 6, and we also present the accuracy in Table 2 when
the training data ratio is 0.6. Additionally, we compare the learned representation of GNNs and
TMLP using t-SNE Van der Maaten & Hinton (2008). From these results, we make the following
observations:
From these results, we make the following observa-
tions: ➋ TMLP almost achieves comparable perfor- Table 2: Performance comparison of GCN
mance to GNNs. In the Figure 4, the performance and HMLP.
of TMLP is significantly better than MLP and on par Datasets       MLP       GCN        TMLP
with GCN, especially when the training data ratio is Cora       73.57±0.98 88.04±1.26 88.26±1.60
large. In some datasets (i.e., Cora, FullCoraML), the CiteSeer 71.90±1.69 75.69±1.36 76.35±1.13
performance of TMLP is slightly worse than GCN but PubMed 86.90±0.74 87.94±0.64 87.58±0.44
still significantly better than MLP. It is worth noting Average   77.45      83.89      84.06
that our proposed TMLP is only trained with the node


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: The performance comparison of the GCNs, MLP and TMLP (Ours). GCN-1 is a one-
layer GCN, and GCN-2 is a two-layer GCN. The results show that TMLP achieves a comparable
performance to GCN and SGC. Note that the architecture is essentially MLP in training time and
GCN in the test time. More results on other datasets and GNNs are presented in Appendix C.2.


Figure 7: Decision Boundary of MLP and TMLP. TMLP can cause node features to move away from
the learned boundary, as shown with      . More experimental details are in Appendix C.3


features, ignoring the connection information. Table 2 show the average accuracy (84.06) of TMLP is
comparable to that of GCN (83.89).
Based on the node representation, ➌ Test-Time
                                                                  Test-Time Mixup
Mixup make the node representation more dis-
criminative than MLP. The visualization clearly il-
lustrates that the node representations within the same
class, as learned by TMLP, are clustered together.
This clustering pattern demonstrates the advanced Figure 5: Visualization of node representa-
predictive power of TMLP, as it appears to have a tions learned by MLP and TMLP. Node rep-
keen ability to distinguish similar group classes ef- resentations from the same class, after Test-
fectively. Consequently, this capacity allows TMLP Time Mixup, become clustered together.
to deliver superior classification performance. The
node representation clearly show that what TMLP does from the representation perspective.


4.2   H OW D OES Test-time Mixup B ENEFIT GCN? I NVESTIGATING D ECISION B OUNDARY

In this section, we evaluate the effect of Test-Time Mixup on the decision boundary change from
MLP to TMLP. To do so, we compare the distance between node features and the decision boundary
of MLP before and after applying Test-Time Mixup. After training a model with training-time data
mixup, we evaluate its decision boundary, which separates different classes in the feature space. We
then apply test-time mixup techniques to node features and reassess the decision boundary. Our
findings indicate that ➍ Test-Time Mixup can cause node features to move away from the learned
boundary, enhancing model robustness to unseen data. However, it’s crucial to strike a balance
between Test-Time Mixup and model performance, as overdoing Mixup may reduce accuracy.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Unifying HMLP and TMLP. these methods together achieve performance comparable to
GNNs (despite the PubMed dataset, as the MLPs also exhibit better performance than GNNs.).

5   U NIFYING HMLP AND TMLP : V ERIFYING THE M AIN R ESULTS

In this section, we unify HMLP and TMLP into a single MLP, which integrates both Homophily
Relabel and Test-time Mixup. They are supposed to be equivalent to graph convolution. To unify
these two MLPs, we 1) relabel all the nodes in the graph with the mixed label Ŷ = A · Y. 2)
train an MLP on all the nodes with Ŷ on relabeled graph, only using node features. 3) employ the
well-trained MLP for inference with neighbor aggregation during testing. To test the efficacy of this
combined approach, we perform experiments comparing the performance of the unified MLP with
that of individual HMLP and TMLP, as well as other GCN. The experimental setup remains consistent
with the previous setting with HMLP and TMLP. We present the results in Figure 8. ➎ Unifying
HMLP and TMLP can achieve comparable performance to original GNNs.



6   D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK

Practical Potentials. Both HMLP and TMLP hold potential value for practical usage. TMLP is
training-efficient, as its backbone and training process are both MLP-based; however, the inference
requires Test-Time Mixup (neighbor aggregation), which can be time-consuming. This limitation also
exists in previous works (Han et al., 2022b; Yang et al., 2023). HMLP, on the other hand, is both
training and test efficient, as both processes are based on MLP. This suggests the potential of HMLP
for practical usage on large-scale graphs, as it eliminates the need for connection information during
both training and testing.
Theoretical Potentials. HMLP, derived from the Mixup, have the theoretical potential to understand
the expressiveness of graph neural network from the Mixup perspective. With the connection between
Mixup and graph convolution, HMLP goes beyond traditional methods to understand the learning
capability of the graph neural network.
Future Work. Based on the above practical and theoretical potentials of the proposed methods in
this paper. Here is some potential future works: 1) improve HMLP to make it more practical for
large-scale graphs and the performance when the training data ratio is small. 2) The well-studied
Mixup strategy would be helpful for understanding the expressiveness of graph neural networks.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To ensure the reproducibility of our experiments and benefit the research community, we provide the
sample source code in the anonymous link https://anonymous.4open.science/r/GraphConv_
is_Mixup-F470. We will also open-source our implementation after we clean up the codes. The
detailed experimental settings required to reproduce our experiments are described in Appendix D.

R EFERENCES
Guillaume P Archambault, Yongyi Mao, Hongyu Guo, and Richong Zhang. Mixup as directional
  adversarial training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06875, 2019.
Aseem Baranwal, Kimon Fountoulakis, and Aukosh Jagannath. Effects of graph convolutions in deep
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.09297, 2022.
Aseem Baranwal, Kimon Fountoulakis, and Aukosh Jagannath. Effects of graph convolutions in
  multi-layer networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=P-73JPgRs0R.
Filippo Maria Bianchi, Daniele Grattarola, Lorenzo Livi, and Cesare Alippi. Graph neural networks
  with convolutional arma filters. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
  44(7):3496–3507, 2021.
Deyu Bo, Xiao Wang, Chuan Shi, and Huawei Shen. Beyond low-frequency information in graph con-
  volutional networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35,
  pp. 3950–3957, 2021.
Chen Cai, Dingkang Wang, and Yusu Wang. Graph coarsening with neural networks. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Xuheng Cai, Chao Huang, Lianghao Xia, and Xubin Ren. LightGCL: Simple yet effective graph
  contrastive learning for recommendation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FKXVK9dyMM.
Kaidi Cao, Jiaxuan You, Jiaju Liu, and Jure Leskovec. Autotransfer: AutoML with knowledge
  transfer - an application to graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=y81ppNf_vg.
Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Sergey Shirobokov, Emanuele Rossi, Fabrizio Frasca, Thomas
  Markovich, Nils Yannick Hammerla, Michael M. Bronstein, and Max Hansmire. Graph neu-
  ral networks for link prediction with subgraph sketching. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=m1oqEOAozQU.
Ming Chen, Zhewei Wei, Zengfeng Huang, Bolin Ding, and Yaliang Li. Simple and deep graph
 convolutional networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1725–1735. PMLR,
 2020.
Ziang Chen, Jialin Liu, Xinshang Wang, and Wotao Yin. On representing linear programs by
  graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=cP2QVK-uygd.
Zizhang Chen, Peizhao Li, Hongfu Liu, and Pengyu Hong. Characterizing the influence of graph
  elements. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=51GXyzOKOp.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Xuanqing Liu, Si Si, Yang Li, Samy Bengio, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Cluster-gcn: An
 efficient algorithm for training deep and large graph convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the
 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 257–266,
 2019.
Muthu Chidambaram, Xiang Wang, Yuzheng Hu, Chenwei Wu, and Rong Ge. Towards under-
 standing the data dependency of mixup-style training. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ieNJYujcGDO.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sanghyuk Chun, Seong Joon Oh, Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo.
  An empirical evaluation on robustness and uncertainty of regularization methods. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.03879, 2020.
Weilin Cong, Si Zhang, Jian Kang, Baichuan Yuan, Hao Wu, Xin Zhou, Hanghang Tong, and
 Mehrdad Mahdavi. Do we really need complicated model architectures for temporal networks? In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
 forum?id=ayPPc0SyLv1.
Gabriele Corso, Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S. Jaakkola. Diffdock:
  Diffusion steps, twists, and turns for molecular docking. In The Eleventh International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=kKF8_K-mBbS.
Leyan Deng, Defu Lian, Chenwang Wu, and Enhong Chen. Graph convolution network based
  recommender systems: Learning guarantee and item mixture powered strategy. In Alice H. Oh,
  Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=aUoCgjJfmY9.
Francesco Di Giovanni, James Rowbottom, Benjamin P Chamberlain, Thomas Markovich, and
  Michael M Bronstein. Graph neural networks as gradient flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10991,
  2022.
Simon S Du, Kangcheng Hou, Russ R Salakhutdinov, Barnabas Poczos, Ruosong Wang, and Keyulu
  Xu. Graph neural tangent kernel: Fusing graph neural networks with graph kernels. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Andrew Dudzik and Petar Veličković. Graph neural networks are dynamic programmers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.15544, 2022.
Wenqi Fan, Yao Ma, Qing Li, Yuan He, Eric Zhao, Jiliang Tang, and Dawei Yin. Graph neural
 networks for social recommendation. In The world wide web conference, pp. 417–426, 2019.
Fabrizio Frasca, Emanuele Rossi, Davide Eynard, Ben Chamberlain, Michael Bronstein, and Federico
  Monti. Sign: Scalable inception graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11198, 2020.
Vikas Garg, Stefanie Jegelka, and Tommi Jaakkola. Generalization and representational limits of
  graph neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3419–3430. PMLR,
  2020.
Johannes Gasteiger, Aleksandar Bojchevski, and Stephan Günnemann. Predict then propagate:
  Graph neural networks meet personalized pagerank. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In
 NeurIPS, pp. 1024–1034, 2017.
Xiaotian Han, Zhimeng Jiang, Ninghao Liu, and Xia Hu. G-mixup: Graph data augmentation for
  graph classification. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8230–8248. PMLR,
  2022a.
Xiaotian Han, Tong Zhao, Yozen Liu, Xia Hu, and Neil Shah. Mlpinit: Embarrassingly simple gnn
  training acceleration with mlp initialization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00102, 2022b.
Matej Hladiš, Maxence Lalis, Sebastien Fiorucci, and Jérémie Topin. Matching receptor to odorant
 with protein language and graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=q9VherQJd8_.
Yang Hu, Haoxuan You, Zhecan Wang, Zhicheng Wang, Erjin Zhou, and Yue Gao. Graph-mlp: node
  classification without message passing in graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04051, 2021.
Qian Huang, Horace He, Abhay Singh, Ser-Nam Lim, and Austin R Benson. Combining label propa-
  gation and simple models out-performs graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.13993,
  2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bo Hui, Da Yan, Xiaolong Ma, and Wei-Shinn Ku. Rethinking graph lottery tickets: Graph
  sparsity matters. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=fjh7UGQgOB.
Adrián Javaloy, Pablo Sanchez Martin, Amit Levi, and Isabel Valera. Learnable graph convolutional
  attention networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=WsUMeHPo-2.
Jang-Hyun Kim, Wonho Choo, and Hyun Oh Song. Puzzle mix: Exploiting saliency and local
  statistics for optimal mixup. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5275–5285.
  PMLR, 2020.
Jang-Hyun Kim, Wonho Choo, Hosan Jeong, and Hyun Oh Song. Co-mixup: Saliency guided joint
  mixup with supermodular diversity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03065, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016a.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Variational graph auto-encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07308,
  2016b.
Alex Lamb, Vikas Verma, Juho Kannala, and Yoshua Bengio. Interpolated adversarial training:
  Achieving robust neural networks without sacrificing too much accuracy. In Proceedings of the
  12th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, pp. 95–103, 2019.
Yi-Lun Liao and Tess Smidt. Equiformer: Equivariant graph attention transformer for 3d atom-
  istic graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=KwmPfARgOTD.
Zirui Liu, Kaixiong Zhou, Fan Yang, Li Li, Rui Chen, and Xia Hu. EXACT: Scalable graph neural
  networks training via extreme activation compression. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=vkaMaq95_rX.
David Lopez-Paz, Ishmael Belghazi, Diane Bouchacourt, Elvis Dohmatob, Badr Youbi Idrissi, Levent
  Sagun, and Andrew M Saxe. An ensemble view on mixup, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=k_iNqflnekU.
Hoang Nt and Takanori Maehara. Revisiting graph neural networks: All we have is low-pass filters.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09550, 2019.
Tianyu Pang, Kun Xu, and Jun Zhu. Mixup inference: Better exploiting mixup to defend adversarial
  attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11515, 2019.
Mahalakshmi Sabanayagam, Pascal Esser, and Debarghya Ghoshdastidar. Representation power of
 graph convolutions: Neural tangent kernel analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09809, 2022.
Zhihao Shi, Xize Liang, and Jie Wang. LMC: Fast training of GNNs via subgraph sampling with
  provable convergence. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5VBBA91N6n.
Chuxiong Sun, Hongming Gu, and Jie Hu. Scalable and adaptive graph neural networks with
  self-label-enhanced training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09376, 2021.
Ruoxi Sun, Hanjun Dai, and Adams Wei Yu. Does GNN pretraining help molecular representation?
  In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  uytgM9N0vlR.
Xianfeng Tang, Yozen Liu, Xinran He, Suhang Wang, and Neil Shah. Friend story ranking with
  edge-contextual local graph convolutions. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International
  Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 1007–1015, 2022.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sunil Thulasidasan, Gopinath Chennupati, Jeff A Bilmes, Tanmoy Bhattacharya, and Sarah Michalak.
  On mixup training: Improved calibration and predictive uncertainty for deep neural networks.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Yijun Tian, Chuxu Zhang, Zhichun Guo, Xiangliang Zhang, and Nitesh Chawla. Learning MLPs on
  graphs: A unified view of effectiveness, robustness, and efficiency. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Cs3r5KLdoj.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Vikas Verma, Alex Lamb, Christopher Beckham, Amir Najafi, Ioannis Mitliagkas, David Lopez-Paz,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Manifold mixup: Better representations by interpolating hidden states. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6438–6447. PMLR, 2019.
Kun Wang, Yuxuan Liang, Pengkun Wang, Xu Wang, Pengfei Gu, Junfeng Fang, and Yang Wang.
  Searching lottery tickets in graph neural networks: A dual perspective. In The Eleventh Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=Dvs-a3aymPe.
Yiwei Wang, Wei Wang, Yuxuan Liang, Yujun Cai, and Bryan Hooi. Mixup for node and graph
  classification. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp. 3663–3674, 2021.
Zichao Wang, Weili Nie, Zhuoran Qiao, Chaowei Xiao, Richard Baraniuk, and Anima Anandkumar.
  Retrieval-based controllable molecule generation. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=vDFA1tpuLvk.
Chunyu Wei, Jian Liang, Di Liu, and Fei Wang. Contrastive graph structure learning via infor-
  mation bottleneck for recommendation. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=lhl_rYNdiH6.
Felix Wu, Amauri Souza, Tianyi Zhang, Christopher Fifty, Tao Yu, and Kilian Weinberger. Sim-
  plifying graph convolutional networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  6861–6871. PMLR, 2019.
Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi Zhang, and S Yu Philip. A
  comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE transactions on neural networks and
  learning systems, 32(1):4–24, 2020.
Jun Xia, Chengshuai Zhao, Bozhen Hu, Zhangyang Gao, Cheng Tan, Yue Liu, Siyuan Li, and Stan Z.
  Li. Mole-BERT: Rethinking pre-training graph neural networks for molecules. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=jevY-DtiZTR.
Keyulu Xu, Chengtao Li, Yonglong Tian, Tomohiro Sonobe, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie
  Jegelka. Representation learning on graphs with jumping knowledge networks. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 5453–5462. PMLR, 2018.
Chenxiao Yang, Qitian Wu, Jiahua Wang, and Junchi Yan. Graph neural networks are inherently
  good generalizers: Insights by bridging gnns and mlps. International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Jiaxuan You, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Design space for graph neural networks. Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:17009–17021, 2020.
Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo.
  Cutmix: Regularization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable features. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 6023–6032, 2019.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hanqing Zeng, Hongkuan Zhou, Ajitesh Srivastava, Rajgopal Kannan, and Viktor Prasanna. Graph-
  saint: Graph sampling based inductive learning method. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
Bohang Zhang, Shengjie Luo, Liwei Wang, and Di He. Rethinking the expressive power of GNNs
  via graph biconnectivity. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=r9hNv76KoT3.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
  risk minimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Linjun Zhang, Zhun Deng, Kenji Kawaguchi, Amirata Ghorbani, and James Zou. How does mixup
  help with robustness and generalization? In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Linjun Zhang, Zhun Deng, Kenji Kawaguchi, and James Zou. When and how mixup improves
  calibration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 26135–26160. PMLR, 2022a.
Shichang Zhang, Yozen Liu, Yizhou Sun, and Neil Shah. Graph-less neural networks: Teaching old
  mlps new tricks via distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Shuai Zhang, Meng Wang, Pin-Yu Chen, Sijia Liu, Songtao Lu, and Miao Liu. Joint edge-model
  sparse learning is provably efficient for graph neural networks. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  4UldFtZ_CVF.
Wentao Zhang, Ziqi Yin, Zeang Sheng, Yang Li, Wen Ouyang, Xiaosen Li, Yangyu Tao, Zhi Yang,
 and Bin Cui. Graph attention multi-layer perceptron. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04355, 2022b.
Yangtian Zhang, Huiyu Cai, Chence Shi, and Jian Tang. E3bind: An end-to-end equivariant network
  for protein-ligand docking. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023c. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=sO1QiAftQFv.
ZAIXI ZHANG, Qi Liu, Shuxin Zheng, and Yaosen Min. Molecule generation for target protein
  binding with structural motifs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Rq13idF0F73.
Jianan Zhao, Meng Qu, Chaozhuo Li, Hao Yan, Qian Liu, Rui Li, Xing Xie, and Jian Tang. Learning
   on large-scale text-attributed graphs via variational inference. In International Conference on
   Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=q0nmYciuuZN.
Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang,
   Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications.
   AI Open, 1:57–81, 2020.
Jinhua Zhu, Kehan Wu, Bohan Wang, Yingce Xia, Shufang Xie, Qi Meng, Lijun Wu, Tao Qin,
   Wengang Zhou, Houqiang Li, and Tie-Yan Liu. $\mathcal{O}$-GNN: incorporating ring priors
   into molecular modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL
   https://openreview.net/forum?id=5cFfz6yMVPU.
Zeyu Zhu, Fanrong Li, Zitao Mo, Qinghao Hu, Gang Li, Zejian Liu, Xiaoyao Liang, and Jian
  Cheng. $\rm a^2q$: Aggregation-aware quantization for graph neural networks. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=7L2mgi0TNEP.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Related Works                                                                              16
       A.1 Graph Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
       A.2 Mixup and Its Variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
       A.3 Efficient Graph Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16

     B Connection between Mixup and More Graph Convolutions                                       17
       B.1 Discussion on More Graph Convolutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
       B.2 Experiments on APPNP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
       B.3 Experiments on APPNP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17

     C Additional Experiments                                                                     18
       C.1 More Experiments for HMLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18
       C.2 More Experiments for TMLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18
       C.3 More Experiments on Decision Boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
       C.4 More Experiments on Deeper GCNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19
       C.5 Experiments on More Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19

     D Experiment Setting                                                                         22
       D.1 Running Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22
       D.2 Experiment Setup for Figure 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22
       D.3 Experiment Setup for Figure 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22
       D.4 Experiment Setup for Figure 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22

     E Datasets                                                                                   22

     F Broader Impact                                                                             23


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     R ELATED W ORKS

In this appendix, we discuss more related work to our paper.

A.1    G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS

Starting from graph convolutional network (Kipf & Welling, 2016a), graph neural networks have been
applied to various graph learning tasks and show great power for graph learning tasks. Despite the
practical power of graph neural network, understanding the generalization and working mechanism
of the graph neural networks are still in its infancy (Garg et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023a; Yang
et al., 2023; Baranwal et al., 2023). The previous works try to understand graph neural networks from
different perspectives, such as signal processing (Nt & Maehara, 2019; Bo et al., 2021; Bianchi et al.,
2021), gradient flow (Di Giovanni et al., 2022), dynamic programming(Dudzik & Veličković, 2022),
neural tangent kernels (Yang et al., 2023; Du et al., 2019; Sabanayagam et al., 2022) and influence
function (Chen et al., 2023b). There is also a line of works try to understand graph neural networks
by analyzing the connection between GNNs and MLPs (Baranwal et al., 2023; Han et al., 2022b;
Yang et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2023).
In our work, we understand graph neural networks through a fresh perspective, Mixup. We believe
this work will inspire further research and lead to the development of new techniques for improving
the performance and interpretability of GNNs.

A.2    M IXUP AND I TS VARIANTS

Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) and its variants (Verma et al., 2019; Yun et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2020;
2021) are important data augmentation methods that are effective in improving the generalization
performance of deep neural networks. Mixup is used to understand or improve many machine
learning techniques. More specifically, deep neural networks trained with Mixup achieve better
generalization (Chun et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Chidambaram et al., 2022), calibration (Thulasi-
dasan et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2022a), and adversarial robustness (Pang et al., 2019; Archambault
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Lamb et al., 2019). As a studies data augmentation method, Mixup
can be understood as a regularization term to improve the effectiveness and robustness of neural
network (Pang et al., 2019; Archambault et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Lamb et al., 2019). Mixup
are also used to explain some other techniques, such as ensmeble (Lopez-Paz et al., 2023). Addition-
ally, Mixup technique is also used to augment graph data for better performance of GNNs Han et al.
(2022a); Wang et al. (2021).
In this work, we use Mixup to explain and understand the graph neural network, and based on the
Mixup, we propose two kinds of MLP that achieve almost equivalent performance to graph neural
networks. Also, our work is different form the works that chance the GNN training with Mixup,
while we connect the graph convolution and Mixup.

A.3    E FFICIENT G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS

Although the graph neural networks are powerful for graph learning tasks, they suffer slow computa-
tional problems since they involve either sparse matrix multiplication or neighbors fetching during the
inference, resulting in active research on the efficiency of graph neural networks. The recent advances
in efficient graph neural networks are as follows. Efficient graph neural network (Wang et al., 2023a;
Shi et al., 2023; Hui et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b; Zhu et al., 2023b) includes the sampling-based
method (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chiang et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2019), quantization (Liu et al., 2022),
knowledge distillation (Zhang et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2023), and graph sparsification (Cai et al.,
2020). There is a line of work to try to use MLP to accelerate the GNN training and inference (Zhang
et al., 2022b; Wu et al., 2019; Frasca et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021).
Simplifying graph convolutional (SGC) (Wu et al., 2019) “simplifying” graph convolutional network
by decoupling the neighbor aggregation and feature transformation, the following work such as You
et al. (2020) employ the similar basic idea. Zhang et al. (2021) leverage knowledge distillation to
transfer the knowledge from GNN to MLP. Han et al. (2022b) and Yang et al. (2023) transfer the
weight from MLP to GNN. These kinds of methods use MLP for efficient graph neural networks.


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our proposed methods HMLP and TMLP are efficient for training and/or inference, which can be
categorized as an efficient graph neural network. Besides, our proposed method provides a new
perspective to understand graph neural networks.


B     C ONNECTION BETWEEN M IXUP AND M ORE G RAPH C ONVOLUTIONS

B.1   D ISCUSSION ON M ORE G RAPH C ONVOLUTIONS

We examine the connection between complex graph convolutions used in various graph neural
networks and Mixup. We aim to approximately rewrite complex graph convolutions (like those in
graph attention networks) into Mixup forms. We present a general Mixup form of graph convolution
for node ni in the graph as follows
                                                                
                                             X         X
                                (x̃, ỹ) =    λj Hj ,     λj yi  .                          (9)
                                            j∈N i            j∈N i


        Table 3: Examples of the relation between graph convolutions to Mixup at k-layer.
                                        (Ni )            (λj )         (Hj )
                               GCN       Ni            ai               Hk
                               SGC       Nik          aki               X
                               GAT       Ni     Attention Score         Hk
                               PPNP      Ni            ai              Logit


Equation (9) shows that graph neural networks architectures vary depending on: 1) how to select
neighbors set (Ni ), 2) how to select aggregation coefficient (λj ), and 3) what is mixed up (Hj ). For
example, if we set N = Ni2 , λ = |N12 | , the above equation will be SGC. However, there are a lot of
                                      i
advanced graph neural networks, such as GAT (Veličković et al., 2018)) (attention-based GNN), and
PPNP (Gasteiger et al., 2018) (MLP as the backbone). Table 3 shows the relationship between those
graph convolutions to Mixup. To include residual connections in some graph convolutions (Chen
et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2018), we can expand the neighbors set Ni of node ni to include its node
representation of the previous time step.

B.2   E XPERIMENTS ON APPNP

**APPNP** essentially performs the neighbor aggregation in the last layer. Thus, TMLP and HMLP,
according to APPNP, are equivalent to GCN. We report the performance in the table below. The
results show that TMLP and HMLP achieve better performance than APPNP.


                        Table 4: Performance Metrics of Different Methods
                               MLP       PPNP        TMLP            HMLP
                              73.57     83.80        88.26           86.42


B.3   E XPERIMENTS ON APPNP

**GNN with trainable mixing parameter λ**: In this experiment, we adopted a method similar
to GAT to examine the performance of our proposed method, with the mixing parameter λ being
learned during the training process. The Softmax (Li et al., 2020) is a learnable aggregation operator
that normalizes the features of neighbors based on a learnable temperature term. We report the
performance in the table below. The results show that the TMLP performed worse than the MLP.
This indicates that the learnable mixing parameter λ does not work well for our proposed method


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Table 5: Performance Metrics of Different Methods
                                   MLP       GAT-alike       TMLP
                                  73.57     88.42           65.62


C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

This appendix presents more experiment results on HMLP and TMLP, including 1) comparison
experiments of MLP, GCN, and HMLP/TMLP; 2) more experimental results on decision boundary.

C.1   M ORE E XPERIMENTS FOR HMLP

We present further experiments comparing MLP, GCN, and HMLP. These experiments complement
those discussed in Figure 4. We expand on that work by evaluating these methods with more GNN
architectures. The results are presented in Figure 9.
The results on more GNN architectures indicate that our proposed HMLP method not only outperforms
traditional MLP, but also attains a performance that is largely on par with GNNs in the majority of
instances.


Figure 9: The performance comparison of the GCN, MLP and HMLP (Ours) with GNN architectures.
The x-axis represents the ratio of training data, and the y-axis represents the classification accuracy.
The results show that our proposed method (HMLP) achieves comparable performance to GCN.


C.2   M ORE E XPERIMENTS FOR TMLP

We present further experiments comparing MLP, GCN, and TMLP. These experiments complement
those discussed in Figure 6. We expand on that work by evaluating these methods with more GNN
architectures. The results are presented in Figure 10.
With the evaluation of an expanded selection of GNN architectures, the results reveal that our
proposed method TMLP typically achieves performance comparable to traditional GNNs in most
situations.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: The performance comparison of the GCNs, MLP and TMLP (Ours). GCN-1 is a one-
layer GCN, and GCN-2 is a two-layer GCN. The results show that TMLP achieves a comparable
performance to GCN and SGC. Note that the architecture is essentially MLP in training time and
GCN in the test time.


      Table 6: Performance comparison of GNNs and our proposed method with different layers.
                                      1-layer     2-layer     3-layer     4-layer
                    MLP                69.11       68.95       68.39       69.22
                    SGC                82.38       84.50       84.23       83.95
                    HMLP               78.56       80.41       80.96       81.15
                    TMLP               82.10       83.76       83.49       83.67
                    HMLP +TMLP         83.12       83.95       84.87       84.41


C.3     M ORE E XPERIMENTS ON D ECISION B OUNDARY

We provide additional experimental results pertaining to the decision boundary of TMLP. Our findings
indicate that TMLP tends to shift the node features in the test set away from the pre-learned decision
boundary by TMLP.

C.4     M ORE E XPERIMENTS ON D EEPER GCN S

We conducted additional experiments on multi-layer graph neural network (SGC) on the Cora dataset.
We use the 20%\40%\40% for train\val\test data split. The test accuracy was determined based on the
results from the validation dataset. The test accuracy is reported in the following table. We observe
from the results that our proposed HMLP+TMLP method achieves performance comparable to that
of SGC when multiple graph convolutions are utilized.

C.5     E XPERIMENTS ON M ORE DATASETS

We conducted additional experiments on more datasets, including FullCora, FullSiteSeer, FullDBLP,
and the results are presented in Figure 12. The additional results provide more evidence that graph
convolution is a mixup under our proposed conditions.


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Decision Boundary of MLP and TMLP. TMLP can cause node features to move away from
the learned boundary.


                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: The additional experimental result on unifying HMLP and TMLP. These methods together
achieve performance comparable to GNNs on these additional datasets. The additional results show
that graph convolution is a mixup under our proposed conditions.


                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D        E XPERIMENT S ETTING

In this appendix, we present the running environment for our experiment and the experimental setup
for all the experiments.

D.1       RUNNING E NVIRONMENTS

We run all the experiments on NVIDIA RTX A100 on AWS. The code is based on PyTorch 2 and
torch_geometric 3 . The datasets used in this paper are built-in datasets in torch_geometric, which
will be automatically downloaded via the torch_geometric API.

D.2       E XPERIMENT S ETUP FOR F IGURE 4

We provide details of the experimental setup associated with Figure 4. The primary objective of this
experiment was to compare the performance of our proposed HMLP model with that of the GCN
model. We utilized diverse datasets to facilitate a comprehensive evaluation. We set the learning rate
to 0.1 for all methods and datasets, and each was trained for 400 epochs.Moreover, we did not use
weight decay for model training. The test accuracy reported is based on the best results from the
validation set. The node classification accuracy served as the evaluation metric for this experiment.

D.3       E XPERIMENT S ETUP FOR F IGURE 6

We provide details of the experimental setup associated with Figure 6. We set the learning rate to 0.1
for all methods, and each was trained for 400 epochs. Additionally, weight decay was not utilized in
this process. The test accuracy reported is based on the best results from the validation set. The node
classification accuracy served as the evaluation metric for this experiment.

D.4       E XPERIMENT S ETUP FOR F IGURE 8

We provide details of the experimental setup associated with Figure 8. We set the learning rate to 0.1
for all methods, and each was trained for 400 epochs. Additionally, weight decay was not utilized in
this process. The test accuracy reported is based on the best results from the validation set. The node
classification accuracy served as the evaluation metric for this experiment.


E       DATASETS

In this experiment, we use widely adopted node classification benchmarks involving different types
of networks: three citation networks (Cora, CiteSeer and PubMed). The datasets used in this
experiment are widely adopted node classification benchmarks. These networks are often used as
standard evaluation benchmarks in the field of graph learning.

          • Cora: is a widely used benchmark data for graph learning, which is a citation network,
            where each node represents a research paper, and edges denote the citation relation. Node
            features are extracted from the abstract of the paper.
          • CiteSeer is another citation network used frequently in GNN literature. It follows a similar
            structure to the Cora dataset, where each node represents a scientific document, and the
            edges are citation information between them. The node features are derived from the text of
            the documents.
          • PubMed: PubMed is a citation network composed of scientific papers related to biomedicine.
            As with the other datasets, nodes represent documents, and edges indicate citation relation-
            ships. Node features correspond to term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF)
            representations of the documents.
    2
        https://pytorch.org/
    3
        https://pyg.org/


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • FullCoraML is a subset of the full Cora dataset. It retains the same structure as the Cora
         dataset but is restricted to documents and citations within the field of machine learning. The
         node features are the bag-of-words representation for the papers.

F    B ROADER I MPACT
This work uncovers the connection between graph convolution and Mixup, which is anticipated to
have significant implications in the graph learning field. The potential impacts include: 1) offering
a fresh perspective for a deeper understanding of graph convolution and 2) providing the potential
to foster the development of more efficient graph neural networks. Our work contributes both
practical and theoretical advances to the AI community, particularly within the domain of graph
neural networks (GNNs).

       • Efficient Alternative Training and Inference Method for GNNs on Large Graph Data.
         HMLP presents an efficient solution for both training and testing on large-scale graphs, as
         it completely eliminates the need for connection information during both stages. TMLP,
         though also MLP-based, emphasizes training efficiency. The improved training efficiency of
         TMLP can still be advantageous for reducing the training cost on large graph.
       • Opening a New Door for Understanding Graph Convolution. The introduction of
         mixup, a simple node-level operation, offers a novel perspective on graph convolution by
         representing it in a mixup form. Traditional graph convolution employs the adjacency
         matrix of the entire graph, a concept that can be complex to comprehend or articulate. By
         approaching the understanding of graph neural networks from the entire graph level, we can
         demystify these complexities. This presents an essential avenue for exploration in future
         work related to our paper.


                                                  23
