Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


BAD H ABITS : P OLICY C ONFOUNDING AND O UT- OF -
T RAJECTORY G ENERALIZATION IN RL
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Reinforcement learning agents may sometimes develop habits that are effective
         only when specific policies are followed. After an initial exploration phase during
         which agents try out different actions in the environment, they eventually converge
         on a particular policy. At this point, the distribution over state-action trajectories
         becomes narrower, leading agents to repeatedly experience the same transitions.
         This repetitive exposure can give rise to spurious correlations. Agents may then
         pick up on these correlations and develop simple habits that only work well within
         the specific set of trajectories dictated by their policy. The issue here is that these
         habits can result in incorrect outcomes if agents are forced to deviate from their
         typical trajectories due to changes in the environment or in their policies. In this
         paper, we provide a mathematical characterization of this phenomenon, which we
         refer to as policy confounding, and show, through a series of examples, when and
         how it occurs in practice.


1    I NTRODUCTION
                  This morning, I went to the kitchen for a coffee. When I arrived,
                        I forgot why I was there, so I got myself a coffee—
How often do you do something without paying close attention to your actions? Have you ever caught
yourself thinking about something else while washing the dishes, making coffee, or cycling? Acting
out of habit is a vital human skill as it allows us to concentrate on more important matters while
carrying out routine tasks. You can commute to work while thinking about how to persuade your boss
to give you a salary raise or prepare dinner while imagining your next holidays in the Alps. However,
unlike in the above example, habits can also lead to undesired outcomes when we fail to recognize
that the context has changed. You may hop in your car and start driving towards work even though it
is a Sunday and you actually want to go to the grocery store, or you may flip the light switch when
leaving a room even though the lights are already off.
Here, we show that reinforcement learning (RL) agents also struggle from this same issue. This is due
to a phenomenon we term policy confounding, which reflects how policies, as a result of influencing
both past and future observation variables, may induce spurious correlations Pearl et al. (2016) among
them. These correlations can lead to the development of seemingly sensible but incorrect habits, such
as automatically flipping the light switch upon leaving a room, without confirming whether the lights
are actually on. The core problem here is that these habits can produce incorrect results when agents
are forced to deviate from their usual trajectories due to changes in their policies or the environment.
We refer to this problem as out-of-trajectory (OOT) generalization. It is important to note that OOT
generalization differs from the standard RL generalization problem (Kirk et al., 2023) in that the
objective is not to generalize to environments with different dynamics and (or) rewards but rather
generalize to different trajectories within the same environment.

Contributions This paper introduces and characterizes the phenomenon of policy confounding.
To do so, we provide a mathematical framework that helps us describe the different types of state
representations, and reveal how, as a result of policy confounding, the agent may learn representations
based on spurious correlations that do not guarantee OOT generalization. Moreover, we include a
series of clarifying examples that illustrate how this occurs. Unfortunately, we do not have a complete
answer for how to prevent policy confounding. However, we suggest a few off-the-shelf solutions that


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                               1.0
                                           GOAL
                                                                               0.8


                                                             Average Return
                                                                               0.6

                                                                               0.4

                                                                               0.2
                   START
                                                                               0.0

                                                                              −0.2
                                                                                                                     Train env
                                                                              −0.4
                                                                                                                     Eval env
                                           GOAL                               −0.6
                                                                                     0   20000   40000   60000   80000     100000
                                                                                                  Timesteps


Figure 1: Left: An illustration of the Frozen T-Maze environment. Right: Learning curves when
evaluated in the Frozen T-Maze environment with (blue curve) and without (red curve) ice.
may help mitigate its effects. We hope this paper will create awareness among the RL community
about the risks of policy confounding and inspire further research on this topic.

2    E XAMPLE : F ROZEN T-M AZE

We now provide an example to illustrate the phenomenon and motivate the need for careful analysis.
The environment shown in Figure 1 is a variant of the popular T-Maze environment (Bakker, 2001).
The agent receives a binary signal, green or purple, at the start location. Then, it needs to move to the
right and reach the correct goal at the end of the maze (ignore the blue cells and the black vertical
arrow in the middle of the maze for now). The agent obtains a reward of +1 for moving to the green
(purple) goal when having received the green (purple) signal and a reward of −1 otherwise. There is
also a −0.1 penalty per timestep to encourage the agent to take the shortest path toward the goal. At
first sight, one may think that the only way the agent can solve the task is if, at every cell along its
trajectory, it can recall the initial signal. However, once the agent figures out the shortest path to each
of the two goals (depicted by the green and purple arrows), the agent may safely forget the initial
signal. The agent knows that whenever it is at any of the cells along the green (purple) path, it must
have received the green (purple) signal. Hence, it can simply move toward the right goal on the basis
of its own location. Sticking to this habit is optimal so long as the agent commits to always taking
these two paths.1 It is also essential that the environment’s dynamics remain the same since even the
slightest change in the agent’s trajectories may erase the spurious correlation induced by the agent’s
policy between the agent’s location and the correct goal.
To show that this actually occurs in practice, we train agents in the original environment (train env)
and evaluate them on a variant of the same (eval env), where some ice (blue) has appeared in the
middle of the maze. The ice makes the agent slip from the upper cell to the bottom cell and vice
versa. Note that, although the ice does change the environment dynamics, its purpose is to force the
agent to take trajectories different from the optimal ones. The way we implemented it, the effect of
the ice would be equivalent to forcing the agent to move down twice when in the top cell or move up
twice when in the bottom cell. Importantly, these trajectories are feasible in the original environment.
The plot on the right of Figure 1 shows the return averaged over 10 trials. The performance drop in
the evaluation environment (blue curve) suggests that the agents’ policies do not generalize. The ice
confuses the agents, who, after being pushed away from their preferred trajectories, can no longer
select the right goal. More details about this experiment are provided in Section 7.

3    R ELATED W ORK

The presence of spurious correlations in the training data is a well-studied problem in machine
learning. These correlations often provide convenient shortcuts that a model can exploit to make
predictions (Beery et al., 2018). However, the performance of a model that relies on them may
significantly deteriorate under different data distributions (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009; Arjovsky,
2021). Langosco et al. (2022) show that RL agents may use certain environment features as proxies
for choosing their actions. These features, which show only in the training environments, happen
to be spuriously correlated with the agent’s objectives. In contrast, we demonstrate that, as a result
of policy confounding, agents may directly take part in the formation of spurious correlations. A
few prior works have already reported empirical evidence of particular forms of policy confounding,
showing that in deterministic environments, agents can rely on information that correlates with the
   1
     Note that the two paths highlighted in Figure 1 are not the only optimal paths. However, for the agent to be
able to ignore the initial signal, it is important that the paths do not overlap.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


agent’s progress in an episode to determine the optimal actions. This strategy is effective because
under fixed policies, features such as timers (Song et al., 2020), agent’s postures (Lan et al., 2023), or
previous action sequences (Machado et al., 2018) can be directly mapped to the agent’s state. These
works provide various hypotheses to justify their experimental observations. Here, we contribute an
overarching theory that explains the underlying causes and mechanisms behind these results, along
with a series of examples illustrating other types of policy confounding. Please refer to Appendix C
for more details on related work.

4     P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce the notation used throughout the paper and provide the mathematical
formulation of the problem.
Definition 1 (MDP). A Markov decision process (MDP) is a tuple ⟨S, A, T, R⟩, where S is the set
of states, A is the set of actions that are available to the agent, T : S × A → ∆(S) is the transitions
function, and R : S × A → R is the reward function.
In particular, we focus on problems where states are represented by a set of observation variables,
or factors, (Boutilier et al., 1999). This is common when parametric functions are used to model
policies and value functions (Sutton & Barto, 2018). These variables typically describe features of
the agent’s state in the environment.
Definition 2 (FMDP). A Factored Markov decision process (FMDP) is an MDP where the set of
states is described by a set of observation variables Θ = {Θ1 , ..., Θ|Θ| }. Each variable Θi can take
any of the values in its domain θi ∈ dom(Θi ). Hence, every state s corresponds to a different
combination of values ⟨θ1 , ..., θ|Θ| ⟩ ∈ ×i dom(Θi ) = S.
The task for the agent involves finding a policy π : S → ∆(A) that maximizes the expected
discounted sum of rewards (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Yet, depending on the number of observation
variables, learning a policy that conditions on all of them may be infeasible. Fortunately, in many
problems, not all variables are strictly relevant; the agent can usually find compact representations of
the states, that are sufficient for solving the task.
While, for simplicity, we employ the MDP formulation, the framework we introduce next is not
limited to fully observable environments. In cases where the current observation does not satisfy the
Markov property, meaning that current observation variables alone are insufficient for predicting state
transitions, we address this limitation by augmenting Θ with past action and observation variables. In
the extreme case, the agent may need to condition its decisions on the entire history, which itself is
guaranteed to satisfy the Markov property (Kaelbling et al., 1998).

5     S TATE REPRESENTATIONS
Factored representations are useful because they readily define relationships between states. States
can be compared to one another by looking at the individual values the different variables take.
Removing some of the variables in Θ has the effect of grouping together those states that share the
same values for the remaining ones. Thus, in contrast with the classical RL framework, which treats
states as independent entities, we can define state abstractions at the variable level instead of doing so
at the state level (Li et al., 2006).
Definition 3 (State representation). A state representation is a function Φ : S → S̄, with S =
×i dom(Θi ), S̄ = ×i dom(Θ̄i ), and Θ̄ ⊆ Θ.
Intuitively a state representation Φ(st ) is a context-specific projection of a state s ∈ S = ×i dom(Θi )
onto a lower dimensional space s̄ = ×i dom(Θ̄i ) defined by a subset of its variables, Θ̄ ⊆ Θ. We
use {s}Φ = {s′ ∈ S : Φ(s′ ) = Φ(s)} to denote the equivalence class of s under Φ.

5.1   M ARKOV STATE REPRESENTATIONS

As noted in Section 4, the agent should strive for state representations with few variables. Yet, not all
state representations will be sufficient to learn the optimal policy; some may exclude variables that
contain useful information for the task at hand.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 4 (Markov state representation). A state representation Φ(st ) is said to be Markov if, for
all st , st+1 ∈ S, at ∈ A,
                                                   X
         R(st , at ) = R(Φ(st ), at ) and                      T (s′t+1 | st , at ) = Pr(Φ(st+1 ) | Φ(st ), at ),
                                             s′t+1 ∈{st+1 }Φ


where R(Φ(st ), at ) = {R(s′t , at )}s′t ∈{st }Φ is the reward at any s′t ∈ {st }Φ .

The above definition is analogous to the notion of bisimulation (Dean & Givan, 1997; Givan et al.,
2003) or model-irrelevance state abstraction (Li et al., 2006). Representations satisfying these
conditions are guaranteed to be behaviorally equivalent to the original representation. That is, for
any given policy and initial state, the expected return (i.e., cumulative reward; Sutton & Barto, 2018)
is the same when conditioning on the full set of observation variables Θ or on the Markov state
representation Φ.
Definition 5 (Minimal state representation). A state representation Φ∗ : S → S̄ ∗ with S̄ ∗ =
×i dom(Θ̄∗i ) is said to be minimal, if all other state representations Φ : S → S̄ with S̄ =
×i dom(Θ̄i ) and Θ̄ ⊂ Θ̄∗ , for some s ∈ S, are not Markov.

In other words, Φ∗ is minimal when none of the remaining variables can be removed while the
representation remains Markov. Hence, we say that a minimal state representation Φ∗ is a sufficient
statistic of the full set of observation variables Θ.
Definition 6 (Superfluous variable). Let {Θ̄∗ }∪Φ∗ be the union of variables in all possible minimal
                                                                          / {Θ̄∗ }∪Φ∗ .
state representations. A variable Θi ∈ Θ is said to be superfluous, if Θi ∈

5.2     π-M ARKOV STATE REPRESENTATIONS

Considering that the agent’s policy will rarely visit all states, the notion of Markov state representation
seems excessively strict. We now define a relaxed version that guarantees the representation to be
Markov when a specific policy π is followed.
Definition 7 (π-Markov state representation). A state representation Φπ (ht ) is said to be π-Markov
if, for all st , st+1 ∈ S π , at ∈ supp(π(· | st )),
                                                  X
      R(st , at ) = Rπ (Φπ (st ), at ) and                     T (s′t+1 | st , at ) = Prπ (Φπ (st+1 ) | Φπ (st ), at ),
                                             s′t+1 ∈{st+1 }Φ
                                                           π


where S π ⊆ S denotes the set of states visited under π, Rπ (Φπ (st ), at ) = {R(s′t , at )}s′t ∈{st }Φπ ,
           ′          π ′                      π
{s}Φ           π                 π
     π = {s ∈ S : Φ (s ) = Φ (s)}, and Pr is probability under π.
Definition 8 (π-minimal state representation). A state representation Φπ∗ : S π → S̄ π∗ with
S̄ π∗ = ×i dom(Θ̄π∗i ) is said to be π-minimal, if all other state representations Φ : S π → S̄ π with
S̄ π = ×i dom(Θ̄i ) and Θ̄ ⊂ Θ̄π∗ , for some s ∈ S π , are not π-Markov.

6     P OLICY C ONFOUNDING
We are now ready to describe how and when policy confounding occurs, as well as why we should
care, and how we should go about preventing it. The proofs for all theoretical results are deferred to
Appendix A.
The next result demonstrates that a π-Markov state representation Φπ requires at most the same
variables, and in some cases fewer, than a minimal state representation Φ∗ , while still satisfying the
Markov conditions for those states visited under π, s ∈ S π .
Proposition 1. Let Φ∗ be the set of all possible minimal state representations, where every Φ∗ ∈ Φ∗
is defined as Φ∗ : S → S̄ ∗ with S̄ ∗ = ×i dom(Θ̄∗i ). For all π and all Φ∗ ∈ Φ∗ , there exists a
π-Markov state representation Φπ : S π → S̄ π with S̄ π = ×i dom(Θ̄πi ) such that for all s ∈ S π ,
Θ̄π ⊆ Θ̄∗ . Moreover, there exist cases for which Θ̄π is a proper subset, Θ̄π ̸= Θ̄∗ .

Although the result above seems intuitive, its truth may appear incidental. While it is clear that Φπ
will never require more variables than the corresponding minimal state representation Φ∗ , whether
or not Φπ will require fewer, seems just an arbitrary consequence of the policy being followed.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                ...                                                       ...


                ...                                                       ...



                ...                                                       ...


Figure 2: Two DBNs representing the dynamics of the Frozen T-Maze environment, when actions are
sampled at random (left), and when they are determined by the optimal policy (right).

Moreover, since the variables in Θ̄∗ are all strictly relevant for predicting transitions and rewards,
one may think that a policy π inducing representations such that Θ̄π ⊂ Θ̄∗ can never be optimal.
However, as shown by the following example, it turns out that the states visited by a particular policy,
especially if it is the optimal policy, tend to contain a lot of redundant information. This is particularly
true in environments where future states are heavily influenced by past actions.

Example 1. (Frozen T-Maze) Let us consider the Frozen T-Maze again (Section 2). Figure 2 shows
two dynamic Bayesian networks (DBN; Dean & Kanazawa, 1989; Murphy, 2002) describing the
dynamics of the environment. The nodes labeled as L represent the agent’s location from t = 0
to t = 8. All intermediate nodes between t = 0 and t = 7 are omitted for simplicity. The nodes
labeled as G indicate whether the goal is to go to the green or the purple cell (see Figure 1). Note
that G always takes the same value at all timesteps within an episode (either green or purple). The
information in G is hidden and only passed to the agent at the start location through the node X0 .
This makes the environment partially observable. Hence, states are defined as the history of actions,
locations, and signal values, st = ⟨l0 , x0 , a0 ..., at−1 , lt , xt ⟩. Of course, most of the information in st
is irrelevant for predicting transitions and rewards. However, depending on the policy being followed,
the agent may be able to ignore more or fewer variables. This can be shown by comparing the two
DBNs in Figure 2. Let us say that we want to predict the reward R8 at given the state s8 at time
t = 8. On the one hand, if actions are not specified by any particular policy, but simply sampled at
random (left DBN), to determine R8 , one needs to know the signal X0 received at t = 0 and the
agent’s current location L8 . These are highlighted by the green circles. This is because the actions
⟨A0 , ..., A7 ⟩ appear as exogenous variables and can take any possible value. Hence, the reward could
be either −0.1, (per timestep penalty), −1 (wrong goal), or +1 (correct goal) depending on the actual
values of X0 and L8 . On the other hand, when actions are sampled from the optimal policy π ∗ (right
DBN), knowing L8 (green circle) is sufficient to determine R8 . In this second case, π ∗ makes the
action A0 , and thus all future agent locations, dependent on the initial signal X0 . This occurs because,
under the optimal policy (green and purple paths in Figure 1), the agent always takes the action
‘move up’ when receiving the green signal or ‘move down’ when receiving the purple signal, and
then follows the shortest path towards each of the goals. As such, we have that, from t = 1 onward,
    ∗
Φπ (st ) = lt is a π-Markov state representation since it constitutes a sufficient statistic of the state st
under π ∗ . Analogously, from t = 1, actions may also condition only on L.

The phenomenon highlighted by the previous example is the
result of a spurious correlation induced by the optimal policy
between the initial signal X0 and the agent’s future locations
⟨L1 , ..., L8 ⟩. Generally speaking, this occurs because policies
act as confounders, opening backdoor paths between future
state variables Θt+1 and the variables in the current state Θt
(Pearl, 2000). This is shown by the DBN depicted in Figure
3, where we see that the policy influences both the current            Figure 3: A DBN illustrating the
state variables and also future state variables, hence potentially     phenomenon of policy confounding.
affecting their conditional relationships. For instance, in the        The policy opens backdoor path that
                      ∗
above example, Rπ (L8 = ‘green goal’) = +1 when follow-                can affect conditional relations be-
ing π ∗ , while for an arbitrary π, R(L8 = ‘green goal’) = ±1.         tween the variables in Θt and Θt+1


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 9 (Policy Confounding). A state representation Φ : S → S̄ is said to be confounded by a
policy π if, for some st , st+1 ∈ S, at ∈ A,
  Rπ (Φ(st ), at ) ̸= Rπ (do(Φ(st )), at ) or   Prπ (Φ(st+1 ) | Φ(st ), at ) ̸= Prπ (Φ(st+1 ) | do(Φ(st )), at )

The operator do(·) is known as the do-operator, and it is used to represent physical interventions
in a system (Pearl, 2000). These interventions are meant to distinguish cause-effect relations from
mere statistical associations. In our case, do(Φ(st )) means setting the variables forming the state
representation Φ(st ) to a particular value and considering all possible states in the equivalence class,
s′t ∈ {st }Φ . That is, independently of what policy is being followed.
It is easy to show that the underlying reason why a π-Markov state representation may require fewer
variables than the minimal state representation (as in Example 1) is indeed policy confounding.
Theorem 1. Let Φ∗ : S → S̄ ∗ with S̄ ∗ = ×i dom(Θ̄∗i ) be a minimal state representation. If, for
some π, there is a π-Markov state representation Φπ : S π → S̄ π with S̄ π = ×i dom(Θ̄πi ), such that
Θ̄π ⊂ Θ̄∗ for some s ∈ S, then Φπ is confounded by policy π.

Finally, it is worth noting that even though, in Example 1, the variables included in the π-minimal
state representation are a subset of the variables in the minimal state representation, Θ̄π∗ ⊂ Θ̄∗ ,
this is not always the case, as Θ̄π∗ may contain superfluous variables (Definition 6). An example
illustrating this situation is provided in Appendix B (Example 4).
Proposition 2. Let {Θ̄∗ }∪Φ∗ be the union of variables in all possible minimal state representations.
There exist cases where, for some π, there is a π-minimal state representation Φπ∗ : S π → S̄ π∗ with
S̄ π∗ = ×i dom(Θ̄π∗i ) such that Θ̄π∗ \ {Θ̄∗ }∪Φ∗ ̸= ∅.

6.1   W HY SHOULD WE CARE ABOUT POLICY CONFOUNDING ?

Leveraging spurious correlations to develop simple habits can be advantageous when resources such
as memory, computing power, or data are limited. Agents can disregard and exclude from their
representation those variables that are redundant under their policies. However, the challenge is
that some of these variables may be crucial to ensure that the agent behaves correctly when the
context changes. In the Frozen T-Maze example from Section 2, we observed how the agent could
no longer find the correct goal when the ice pushed it away from the optimal trajectory. This is a
specific case of a well-researched issue known as out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization (Quionero-
Candela et al., 2009; Arjovsky, 2021). We refer to it as out-of-trajectory (OOT) generalization to
highlight that the problem arises due to repeatedly sampling from the same policy and thus following
the same trajectories. In contrast to previous works (Kirk et al., 2023) that address generalization
to environments that differ from the training environment, our objective here is to generalize to
trajectories the agent never (or only rarely) takes.
Ideally, the agent should aim to learn representations that enable it to predict future rewards and
transitions even when experiencing slight variations in its trajectory. Based on Definition 4, we know
that, in general, only a Markov state representation satisfies these requirements. However, computing
such representations is typically intractable (Ferns et al., 2006), and thus most standard RL methods
usually learn representations by maximizing an objective function that depends on the distribution of
trajectories P b (τ ) visited under a behavior policy b (e.g., expected return, Eτ ∼P b (τ ) [G(τ )]; Sutton
& Barto, 2018). The problem is that b may favor certain trajectories over others, which may lead to
the exploitation of spurious correlations in the learned representation.

6.2   W HEN SHOULD WE WORRY ABOUT OOT GENERALIZATION IN PRACTICE ?

The previous section highlighted the generalization failures of representations that depend on spurious
correlations. Now, let us delve into the circumstances in which policy confounding is most prone to
cause problems.

Function approximation Function approximation has enabled traditional RL methods to scale to
high-dimensional problems, where storing values in lookup tables is infeasible. Using parametric
functions (e.g., neural networks) to model policies and value functions, agents can learn abstractions
by grouping together states if these yield the same transitions and rewards. As mentioned before,


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


abstractions occur naturally when states are represented by a set of variables since the functions
simply need to ignore some of these variables. However, this also implies that value functions and
policies are exposed to spurious correlations. If a particular variable becomes irrelevant due to policy
confounding, the function may learn to ignore it and remove it from its representation (Example
1). This is in contrast to tabular representations, where, every state takes a separate entry, and even
though there exist algorithms that perform state (state) abstractions in tabular settings (Andre &
Russell, 2002; Givan et al., 2003), these abstractions are normally formed offline before learning
(computing) the policy, hence avoiding the risk of policy confounding.


 Narrow trajectory distributions In practice, agents are less prone to policy confounding when the
 trajectory distribution P b (τ ) is broad (i.e., when b encompasses a wide set of trajectories) than when
 it is narrow. This is because the spurious correlations present in certain trajectories are less likely to
 have an effect on the learned representations. On-policy methods (e.g., SARSA, Actor-Critic; Sutton
 & Barto, 2018) are particularly troublesome for this reason since the same policy being updated
 must also be used to collect the samples. Yet, even when the trajectory distribution is narrow, there
 is no reason why the agent should pick up on spurious correlations while its policy is still being
 updated. Only when the agent commits to a particular policy should we start worrying about policy
 confounding. At this point, lots of the same trajectories are being used for training, and the agent may
‘forget’ (French, 1999) that, even though certain variables may no longer be needed to represent the
 states, they were important under previous policies. This generally occurs at the end of training when
 the agent has converged to a particular policy. However, if policy confounding occurs earlier during
 training, it may prevent the agent from further improving its policy (Nikishin et al., 2022; please refer
 to Appendix C for more details).


6.3    W HAT CAN WE DO TO IMPROVE OOT GENERALIZATION ?

As mentioned in the introduction, we do not have a complete answer to the problem of policy
confounding. Yet, here we offer a few off-the-shelf solutions that, while perhaps limited in scope, can
help mitigate the problem in some situations. These solutions revolve around the idea of broadening
the distribution of trajectories so as to dilute the spurious correlations introduced by certain policies.


Off-policy methods We already explained in Section 6.2 that on-policy methods are particularly
prone to policy confounding since they are restricted to using samples coming from the same policy.
A rather obvious solution is to instead use off-policy methods, which allow using data generated from
previous policies. Because the samples belong to a mixture of policies it is less likely that the model
will pick up the spurious correlations present on specific trajectories. However, as we shall see in
the experiments, this alternative works only when replay buffers are large enough. This is because
standard replay buffers are implemented as queues, and hence the first experiences coming in are the
first being removed. This implies that a replay buffer that is too small will contain samples coming
from few and very similar policies. Since there is a limit on how large replay buffers are allowed to
be, future research could explore other, more sophisticated, ways of deciding what samples to store
and which ones to remove (Schaul et al., 2016).


Exploration and domain randomization When allowed, exploration may mitigate the effects
of policy confounding and prevent agents from overfitting their preferred trajectories. Exploration
strategies have already been used for the purpose of generalization; to guarantee robustness to
perturbations in the environment dynamics (Eysenbach & Levine, 2022), or to boost generalization
to unseen environments (Jiang et al., 2022). The goal for us is to remove, to the extent possible,
the spurious correlations introduced by the current policy. Unfortunately, though, exploration is not
always without cost. Safety-critical applications require the agent to stay within certain boundaries
(Altman, 1999; García & Fernández, 2015). When training on a simulator, an alternative to exploration
is domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2018; Machado et al., 2018). The empirical
results reported in the next section suggest that agents become less susceptible to policy confounding
when adding enough stochasticity to the environment or to the policy. Yet, there is a limit on how
much noise can be added to the environment or the policy without altering the optimal policy ( Sutton
& Barto, 2018, Example 6.6: Cliff Walking).


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           KEY   START              START                   START                        GOAL
                                            DOOR
                 train               eval


         Figure 4: Illustrations of the Key2Door (left) and Diversion (right) environments.

7     E XPERIMENTS
The goal of the experiments is to: (1) demonstrate that the phenomenon of policy confounding
described by the theory does occur in practice, (2) uncover the circumstances under which agents are
most likely to suffer the effects of policy confounding and fail to generalize, and (3) evaluate how
effective the strategies proposed in the previous section are in mitigating these effects.

7.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

Agents are trained with an off-policy method, DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) and an on-policy method, PPO
(Schulman et al., 2017). We represent policies and value functions as feedforward neural networks
and use a stack of past observations as input in the environments that require memory. We report
the mean return as a function of the number of training steps. Training is interleaved with periodic
evaluations on the original environments and variants thereof used for validation. The results are
averaged over 10 random seeds. Please refer to Appendix F for more details about the setup.

7.2   E NVIRONMENTS

We ran our experiments on three grid-world environments: the Frozen T-Maze from Section 2, and
the below described Key2Door, and Diversion environments. We use these as pedagogical examples
to clarify the ideas introduced by the theory. Nonetheless, in Appendix C, we refer to previous works
showing evidence of particular forms of policy confounding in high dimensional domains.
Example 2. Key2Door. Here, the agent needs to collect a key placed at the beginning of the corridor
in Figure 4 (left) and then open the door at the end. The current observation variables do not show
whether the key has already been collected. The states are thus given by the history of past locations
st = ⟨l0 , ..., lt ⟩. This is because to solve the task in the minimum number of steps, the agent must
remember that it already got the key when going to the door. Yet, since during training, the agent
always starts the episode at the first cell from the left, when moving towards the door, the agent
can forget about the key (i.e., ignore past locations) once it has reached the third cell. As in the
Frozen T-Maze example, the agent can build the habit of using its own location to tell whether it
has or has not got the key yet. This, can only occur when the agent consistently follows the optimal
policy, depicted by the purple arrow. Otherwise, if the agent moves randomly through the corridor,
it is impossible to tell whether the key has or has not been collected. In contrast, in the evaluation
environment, the agent always starts at the second to last cell, this confuses the agent, which is used
to already having the key by the time it reaches said cell. A DBN is provided in Appendix D.
Example 3. Diversion. Here, the agent must move from the start state to the goal state in Figure
4 (right). The observations are length-8 binary vectors. The first 7 elements indicate the column
where the agent is located. The last element indicates the row. This environment aims to show that
policy confounding can occur not only when the environment is partially observable, as was the case
in the previous examples, but also in fully observable scenarios. After the agent learns the optimal
trajectory depicted by the green arrow, it can disregard the last element in the observation vector. This
is because, if the agent does not deviate, the bottom row is never visited. Rather than forgetting past
information, the agent ignores the last element in the current observation vector for being irrelevant
when following the optimal trajectory. We train the agent in the original environment and evaluate it
in a version with a yellow diversion sign in the middle of the maze that forces the agent to move to
the bottom row. A DBN is provided in Appendix D.
Note that, as we did in the Frozen T-Maze environment, in order to assess whether the learned state
representations generalize beyond the agent’s usual trajectories we must modify the environment
dynamics so as to force the agents to take alternative trajectories. Importantly, these alternative
trajectories are both possible and probable in the original environments, and thus one would expect
well-trained agents to perform well on them.


                                                   8
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  1.0                                                       1.0                                                      1.0                                                        1.0                                                      1.0

                  0.8                                                                                                                0.8


Average Return


                                                          Average Return


                                                                                                                   Average Return


                                                                                                                                                                              Average Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Average Return
                  0.6                                                       0.5                                                      0.6                                                        0.5                                                      0.5

                  0.4                                                                                                                0.4

                  0.2                                                       0.0                                                      0.2                                                        0.0                                                      0.0

                  0.0                                                                                                                0.0
                                          PPO train                                                PPO train                                                  PPO train
                                                                           −0.5                                                                                                                −0.5                                                     −0.5
                 −0.2                     PPO eval                                                 PPO eval                         −0.2                      PPO eval
                                          DQN train                                                DQN train                                                  DQN train                                          DQN eval, BS=200                                   PPO eval, eps=.2
                 −0.4                                                                                                               −0.4
                                          DQN eval                                                 DQN eval                                                   DQN eval                                           DQN eval, BS=20K                                   DQN eval, BS=200, eps=.1
                                                                           −1.0                                                                                                                −1.0                                                     −1.0
                 −0.6                                                                                                               −0.6
                     0   20000 40000 60000 80000 100000                       0   20000 40000 60000 80000 100000                           0   5000   10000   15000   20000                       0   20000 40000 60000 80000 100000                       0   20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
                              Timesteps                                                Timesteps                                                  Timesteps                                                Timesteps                                                Timesteps



Figure 5: DQN vs. PPO in the train and evaluation                                                                                                                              Figure 6: Frozen T-Maze. Left: DQN
variants of Frozen T-Maze (left), Key2Door (middle),                                                                                                                           small vs. large buffer sizes. Right: PPO
and Diversion (right).                                                                                                                                                         and DQN when adding stochasticity.

 7.3                       R ESULTS

 On-policy vs. off-policy The results in Figure 5 reveal the same pattern in all three environments.
 PPO fails to generalize outside the agent’s preferred trajectories. After an initial phase where the
 average returns on the training and evaluation environments increase (‘PPO train’ and ‘PPO eval’),
 the return on the evaluation environments (‘PPO eval’) starts decreasing when the agent commits to a
 particular trajectory, as a result of policy confounding. In contrast, since the training samples come
 from a mixture of policies, DQN performs optimally in both variants of the environments (‘DQN
 train’ and ‘DQN eval’) long after converging to the optimal policy.2 A visualization of the state
 representations learned with PPO, showing that the policy does ignore variables that are necessary
 for generalization, is provided in Appendix E.1.

Large vs. small replay buffers We mentioned in Section 6.3 that the effectiveness of off-policy
methods against policy confounding depends on the size of the replay buffer. The results in Figure 6
(left) confirm this claim. The plot shows the performance of DQN in the Frozen T-Maze environment
when the size of the replay buffer contains 100K experiences and when it only contains the last 10K
experiences. We see that in the second case, the agents performance in the evaluation environment
decreases (red curve left plot). This is because, after the initial exploration phase, the distribution of
trajectories becomes too narrow, and the spurious correlations induced by the latest policies dominate
the replay buffer. Similar results for the other two environments are provided in Appendix E.2.

Exploration and domain randomization The last experiment shows that if sufficient exploration
is allowed, DQN may still generalize to different trajectories, even when using small replay buffers
(blue curve right plot Figure 6). In the original configuration, the exploration rate ϵ for DQN starts at
ϵ = 1 and decays linearly to ϵ = 0.0 after 20K steps. For this experiment, we set the final exploration
rate ϵ = 0.1. In contrast, since exploration in PPO is normally controlled by the entropy bonus,
which makes it hard to ensure fixed exploration rates, we add noise to the environment instead. The
red curve in Figure 6 (right) shows that when we train in an environment where the agent’s actions
are overridden by a random action with 20% probability, the performance of PPO in the evaluation
environment does not degrade after the agent has converged to the optimal policy. This suggests that
the added noise prevents the samples containing spurious correlations from dominating the training
batches. However, it may also happen that random noise is not sufficient to remove the spurious
correlations. As shown in Figure 13 (Appendix E.2), in the Key2Door environment, neither forcing
the agent to take random actions 20% of the time nor setting ϵ = 0.1, solves the OOT generalization
problem. Similar results for Diversion are provided in Appendix E.2.

 8                       C ONCLUSION
This paper described the phenomenon of policy confounding. We showed both theoretically and em-
pirically how as a result of following certain trajectories, agents may pick up on spurious correlations,
and build habits that are not robust to trajectory deviations. We also uncovered the circumstances
under which policy confounding is most likely to occur in practice and suggested a few ad hoc
solutions that may mitigate its effects. We conceive this paper as a stepping stone to explore more
sophisticated solutions. An interesting avenue for future research is the integration of tools from
the field of causal inference (Pearl et al., 2016; Peters et al., 2017) to aid the agent in forming state
representations that are grounded on causal relationships rather than mere statistical associations (Lu
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020; Sontakke et al., 2021; Saengkyongam et al., 2023).
    2
      The small gap between ‘DQN train’ and ‘DQN eval’ is due to the −0.1 penalty per timestep. In all three
 environments, the shortest path is longer in the evaluation environment than in the training environment.


                                                                                                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Eitan Altman. Constrained Markov decision processes, volume 7. CRC press, 1999.
David Andre and Stuart J. Russell. State abstraction for programmable reinforcement learning agents.
  In Proceedings of the Eighteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 119–125,
  2002.
Martin Arjovsky. Out of distribution generalization in machine learning.            arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2103.02667, 2021.
Bram Bakker. Reinforcement learning with long short-term memory. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 14, 2001.
Sara Beery, Grant Van Horn, and Pietro Perona. Recognition in terra incognita. In Proceedings of the
  European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 456–473, 2018.
M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The Arcade Learning Environment: An
 evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:253–279,
 jun 2013.
Craig Boutilier, Thomas Dean, and Steve Hanks. Decision-theoretic planning: Structural assumptions
  and computational leverage. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 11:1–94, 1999.
Pablo Samuel Castro. Scalable methods for computing state similarity in deterministic markov
  decision processes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Thomas Dean and Robert Givan. Model minimization in Markov decision processes. In Proc. of the
  National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 106–111, 1997.
Thomas Dean and Keiji Kanazawa. A model for reasoning about persistence and causation. Compu-
  tational intelligence, 5(2):142–150, 1989.
Benjamin Eysenbach and Sergey Levine. Maximum entropy RL (provably) solves some robust RL
  problems. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Norm Ferns, Pablo Samuel Castro, Doina Precup, and Prakash Panangaden. Methods for computing
  state similarity in markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Conference on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI’06, pp. 174–181, 2006.
Robert M French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in cognitive sciences, 3
  (4):128–135, 1999.
Javier García and Fernando Fernández. A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):1437–1480, 2015.
Robert Givan, Thomas Dean, and Matthew Greig. Equivalence notions and model minimization in
  Markov decision processes. Artificial Intelligence, 14(1–2):163–223, 2003.
Irina Higgins, Arka Pal, Andrei Rusu, Loic Matthey, Christopher Burgess, Alexander Pritzel, Matthew
   Botvinick, Charles Blundell, and Alexander Lerchner. Darla: Improving zero-shot transfer in
   reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1480–1490. PMLR,
   2017.
Yiding Jiang, J Zico Kolter, and Roberta Raileanu. Uncertainty-driven exploration for generalization
  in reinforcement learning. In Deep Reinforcement Learning Workshop NeurIPS 2022, 2022.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L. Littman, and Anthony R. Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of zero-shot
  generalisation in deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:
  201–264, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Li-Cheng Lan, Huan Zhang, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Can agents run relay race with strangers? gener-
  alization of RL to out-of-distribution trajectories. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.

Lauro Langosco, Jack Koch, Lee D Sharkey, Jacob Pfau, and David Krueger. Goal misgeneralization
  in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12004–
  12019. PMLR, 2022.

Alessandro Lazaric. Transfer in reinforcement learning: a framework and a survey. Reinforcement
  Learning: State-of-the-Art, pp. 143–173, 2012.

Lihong Li, Thomas J. Walsh, and Michael L. Littman. Towards a unified theory of state abstraction
  for MDPs. In International Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics (ISAIM 2006),
  2006.

Chaochao Lu, Bernhard Schölkopf, and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. Deconfounding reinforce-
  ment learning in observational settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.10576, 2018.

Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and Michael
 Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open problems for
 general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:523–562, 2018.

Ajay Mandlekar, Yuke Zhu, Animesh Garg, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio Savarese. Adversarially robust
  policy learning: Active construction of physically-plausible perturbations. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ
  International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 3932–3939. IEEE, 2017.

Andrew K. McCallum. Reinforcement Learning with Selective Perception and Hidden State. PhD
  thesis, University of Rochester, 1995.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
  through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529, 2015.

Matthias Muller-Brockhausen, Mike Preuss, and Aske Plaat. Procedural content generation: Better
 benchmarks for transfer reinforcement learning. In 2021 IEEE Conference on games (CoG), pp.
 01–08. IEEE, 2021.

Kevin P. Murphy. Dynamic Bayesian Networks: Representation, Inference and Learning. PhD thesis,
  UC Berkeley, Computer Science Division, 2002.

Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron Courville. The
  primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 16828–16847. PMLR, 2022.

Daniel Jarne Ornia, Licio Romao, Lewis Hammond, Manuel Mazo Jr, and Alessandro Abate.
  Observational robustness and invariances in reinforcement learning via lexicographic objectives.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15320, 2022.

Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Judea Pearl, Madelyn Glymour, and Nicholas P Jewell. Causal inference in statistics: A primer. 2016.
  Internet resource, 2016.

Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real transfer of
  robotic control with dynamics randomization. In 2018 IEEE international conference on robotics
  and automation (ICRA), pp. 3803–3810. IEEE, 2018.

Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations
  and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.

Joaquin Quionero-Candela, Masashi Sugiyama, Anton Schwaighofer, and Neil D Lawrence. Dataset
  shift in machine learning. The MIT Press, 2009.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021.
Sorawit Saengkyongam, Nikolaj Thams, Jonas Peters, and Niklas Pfister. Invariant policy learning: A
  causal perspective. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2023.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Xingyou Song, Yiding Jiang, Stephen Tu, Yilun Du, and Behnam Neyshabur. Observational overfitting
  in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Sumedh A Sontakke, Arash Mehrjou, Laurent Itti, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal curiosity: Rl
  agents discovering self-supervised experiments for causal representation learning. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 9848–9858. PMLR, 2021.
Austin Stone, Oscar Ramirez, Kurt Konolige, and Rico Jonschkowski. The distracting control suite–a
  challenging benchmark for reinforcement learning from pixels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.02722,
  2021.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Matthew E Taylor and Peter Stone. Transfer learning for reinforcement learning domains: A survey.
 Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10(7), 2009.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain
  randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In 2017
  IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS), pp. 23–30. IEEE,
  2017.
Amy Zhang, Nicolas Ballas, and Joelle Pineau. A dissection of overfitting and generalization in
 continuous reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.07937, 2018a.
Amy Zhang, Clare Lyle, Shagun Sodhani, Angelos Filos, Marta Kwiatkowska, Joelle Pineau, Yarin
 Gal, and Doina Precup. Invariant causal prediction for block mdps. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, pp. 11214–11224. PMLR, 2020.
Chiyuan Zhang, Oriol Vinyals, Remi Munos, and Samy Bengio. A study on overfitting in deep
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06893, 2018b.
Wenshuai Zhao, Jorge Peña Queralta, and Tomi Westerlund. Sim-to-real transfer in deep reinforce-
 ment learning for robotics: a survey. In 2020 IEEE symposium series on computational intelligence
 (SSCI), pp. 737–744. IEEE, 2020.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOFS
Lemma 1. Let Φπ1 ∗ be the set of all possible π-minimal state representations under π1 , where every
Φπ1 ∗ ∈ Φπ1 ∗ is defined as Φπ1 ∗ : S π1 → S̄ π1 ∗ and S̄ π1 ∗ = ×i dom(Θ̄π1 ∗i ) , and let π2 be a second
policy such that for all st ∈ S π1 ∩ S π2 ,
                                   supp (π2 (· | st )) ⊆ supp (π1 (· | st )) .
         π1 ∗      π1 ∗
For all Φ   ∈ Φ , there exists a π-Markov state representation under policy π2 , Φπ2 : S π2 → S̄ π2
with S̄ = ×i dom(Θ̄π2 i ), such that Θ̄π2 ⊆ Θ̄π1 ∗ for all st ∈ S π1 ∩ S π2 . Moreover, there exist
        π2

cases where Θ̄πt 2 ̸= Θ̄πt 1 ∗ .

Proof. First, it is easy to show that
                  ∀st ∈ S, supp (π2 (· | st )) ⊆ supp (π1 (· | st )) ⇐⇒ S π2 ⊆ S π1 ,
and
                  ∀st ∈ S, supp (π2 (· | st )) = supp (π1 (· | st )) ⇐⇒ S π2 = S π1 .

In particular, S π2 ⊂ S π1 if there is at least one state s′t ∈ S π1 ∩ S π2 such that
                                    supp (π2 (· | s′t )) ⊂ supp (π1 (· | s′t ))
while
                                    supp (π2 (· | st )) = supp (π1 (· | st ))
                       π1     π2
for all other st ∈ S        ∩S .
In such cases, we know that there is at least one action a′ for which π2 (a′t | s′t ) = 0 but π1 (a′t | s′t ) ̸=
0. Hence, if there was a state (or group of states) that could only be reached by taking action a′t at s′t ,
π2 would never visit it and thus S π2 ⊂ S π1 .
Further, if S π2 ⊂ S π1 , we know that, for every Φπ1 ∗ ∈ Φπ1 ∗ , there must be a Φπ2 ∗ that requires,
at most, the same number of variables, Θ̄πt 2 ⊆ Θ̄πt 1 ∗ and, in some cases, fewer, Θ̄πt 1 ∗ ̸= Θ̄πt 2 ∗ (e.g.,
Frozen T-Maze example).


Proposition 1. Let Φ∗ be the set of all possible minimal state representations, where every Φ∗ ∈ Φ∗
is defined as Φ∗ : S → S̄ ∗ with S̄ ∗ = ×i dom(Θ̄∗i ). For all π and all Φ∗ ∈ Φ∗ , there exists a
π-Markov state representation Φπ : S π → S̄ π with S̄ π = ×i dom(Θ̄πi ) such that for all s ∈ S π ,
Θ̄π ⊆ Θ̄∗ . Moreover, there exist cases for which Θ̄π is a proper subset, Θ̄π ̸= Θ̄∗ .

Proof. The proof follows from Lemma 1. We know that, in general, S π ⊆ S, and if π(a′t |s′t ) = 0 for
at least one pair a′t ∈ A, s′t ∈ S for which there is a state (or group of states) that can only be reached
by taking action a′t at s′t , then S π ⊂ S. Hence, for every Φ∗ there is a Φπ such that Θ̄π ⊆ Θ̄∗ , and in
some cases, we may have Θ̄π ̸= Θ̄∗ (e.g., Frozen T-Maze example).


Theorem 1. Let Φ∗ : S → S̄ ∗ with S̄ ∗ = ×i dom(Θ̄∗i ) be a minimal state representation. If, for
some π, there is a π-Markov state representation Φπ : S π → S̄ π with S̄ π = ×i dom(Θ̄πi ), such that
Θ̄π ⊂ Θ̄∗ for some s ∈ S, then Φπ is confounded by policy π.

Proof. Proof by contradiction. Let us assume that Θ̄π ⊂ Θ̄∗ , and yet there is no policy confounding.
I.e., for all st , st+1 ∈ S, at ∈ A,
                                   Rπ (Φπ (st ), at ) = Rπ (do(Φπ (st )), at )                              (1)
and
                   Prπ (Φπ (st+1 ) | Φπ (st ), at ) = Prπ (Φπ (st+1 ) | do(Φπ (st )), at )                  (2)
First, note that the do-operator implies that the equality must hold for all s′t in the equivalence of st
                             π
class under Φπ , s′t ∈ {st }Φ = {h′t ∈ Ht : Φ(h′t ) = Φ(ht )}, i.e., not just those h′t that are visited
under π,
                    Rπ (Φπ (st ), at ) = Rπ (do(Φπ (st )), at ) = {R(s′t , at )}s′t ∈{st }Φ           (3)


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which is precisely the first condition in Definition 4,
                                          R(Φπ (st ), at ) = R(st , at ),                              (4)
for all st ∈ S and at ∈ A.
Analogously, we have that,
                  Prπ (Φπ (st+1 ) | Φπ (st ), at ) = Prπ (Φπ (st+1 ) | do(Φπ (st )), at )
                                                                                                       (5)
                                                   = Pr(Φπ (st+1 ) | Φπ (st ), at )
where the second equality reflects that the above must hold independently of π. Hence, we have that
for all st , st+1 ∈ S and s′t ∈ {st }Φ ,
                      Pr(Φπ (st+1 ) | Φπ (st ), at ) = Pr(Φπ (st+1 ) | Φπ (s′t ), at ),                (6)
which means that, for all st , st+1 ∈ S and st ∈ A,
                    Pr(Φπ (st+1 ) | Φπ (st ), at ) = Pr(Φπ (st+1 ) | st , at )
                                                         X
                                                   =               T (s′t+1 | st , at ),               (7)
                                                         s′t+1 ∈{st+1 }Φπ

which is the second condition in Definition 4.
Equations equation 4 and equation 7 reveal that if the assumption is true (i.e., Φπ is not confounded
by the policy), then Φπ is not just π-Markov but actually strictly Markov (Definition 4). However, we
know that Φ∗ (st ) is the minimal state representation, which contradicts the above statement, since,
according to Definition 5, there is no proper subset of Θ̄∗ , for all st ∈ S, such that the representation
remains Markov. Hence, Θ̄π ⊂ Θ̄∗ implies policy confounding.
Proposition 2. Let {Θ̄∗ }∪Φ∗ be the union of variables in all possible minimal state representations.
There exist cases where, for some π, there is a π-minimal state representation Φπ∗ : S π → S̄ π∗ with
S̄ π∗ = ×i dom(Θ̄π∗i ) such that Θ̄π∗ \ {Θ̄∗ }∪Φ∗ ̸= ∅.

Proof (sketch). Consider a deterministic MDP with a deterministic policy. Imagine there exists a
variable X that is perfectly correlated with the episode’s timestep t, but that is generally irrelevant to
the task. The variable X would constitute in itself a valid π-Markov state representation since it can
be used to determine transitions and rewards so long as a deterministic policy is followed. At the
same time, X would not enter the minimal Markov state representation because it is useless under
stochastic policies. Example 4 below illustrates this situation.

B    E XAMPLE : WATCH THE T IME



                                  START                                     GOAL


                    Figure 7: An illustration of the watch-the-time environment.

Example 4. (Watch the Time) This example is inspired by the empirical results of Song et al. (2020).
Figure 7 shows a grid world environment., The agent must go from the start cell to the goal cell. The
agent must avoid the pink cells; stepping on those yields a −0.1 penalty. There is a is +1 reward for
reaching the goal. The agent can observe its own location within the maze X and the current timestep
t. The two diagrams in Figure 8 are DBNs describing the environment dynamics. When actions are
considered exogenous random variables (left diagram), the only way to estimate the reward at t = 10
is by looking at the agent’s location. In contrast, when actions are determined by the policy (right
diagram), t becomes a proxy for the agent’s location X10 . This is because the start location and the
sequence of actions are fixed. This implies that t is a perfectly valid π-Markov state representation
under π ∗ . Moreover, as shown by the DBN on the right, the optimal policy may simply rely on t to
determine the optimal action.


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             ...                                                    ...


             ...                                                    ...



Figure 8: Two DBNs representing the dynamics of the watch-the-time environment, when actions are
sampled at random (left), and when they are determined by the optimal policy (right).


C    F URTHER R ELATED W ORK

Early evidence of policy confounding Although to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
bring forward and describe mathematically the idea of policy confounding, a few prior works have
reported evidence of particular forms of policy confounding. In their review of the Arcade Learning
Environment (ALE; Bellemare et al., 2013), Machado et al. (2018) explain that because the games are
fully deterministic (i.e., initial states are fixed and transitions are deterministic), open-loop policies
that memorize good action sequences can achieve high scores in ALE. Clearly, this can only occur if
the policies themselves are also deterministic. In such cases, policies, acting as confounders, induce a
spurious correlation between the past action sequences and the environment states. Similarly, Song
et al. (2020) showed, by means of saliency maps, how agents may learn to use irrelevant features of
the environment that happen to be correlated with the agent’s progress, such as background clouds or
the game timer, as clues for outputting optimal actions. In this case, the policy is again a confounder
for all these, a priori irrelevant, features. Zhang et al. (2018b) provide empirical results showing how
large neural networks may overfit their training environments and, even when trained on a collection
of procedurally generated environments, memorize the optimal action for each observation. Zhang
et al. (2018a) shows how, when trained on a small subset of trajectories, agents fail to generalize
to a set of test trajectories generated by the same simulator. Lan et al. (2023) report evidence of
well-trained agents failing to perform well on Mujoco environments when starting from trajectories
(states) that are out of the distribution induced by the agent’s policy. We conceive this as a simple
form of policy confounding. Since the Mujoco environments are also deterministic, agents following
a fixed policy can memorize the best actions to take for each state instantiation, potentially relying
on superfluous features. Hence, they can overfit to unnatural postures that would not occur under
different policies. Finally, Nikishin et al. (2022) describe a phenomenon named ‘primacy bias’, which
prevents agents trained on poor trajectories from further improving their policies. The authors show
that this issue is particularly relevant when training relies heavily on early data coming from a fixed
random policy. We hypothesize that one of the causes for this is also policy confounding. The random
policy may induce spurious correlations that lead to the formation of rigid state (state) representations
that are hard to recover from.


Generalization Generalization is a hot topic in machine learning. The promise of a model perform-
ing well in contexts other than those encountered during training is undoubtedly appealing. In the
realm of reinforcement learning, the majority of research focuses on generalization to environments
that, despite sharing a similar structure, differ somewhat from the training environment (Kirk et al.,
2023). These differences range from small variations in the transition dynamics (e.g., sim-to-real
transfer; Higgins et al., 2017; Tobin et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2020), changes
in the observations (i.e., modifying irrelevant information, such as noise: Mandlekar et al., 2017;
Ornia et al., 2022, or background variables: Zhang et al., 2020; Stone et al., 2021), to alterations
in the reward function, resulting in different goals or tasks (Taylor & Stone, 2009; Lazaric, 2012;
Muller-Brockhausen et al., 2021). Instead, we focus on the problem of OOT generalization. We
aim to ensure that agents perform effectively when confronted with situations that differ from those
encountered along their usual trajectories. Note that, in our experiments agents are evaluated in
altered environments with different dynamics than those seen during training. These alterations are
only intended to force the agent to take different trajectories. Importantly, the trajectories we force
the agent to take are possible in the original environment.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


State abstraction State abstraction is concerned with removing from the representation all that
state information that is irrelevant to the task. In contrast, we are worried about learning representa-
tions containing too little information, which can lead to state aliasing. Nonetheless, as argued by
McCallum (1995), state abstraction and state aliasing are two sides of the same coin. That is why we
borrowed the mathematical frameworks of state abstraction to describe the phenomenon of policy
confounding. Li et al. (2006) provide a taxonomy of the types of state abstraction and how they relate
to one another. Givan et al. (2003) introduce the concept of bisimulation, which is equivalent to our
definition of Markov state representation (Definition 4). Ferns et al. (2006) proposes a method for
measuring the similarity between two states. Castro (2020) notes that this metric is prohibitively
expensive and suggests using a relaxed version that computes state similarity relative to a given policy.
This is similar to our notion of π-Markov state representation (Definition 7). While the end goal of
this metric is to group together states that are similar under a given policy, here we argue that this
may lead to poor OOT generalization.

D     DYNAMIC BAYESIAN N ETWORKS


              `           ...                                                    ...



                          ...                                                    ...


Figure 9: Two DBNs representing the dynamics of the Key2Door environment, when actions are
sampled at random (left), and when they are determined by the optimal policy (right). The nodes
labeled as X represent the agent’s location, while the nodes labeled as Y represent whether or not the
key has been collected. The agent can only see X. Hence, when actions that are sampled are random
(left), the agent must remember its past locations to determine the reward R7 . Note that only X1
and X7 are highlighted in the left DBN. However, other variables in ⟨X2 , ..., X6 ⟩ might be needed,
depending on when the key is collected. In contrast, when following the optimal policy, only X7 is
needed. In this second case, knowing the current location is sufficient to determine whether the key
has been collected.


                    ...                                           ...


                    ...                                           ...


Figure 10: Two DBNs representing the dynamics of the Diversion environment, when actions are
sampled at random (left), and when they are determined by the optimal policy (right). The nodes
labeled as X 1 indicate the row where the agent is located; the nodes labeled as X 2 indicate the
column. We see that when actions are sampled at random, both X61 and X62 are necessary to determine
R6 . However, when actions are determined by the optimal policy, X62 is sufficient, as the agent
always stays at the top row.


E     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
E.1   L EARNED STATE REPRESENTATIONS

The results reported in Section 7 show that the OOT generalization problem exists. However, some
may still wonder if the underlying reason is truly policy confounding. To confirm this, we compare the
outputs of the policy at every state in the Frozen T-Maze when being fed the same states (observation


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


stack) but two different signals. That is, we permute the variable containing the signal (X in the
diagram of Figure 2) and leave the rest of the variables in the observation stack unchanged. We then
feed the two versions to the policy network and measure the KL divergence between the two output
probabilities. This metric is a proxy for how much the agent attends to the signal in every state. The
heatmaps in Figure 11 show the KL divergences at various points during training (0, 10K, 30K, and
100K timesteps) when the true signal is ‘green’ and we replace it with ‘purple’. We omit the two goal
states since no actions are taken there. We see that initially (top left heatmap), the signal has very
little influence on the policy (note the scale of the colormap is 10−6 ), after 10K steps, the agent learns
that the signal is very important when at the top right state (top right heatmap). After this, we start
seeing how the influence of the signal at the top right state becomes less strong (bottom left heatmap)
until it eventually disappears (bottom right heatmap). In contrast, the influence of the signal at the
initial state becomes more and more important, indicating that after taking the first action, the agent
ignores the signal and only attends to its own location. The results for the alternative case, ‘purple’
signal being replaced by ‘green’ signal, are shown in Figure 12.


Figure 11: A visualization of the learned state representations. The heatmaps show the KL divergence
between the action probabilities when feeding the policy network a stack of the past 10 observations
and when feeding the same stack but with the value of the signal being switched from green to purple,
after 0 (top left), 10K (top right), 30K (bottom left), and 100K (bottom right) timesteps of training.


Figure 12: A visualization of the learned state representations. The heatmaps show the KL divergence
between the action probabilities when feeding the policy network a stack of the past 10 observations
and when feeding the same stack but with the value of the signal being switched from purple to green,
after 0 (top left), 10K (top right), 30K (bottom left), and 100K (bottom right) timesteps of training.


E.2   B UFFER SIZE AND EXPLORATION / DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION

Figures 13 and 14 report the results of the experiments described in Section 7 (paragraphs 2 and 3)
for Key2Door and Diversion. We see how the buffer size also affects the performance of DQN in the


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


two environments (left plots). We also see that exploration/domain randomization does improve OOT
generalization in Diversion but not in Key2Door.
                                1.0                                                             1.0


              Average Return


                                                                              Average Return
                                0.5                                                             0.5



                                0.0                                                             0.0



                               −0.5                                                            −0.5

                                                       DQN eval, BS=200                                        PPO eval, eps=.2
                                                       DQN eval, BS=20K                                        DQN eval, BS=200, eps=.1
                               −1.0                                                            −1.0
                                  0       20000 40000 60000 80000 100000                          0       20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
                                               Timesteps                                                       Timesteps

Figure 13: Key2Door. Left: DQN small vs. large buffer sizes. Right: PPO and DQN when adding
stochasticity.


                                1.0                                                             1.0

                                0.8                                                             0.8
              Average Return


                                                                              Average Return
                                0.6                                                             0.6

                                0.4                                                             0.4

                                0.2                                                             0.2

                                0.0                                                             0.0

                               −0.2                                                            −0.2
                                                       DQN eval, BS=200                                        PPO eval, eps=.2
                               −0.4                                                            −0.4
                                                       DQN eval, BS=20K                                        DQN eval, BS=200, eps=.1
                               −0.6                                                            −0.6
                                      0     5000     10000   15000    20000                           0     5000     10000   15000    20000
                                                   Timesteps                                                       Timesteps

Figure 14: Diversion. Left: DQN small vs. large buffer sizes. Right: PPO and DQN when adding
stochasticity.


                                                                          18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    F URTHER E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
We ran our experiments on an Intel i7-8650U CPU with 8 cores. Agents were trained with Stable
Baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021). Most hyperparameters were set to their default values except for the
ones reported in Tables 1 (PPO) and 2 (DQN), which seemed to work better than the default values.
                                  Table 1: PPO hyperparameters.

                 Rollout steps                         128
                 Batch size                            32
                 Learning rate                         2.5e-4
                 Number epoch                          3
                 Entropy coefficient                   1.0e-2
                 Clip range                            0.1
                 Value coefficient                     1
                 Number Neurons 1st layer              128
                 Number Neurons 2nd layer              128
                                  Table 2: DQN hyperparameters.

                 Buffer size                           1.0e5
                 Learning starts                       1.0e3
                 Learning rate                         2.5e-4
                 Batch size                            256
                 Initial exploration bonus             1.0
                 Final exploration bonus               0.0
                 Exploration fraction                  0.2
                 Train frequency                       5
                 Number Neurons 1st layer              128
                 Number Neurons 2nd layer              128


                                                 19
