Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACHIEVING C ERTIFIED ROBUSTNESS AND M AINTAIN -
ING C LEAN ACCURACY VIA VANILLA M ODEL G UIDE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Certified robustness can provide theoretical defense guarantees for deep neural
         network models against adversarial examples within a certain perturbation range.
         However, existing research on obtaining certified robustness requires specialized
         certified robust training from scratch for DNNs models. This approach significantly
         decreases the clean accuracy of normal inputs compared to vanilla models trained
         with vanilla training, affecting the main inference task of DNNs models and causing
         practical difficulties for security methods. We propose a practical training method
         that aims to obtain certified robustness while maintaining clean accuracy. This
         method involves adding a pre-trained vanilla model and applying singular value
         decomposition (SVD) to the weight matrices of each network layer of the vanilla
         model. This process yields rotation matrices and singular values that respectively
         affect clean accuracy and certified robustness. The vanilla model is used as a guide
         model, establishing a knowledge transfer process based on the similarity of rotation
         matrices between the guide model and the certification model that obtains certified
         robustness. In order to select important rotation matrix information and reduce
         computational cost, a low-rank approximation is used for practical knowledge
         transfer. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach significantly improves
         clean accuracy while only slightly reducing certified accuracy.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning has achieved great success in many fields, such as computer vision, natural language
processing, speech recognition. Increasingly, deep neural network models (DNNs) have been trained
and deployed in various software and hardware environments to bring commercial benefits and social
services. However, these DNNs models through vanilla training (referred to as vanilla models) are
vulnerable to adversarial examples, where small perturbations are added to the clean input to cause
the vanilla model to incorrectly output the result (Szegedy et al., 2013). Many heuristic defense
methods have been proposed to block adversarial examples, such as gradient masking (Papernot et al.,
2017), adversarial training (Madry et al., 2017; Kurakin et al., 2016; Goodfellow et al., 2014), and
defensive distillation (Papernot et al., 2016). However, the shields constructed by these methods
can be easily broken by adaptive attack methods (Liu et al., 2022; Croce & Hein, 2020; Tramer
et al., 2020), which raises security concerns for a large number of deployed vanilla DNN models. In
particular, these vanilla models are applied to safety-critical domains such as autonomous driving,
medical testing, face recognition.
The existing deep learning security community tries to provide theoretical guarantees for defend-
ing against adversarial examples, and certified robustness has been heavily studied for providing
invariance in the output results of DNNs model within a certain range of perturbations. The defense
methods of certified robustness can be simply divided into two categories: the first category is the
determination method of computing the propagation interval of the perturbation in DNNs model
(e.g., (Huang et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2020; Tsuzuku et al., 2018; Gowal et al., 2019)), the second
category is the probabilistic method using randomized smoothing(e.g., (Salman et al., 2019; Cohen
et al., 2019; Lecuyer et al., 2019)). The remaining other methods are less used because of the difficulty
of scaling and the high computational effort (e.g., (Wang et al., 2018; Weng et al., 2018; Pulina &
Tacchella, 2010)). The first type of method to determine the perturbation interval is to calculate the
Lipschitz constant of the DNNs model to measure the change range of the perturbation on the value
of the output result. Because the Lipschitz constant of the vanilla model is too large to cause the


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


adversarial examples, so it is necessary to adjust Lipschitz constant by training the DNNs model
from scratch. It causes the clean accuracy of the main inference task because the DNNs model is
too regularization. The decrease of clean accuracy makes the DNNs model’s practicality seriously
affected. The second class of probabilistic methods using randomized smoothing requires adding
a smooth classifier to the input before it enters the vanilla model. This certified robust approach is
uncertain, i.e., there will be adversarial examples to pass the certified robustness test.
We then propose a practical training method that aims to obtain certified robustness while maintaining
clean accuracy. We refer to the models that achieve certified robustness through certified robust
training as certification model, and we designate the extensively pre-trained models as vanilla model.
(1) We start by adding a pre-trained vanilla model, which has the same network structure as the
certification model, as the guide model. Then, we perform singular value decomposition on the
weight matrices of each network layer of the vanilla model, obtaining singular values and rotation
matrices. By establishing the similarity of rotation matrices between each network layer of the
vanilla model and the certification model, we transfer knowledge to guide the clean accuracy of the
certification model. (2) To select important rotation matrix information, we only use the low-rank
approximation of the rotation matrices from the vanilla model for knowledge transfer. For each
network layer of the certification model, we approximate its rotation matrix using the spectral norm
computed during certified robust training, reducing the computational cost of the entire process.
Our method offers practical solutions for a wide range of scenarios that require high-performance
clean accuracy inference tasks and provide certified robustness in terms of security. Our contributions
are summarized as follows.

• We introduce Duet, which employs a pre-trained vanilla model as a guide teacher to maintain the
  clean accuracy capability of the model requiring certified robustness (referred to as the certification
  model).
• We perform singular value decomposition on the weight matrices of the network layers in the
  pre-trained vanilla model to obtain rotation matrices that contribute to clean accuracy.
• In certified robust training, we establish knowledge transfer of rotation matrix similarity between
  each network layer of the vanilla model and the certification model to maintain the clean accuracy
  of the certification model.
• The experiment demonstrates that Duet achieves 3.76% improvement in clean accuracy compared
  to the previously trained certified robustness model that only utilized global Lipschitz regularization
  for training. It performs on par with models trained using local Lipschitz regularization which the
  significant computational and memory costs make it difficult to put into practical use. Meanwhile,
  there is a slight decrease of 0.93% in certified accuracy.

2   P RELIMINARY
In this section, we provide the background for the Duet method by introducing the concepts and
symbols of deep learning and certified robustness involved in this paper.
DNNs model architecture. In this paper, we focus on researching DNNs model architecture for
classification tasks. This architecture with L layers can be seen as a mapping function F (x, W ) from
RN1 ⇒ RN2 , where x ∈ X ⊂ RN1 is the input, z ∈ Z ⊂ RN2 is the output logit vector, and W
represents the weight parameters of the DNN model. The maximum value zy of the output logit
vector z is associated with the correct classification label result y ∈ Y , Y represents all relevant
predicted labels. The function F (x, W ) is defined as,
                                 F (x, W ) = ϕ(ϕ(x, W 0 )..., W l−1 ).                                (1)
           l∈[0,L−1]
W = {W             } represents the trainable weight parameters from the first to the last layer.
ϕ(·) = max(·, 0) is the element-wise ReLU activation function. In this paper, we differentiate
the parameters involved in the two types of DNN model architectures: vanilla model, certification
model using subscripts "van" and "cer" respectively. The relevant parameter symbols are Fvan , Fcer ,
Wvan ,Wcer , zvan and zcer .
Lipschitz constant of neural network. The Lipschitz constant is used to determine the maximum
possible change in the output z of the function F when the input x changes. In the field of deep


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


learning, Lipschitz constant is commonly used to measure the generalization and robustness of neural
networks. The Lipschitz constant of function F is,
                                                            ||F (x0 ) − F (x1 )||
                          Lip(F, X) :=             sup                            .                 (2)
                                          x0 ,x1 ∈X,x0 ̸=x1      ||x0 − x1 ||
The Lipschitz constant of the neural network F is calculated by multiplying the spectral norm ||W ||l
of each linear layer weight matrix W l . The spectral norm ||W ||l is usually calculated using the
power iteration method or singular value decomposition. For vanilla model and auxiliary model, their
Lipschitz constant calculation formulas is,
                                                     L−1
                                                     Y
                                           Lip =             ||W l ||.                              (3)
                                                     l=0


Singular value decomposition. The matrix A can be explained using Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) as,
                                                                         VT
                                                        P
                                    U
                                                                             
                                  |    |          σ1     0 ···         − v1 −
                               
                W                                      σ2 · · · 
                          = u1 u2 · · ·       0                  − v2 −              (4)
                                                                                
                                                   ..     .. . .            ..
                                  |    |            .      .     .           .


SVD
P is a matrix     factorization method that decomposes A into the product of three matrices: U ,
   , and V T . U andPV are orthogonal matrices containing the left and right singular vectors of A,
respectively, while    is a diagonal matrix containing the singular values σ of A.
Certified robustness. To determine whether a DNN model’s prediction is certified robustness, we
compute the minimum boundary value MF,x under the influence of the adversary. We subtract the
output logit vector zy′ corresponding to each other prediction label y ′ from the output logit vector z0
associated with the correct prediction label y0 . The formula for computing the latest boundary value
MF,x is,
                                  MF,x =         min     (zy0 − zy′ ).                               (5)
                                            x∈Ballp (x0 ,ϵ)

Where, zy0 = F (x, W )y0 , and zy′ = F (x, W )y′ . If M (F, x) > 0 for all y ′ ∈ [Y ] \ {y0 }, we say
that the DNN model F (x, W ) is certified robust under the influence of the (lp , ϵ)-adversary. This
means that the correct prediction label outputted in inference will not be changed.
Certified robust training. For the DNNs model Fvan (x, W ) trained by vanilla training methods,
since its minimum margin MF,x is always < 0, the vanilla model does not have certified robustness.
To obtain certified robustness for DNNs models, we need to use special certified robust training
methods. Certified robust training can continuously optimize the minimum margin value MF,x
to make it > 0 while training the DNNs model from scratch. Since it is an NP-hard problem to
accurately solve the value of MF,x , we usually optimize the lower bound of MF,x .
Certified robustness using Lipschitz constant. For a DNN model, the lower bound of MF,x can be
computed using the Lipschitz constant of F (x, W ) in order to determine whether the input possesses
certified robustness. Previous work (Tsuzuku et al., 2018) has obtained a lower bound for MF,x using
the Lipschitz constant of F (x, W ) as,
                                                             √
                         MF,x ≥ ( ′ min (zy0 − zy′ ) − 2Lip(F, X)ϵ).                              (6)
                                   y ∈[Y ]\{y0 }

However, using only the Lipschitz constant to calculate the lower bound of MF,x can result in a
loose lower bound, which decreases the certified accuracy of DNN models. Subsequent work(Lee
et al., 2020) combines Lipschitz constant and interval propagation to solve for a more accurate outer
bound of the output logit with perturbed inputs. By using this outer bound, the worst-translated logit,
denoted as z ∗ , can be obtained. z ∗ can then provide a tighter lower bound for MF,x . Each term in z ∗
can be defined as,
                               zy∗′ = F (x, W ) −            min (zy0 − zy′ ).                      (7)
                                                     z∈ẑ(B(x))


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     R ELATED W ORK

LMT (Tsuzuku et al., 2018) determines the maximum change range of perturbation by calculating
the Lipschitz constant of DNNs model, and adds the Lipschitz constant to the corresponding logit
except for the correct class label during feedback training to enhance certified robustness in certified
robust training. GloRo (Leino et al., 2021) calculates the Lipschitz constant of the DNNs model and
constructs a new output logit vector for a specific class based on it, which is used for certified robust
training to enhance certified robustness. BCP (Lee et al., 2020) suggested that using only the global
Lipschitz constant in certified robust training could lead to over-regularization of the DNNs model,
resulting in reduced generalization performance. BCP not only uses the global Lipschitz constant
but also calculates the corresponding perturbation interval propagation (box constraint bound) for
each input using the Interval Bound Propagation (IBP) (Gowal et al., 2019) method. By taking
the intersection of the two, BCP can obtain a tighter propagation interval, which further enhances
certified robustness. Local Lipschitz Bounds (Huang et al., 2021) suggests that previous work on
certified robust training has focused on using globally calculated Lipschitz constants that can be
computationally efficient, but such an approach results in over-regularized DNNs models, leading
to reduced clean accuracy. To compute local Lipschitz bounds more efficiently, Local Lipschitz
Bounds analyzes non-linear functions such as ReLU and linear layer weight matrices, eliminating
rows and columns of the weight matrix output constants to obtain a more accurate local Lipschitz
constant. From another perspective, for example, the excessive warm up (Shi et al., 2021) process
during certified robust training determines a new weight initialization process and adds a Batch
Normalization operation for each layer, similarly by changing the conditions of other training based
on the computation of the perturbation propagation interval certified robustness. The work also
include (Zhang et al., 2022; Mirman et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2022; Cullen et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2019). The propagation interval method
mentioned earlier provides deterministic certified robustness, while another class of methods based
on randomized smoothing provides probabilistic certified robustness, meaning that inputs satisfying
certified robustness may still be adversarial examples. (Cohen et al., 2019) achieved l2 norm based
certified robustness for DNNs models on ImageNet datasets (Deng et al., 2009) by establishing
Gaussian noise smoothing, which makes certified robustness for DNNs models scalable. (Lecuyer
et al., 2019) established the theoretical connection between certified robustness and differential privacy
by treating images as a database and each pixel in the image as a tuple in the database to analyze the
impact of perturbation on the image using theoretical analysis. (Carlini et al., 2022) achieves higher
clean accuracy for DNNs models by using a pre-trained denoising diffusion probabilistic model for
denoised smoothing. Other works to improve the certified robustness of probabilistic methods include
(Jeong & Shin, 2020; Lee, 2021; Salman et al., 2020; Zhai et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Jeong et al.,
2021).


4     M ETHOD

4.1   OVERVIEW

Figure 1 illustrates the entire workflow. It can be divided into two phases. The first phase involves
obtaining and loading a pre-trained vanilla model. The second phase consists of adding an certification
model to construct an knowledge transfer process and performing certified robust training.
In the first phase (step ⃝),
                         1 our method initializes the model structure of the vanilla model and loads
the pre-trained parameters of the vanilla model. Then it calculates the singular value decomposition
of the weight matrices of the vanilla model.
In the second stage (step ⃝∼
                           2 ⃝),3 during certified robust training of the knowledge transfer process,
our method first adds an certification model with the same model structure as the vanilla model. Then,
it combines the vanilla model and the certification model to form the knowledge transfer process
(step ⃝).
       2 To preserve clean accuracy during certified robust training, our method also maintains
the similarity of the unit vectors of the SVD decomposition rotation matrices between the vanilla
model and the certification model (step ⃝).
                                         3 The logit vector and Lipschitz constant of the knowledge
transfer process are calculated to obtain the worst logit for certified robust training and achieve
certified robustness (step ⃝).
                           4


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   a) Pre-trained vanilla model                            b) Certified Robust training
                                           CA       CR
                                                                                                        CA       CR
                                                                                 Vanilla model
                  ①
                                                                      ②



      X
                                                                                      ③
                                                                 X

             U0   Σ0   V0     Ul-1 Σl-1   Vl-1

                                                                                                      Zcer
                                                                                                             ④
                                                                                Certification model


                                                   Figure 1: Overview


4.2       W HY DOES CERTIFIED ROBUSTNESS TRAINING LEAD TO A DECREASE IN CLEAN
          ACCURACY ?

For the certified robust training method based on Lipschitz constant for interval propagation estima-
tion, the Lipschitz constant of the certification model can be determined. Additionally, considering
the box constraints of the actual inputs, the worst logit can be obtained for the purpose of backward
propagation. However, this allows the network structure of the certification model to minimize the
influence of adversarial perturbations on the output margin by scaling the spectral norm, i.e., the
maximum singular value of the weight matrices, as the perturbations propagate through each layer of
the network. This allows the network structure of the certification model to minimize, as much as
possible, the impact of adversarial perturbations on the output margin. It achieves this by scaling
the spectral norm, which is the maximum singular value of the weight matrices, as the perturbations
propagate through each layer of the network. However, this approach also leads to the scaling range
of different directions in the weight matrices becoming similar. As a result, the certification model
finds it difficult to rotate the values in a vector to the appropriate positions for varying scales, which
affects numerical magnitude changes.
For weight matrices, their ability to accurately adjust the magnitude of input vector changes is not
solely determined by the variation in the maximum scale, i.e., singular values. From the perspective
of SVD, it is also influenced by the rotation matrix’s effect on the input vector in the space. By
performing SVD on the weight matrices, we can observe that similar singular values make the
certification model less sensitive to the scale changes of each layer’s weight matrices. This prevents
the upper bound of perturbation propagation from affecting the non-negativity of the margin. However,
this also means that a well-trained certification model relies more on the rotation effect of the weight
matrices. In other words, it allows the values of the input vector to be correctly scaled after coordinate
transformation. However, traditional certified robust training only takes into account the influence
of singular values on certified robustness, neglecting the role of rotation matrices. This leads to a
decrease in clean accuracy compared to the vanilla model for the certification model.
                                                                                         ∗
When certified robust training is completed, existing methods for computing worst logit zcer approxi-
mate the calculation process using the weight matrix Wcer , obtained by performing singular value
decomposition on Wcer as,


                                                                                                VT
                                                                            P
                                                   U                                            
                                               |      |               σ1    0 ···             − v1 −
                                                             
                       Wcer                                          0     σ1 · · ·        − v2 − 
                                             u1     u2 · · · 
                                 
                                      =                                                                           (8)
                                                                       ..    .. . .              ..
                                                                                                  
                                               |      |                 .     .     .             .



                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In other words, the maximum singular value σ1 is the same as the other singular values, which results
in equal variations in the weight matrix Wcer across all directions.

4.3   L OW- RANK APPROXIMATION OF VANILLA ROTATION MATRICES .

Decomposing the weight matrices of each layer in the vanilla model using SVD can be done in the
offline stage, which doesn’t require training or inference time. For the weight matrices of the vanilla
model, low-rank approximation can be achieved by using a small number of singular values and the
orthogonal unit vectors from the rotation matrices for recovery.
In our approach, the rotation matrices of the vanilla model are already capable of appropriately
rotating input vectors. Similarly, during computation, it is not necessary to use all orthogonal unit
vectors from the rotation matrices. Only a few orthogonal unit vectors are needed to approximate the
recovery of rotation matrices U and V . The low-rank approximation of the rotation matrices is as,

                                              X
                                                    ui viT = U V T .                                (9)
                                              i≤r

Low-rank approximation not only selects the important information from the rotation matrices but
also reduces the computational and storage costs.

4.4   P RESERVATION OF SIMILARITY BETWEEN ROTATION MATRICES .

For the vanilla model, its high performance classification ability for clean input is expressed by
the parameter values of the weight matrices of each layer, and the change in the values of these
weight matrices brings high performance classification ability in the normal training process, while
in the previous certified robust training process, these weight matrices are affected by the Lipschitz
In the previous certified robust training process, these weight matrices were affected by Lipschitz
constant reinforcement, which made their changes to the input become small, resulting in poor
classification results for the clean input. To solve this problem, our method makes the parameters
of the weight matrices of each layer of the certification model handle clean input well by making
SVD decomposition rotation matirx U and V T of each layer of the certification model as similar
as possible to the same layer weight rotation matrices decomposition the vanilla model, so that our
method’s retention of clean accuracy This is also to strengthen the role of the weight parameters in
the conflict between certified robustness and clean accuracy. The different U and VT of Rota matrix
similarity is,
                                                l      T
                                     Rotavan = Uvan (Vvan )l x,
                                                   l      T l
                                        Rotacer = Ucer (Vcer ) x.                                 (10)

However, it is not feasible to directly calculate the similarity between the rotation matrics of each
layer of the certification model and each layer of the vanilla model. This makes the output of each
layer of the vanilla model must be adjusted, otherwise it will make it difficult for the output of each
layer of the certification model to learn the appropriate representation and thus reduce our method’s
performance. The simplified method is based on the calculation of the Lipschitz constant, that is,
the multiplication of the spectral parametrization of each linear layer gives the lipshcitz constant,
and we can obtain this approximate change relationship by adjusting the relationship between the
spectral parametrization of each layer of the vanilla model and the spectral parametrization of each
layer of the certification model, which makes The entire clean reserved process can be integrated
in the previous process of obtaining certified robustness for the vanilla model, which improves the
efficiency of the calculation, and the corresponding loss calculation formula is,
                                  L−1           l                   l
                                  X          ||σcer ||           ||σvan ||
                     Losssim =          ||      l
                                                       Rotavan −    l
                                                                           Rotacer ||2 .          (11)
                                             ||σvan ||           ||σcer ||
                                  l=0


Finally, our full training procedure is presented in Algorithm 1.


                                                         6
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Algorithm 1: Certified Robust Training
   Input :Data X,Pre-trained Model Fvan and Lipvan ,certification Model Fcer
   Output :Provable Robustness Model Fcer
 1 for i ← 0 to epoch do
 2     for j ← 0 to batchsize do
 3         Fcer ← Xbatch
 4         Fvan ← Xbatch
 5         for l ← 0 to Layersize do
                 l               l              l
 6             Uvan  , σvan , Vvan    = SVD(Wvan  )
                                              l
 7             σcer = SpecNormCal(Wcer )
 8             Lipcer = σcer · Lipcer
                   l        l
 9             Wcer   = Wcer       σcer
                                l       T
10             Rotavan = Uvan        (Vvan )l x
                               l       T l
11             Rotacer = Ucer       (Vcer )x
                                                                    ||σ l      ||                          ||σ l       ||
12                             losssim + = || ||σlcer || Rotavan − ||σvan
                                                                      l  ||
                                                                            Rotacer ||2
                                                                           van                                 cer
                       ∗
13                    zcer = Worst-logit(zcer )
14                    Losstotal = losszcer + losssim
15                    Upadte Weight Parameters
16   return Fcer

                           clean_training_loss                                   clean_training_accuracy                                 clean_test_loss                                     clean_test_accuracy
                                                                                                                          1.5
            1.8                                                                                                                                                                  0.75
                                                                    0.70
                                                                                                                          1.4
                                                                    0.65                                                                                                         0.70
            1.6                                                                                                           1.3
                                                                    0.60
                                                         accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                      accuracy
                                                                                                                          1.2                                                    0.65
            1.4                                                     0.55
     loss


                                                                                                                   loss


                                                                    0.50                                                  1.1                                                    0.60
            1.2
                                                                    0.45                                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.55
            1.0                                                     0.40                                                  0.9
                  0   20       40        60   80   100                     0     20    40        60   80     100                0   20      40      60     80   100                     0   20    40      60   80   100
                                    epoch                                                   epoch                                             epoch                                                 epoch



                                                                                      Figure 2: Duet Clean accuracy


     5            E XPERIMENT

     In this section, we first introduced the software and hardware environment used, as well as the
     corresponding information of the DNNs model, including the model, data, algorithm. We compared
     the certified robust training methods with only global Lipschitz constant(Lee et al., 2020) and local
     Lipschitz constant(Huang et al., 2021), respectively. In terms of model accuracy, computation time,
     and memory consumption. We demonstrated that the certified robust training method using vanilla
     model as guide can effectively improve the clean accuracy of the model while slightly lowering the
     certified accuracy.
     Experiment setup. All our experiments were conducted using PyTorch version 2.0.0 on a single
     NVIDIA A40 GPU. The dataset used was CIFAR-10. Both the vanilla model and the model requiring
     certified robustness had the same architecture as previous work, which is six Convolutional Layers
     and two Fully Connected Layers. Depending on the previous work, either ReLU or MaxMin was
     used as the activation function. The pre-trained vanilla model achieved an accuracy of 90.06%. The
     l2 -norm-based perturbation radius used is 36/255.
     Clean accuracy. As shown in Figure 2, in the process of certified robust training, the phenomenon
     where the clean loss initially increases and then decreases is caused by the larger rotation angles and
     values of the rotation matrices and singular values corresponding to each layer’s SVD decomposition
     in the vanilla model. In order to make the vanilla model similar to the certified robustness model in
     terms of rotation matrices, Duet continually adjusts the rotation angles of the weight matrix with
     respect to the vectors. This adaptation process is necessary for randomly initialized weight matrices.


                                                                                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       Method                                          Similarity(%)                         Lipschitz Constant
                                 LMT(Tsuzuku et al., 2018)                                                              51.6                                19.9
                                   BCP(Lee et al., 2020)                                                                70.3                                 5.5
                                LocalBCP(Huang et al., 2021)                                                            77.8                                 3.8
                                        Our work                                                                        95.6                                7.8

                                                                       Table 1: Rotation matrix similarity.

                  certified_training_loss                              certified_training_accuracy                               certified_test_loss                                   certified_test_accuracy
                                                             0.5                                                                                                             0.5
       3.25                                                                                                       3.5

       3.00                                                  0.4                                                  3.0                                                        0.4
       2.75
                                                  accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                  accuracy
       2.50                                                  0.3                                                  2.5                                                        0.3
loss


                                                                                                           loss
       2.25
       2.00                                                  0.2                                                  2.0                                                        0.2
       1.75
                                                             0.1                                                  1.5                                                        0.1
       1.50
              0   20    40        60   80   100                    0    20     40        60   80     100                0   20       40      60        80   100                    0   20     40      60    80   100
                             epoch                                                  epoch                                              epoch                                                    epoch



                                                                       Figure 3: Duet Certified robustness


As for clean accuracy, the instability of the similarity of rotation matrices also introduces more
numerical fluctuations in the testing process.
Rotation matrix similarity. During the previous certified robust training process, the average
similarity between the rotation matrices of the certification model and the original vanilla model was
77.8%. However, for our method, the trained rotation matrices achieved a similarity of 95.6%. A
higher similarity matrix indicates that the certification model has better grasp of the optimal rotation
angles for the input content. Even though the spectral norms of weight matrices at each layer may
stretch the output values along each axis, the correct rotation direction still maintains the classification
ability for clean accuracy.
Certified robustness. As shown in Figure 3, during the certified robust training process, it is observed
that both the certified robustness loss and accuracy stabilize for a certain period of epochs. This
phenomenon can be attributed to the logit mapping used in the model, which tends to make the
outputs of both loss and accuracy converge to some extent. To break this balance, the continuous
preservation of similarity in unit vectors within the rotation matrix is crucial. This indicates that the
method employed to maintain clean accuracy helps the certified accuracy and loss to break out of
saddle points, leading to improved training performance.
Effective comparison.
As shown in Table 2, our work has shown a consistent improvement in both certified robustness and
clean accuracy compared to other existing methods. Specifically, in terms of certified robustness,
compared to the best existing work in certified robustness, our method only incurs a slight decrease
of less than 1% in certified accuracy when retaining the auxiliary model’s similarity to the rotation
matrix unit vectors. Additionally, since the Local Lipschitz Bound calculates the Lipschitz constant
for each input sample locally, our method may seem to exhibit a significant decrease. However,
in reality, our method directly calculates the global Lipschitz constant and can still be extended to
incorporate this approach.
Computational cost.
As shown in Table 3, during the training process, the computational cost associated with the similarity
calculation of the rotation matrix that we introduced is moderate. In contrast, the highest-certified
accuracy method shown in the table, Local Lipschitz Bound, exhibits a rapid increase in computational
cost and memory usage as the depth of the neural network increases. For the different network
architectures of 4C2F and 6C2F, the corresponding computation times and memory usage are
45.8s and 67.8s, and 21GB and 40.3GB, respectively. This poses challenges to the scalability and
practicality of the Local Lipschitz Bound method. In contrast, our work, as well as other existing
methods, does not involve the calculation of Lipschitz constants for each input sample at every layer.


                                                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Method                                 Clean(%)        PGD(%)        Certified(%)
           LMT(Tsuzuku et al., 2018)                63.1           58.3             38.1
           BCP (Lee et al., 2020) (Baseline)        65.7           60.8             51.3
           LocalBCP(Huang et al., 2021)             70.7           64.8             54.3
           Our work                             69.46 (+3.76)      61.8         50.37 (-0.93)

                     Table 2: Comparison to other certified training algorithms.

                               Method                 Time(Sec)     Memory(GB)
                    LMT(Tsuzuku et al., 2018)            569               8
                      BCP(Lee et al., 2020)              14.8             3.2
                   LocalBCP(Huang et al., 2021)          67.8            40.3
                           Our work                      38.5             5.1

                                     Table 3: Computation cost.


The computation time and memory cost are not sensitive to the depth of the network in our approach,
which enhances its scalability and applicability.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, We propose a practical training method that aims to obtain certified robustness while
maintaining clean accuracy. This method involves adding a pre-trained vanilla model and applying
singular value decomposition (SVD) to the weight matrices of each network layer of the vanilla
model. This process yields rotation matrices and singular values that respectively affect clean
accuracy and certified robustness. The vanilla model is then used as a guide model, establishing a
knowledge transfer process based on the similarity of rotation matrices between the guide model
and the certification model that obtains certified robustness. In order to select important rotation
matrix information and reduce computational cost, a low-rank approximation is used for practical
knowledge transfer. Additionally we hope that our method can offers practical solutions for a wide
range of scenarios that require high-performance clean accuracy inference tasks and provide certified
robustness in terms of security.

R EFERENCES
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, J Zico Kolter, et al. (certified!!) adversarial robustness for free!
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10550, 2022.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
  smoothing. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 1310–1320. PMLR, 2019.
Francesco Croce and Matthias Hein. Minimally distorted adversarial examples with a fast adaptive
  boundary attack. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2196–2205. PMLR, 2020.
Andrew Cullen, Paul Montague, Shijie Liu, Sarah Erfani, and Benjamin Rubinstein. Double bubble,
  toil and trouble: enhancing certified robustness through transitivity. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:19099–19112, 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Fei-Fei Li. ImageNet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 248–255, 2009.
Boyuan Feng, Tianqi Tang, Yuke Wang, Zhaodong Chen, Zheng Wang, Shu Yang, Yuan Xie, and
  Yufei Ding. Faith: An efficient framework for transformer verification on {GPUs}. In 2022
  USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 22), pp. 167–182, 2022.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sven Gowal, Krishnamurthy Dj Dvijotham, Robert Stanforth, Rudy Bunel, Chongli Qin, Jonathan
  Uesato, Relja Arandjelovic, Timothy Mann, and Pushmeet Kohli. Scalable verified training for
  provably robust image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 4842–4851, 2019.
Yujia Huang, Huan Zhang, Yuanyuan Shi, J Zico Kolter, and Anima Anandkumar. Training certifiably
  robust neural networks with efficient local lipschitz bounds. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:22745–22757, 2021.
Jongheon Jeong and Jinwoo Shin. Consistency regularization for certified robustness of smoothed
  classifiers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:10558–10570, 2020.
Jongheon Jeong, Sejun Park, Minkyu Kim, Heung-Chang Lee, Do-Guk Kim, and Jinwoo Shin.
  Smoothmix: Training confidence-calibrated smoothed classifiers for certified robustness. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:30153–30168, 2021.
Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial machine learning at scale. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01236, 2016.
Mathias Lecuyer, Vaggelis Atlidakis, Roxana Geambasu, Daniel Hsu, and Suman Jana. Certified
 robustness to adversarial examples with differential privacy. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security
 and Privacy (SP), pp. 656–672. IEEE, 2019.
Kyungmin Lee. Provable defense by denoised smoothing with learned score function. In ICLR
 Workshop on Security and Safety in Machine Learning Systems, 2021.
Sungyoon Lee, Jaewook Lee, and Saerom Park. Lipschitz-certifiable training with a tight outer bound.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:16891–16902, 2020.
Klas Leino, Zifan Wang, and Matt Fredrikson. Globally-robust neural networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6212–6222. PMLR, 2021.
Zhangheng Li, Tianlong Chen, Linyi Li, Bo Li, and Zhangyang Wang. Can pruning improve certified
  robustness of neural networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07311, 2022.
Ye Liu, Yaya Cheng, Lianli Gao, Xianglong Liu, Qilong Zhang, and Jingkuan Song. Practical
  evaluation of adversarial robustness via adaptive auto attack. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15105–15114, 2022.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.
Yuhao Mao, Mark Niklas Müller, Marc Fischer, and Martin Vechev. Taps: Connecting certified and
  adversarial training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04574, 2023.
Matthew Mirman, Maximilian Baader, and Martin Vechev. The fundamental limits of interval
 arithmetic for neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05235, 2021.
Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Xi Wu, Somesh Jha, and Ananthram Swami. Distillation as a
  defense to adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks. In 2016 IEEE symposium on
  security and privacy (SP), pp. 582–597. IEEE, 2016.
Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Ian Goodfellow, Somesh Jha, Z Berkay Celik, and Ananthram
  Swami. Practical black-box attacks against machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on
  Asia conference on computer and communications security, pp. 506–519, 2017.
Luca Pulina and Armando Tacchella. An abstraction-refinement approach to verification of artificial
  neural networks. In Computer Aided Verification: 22nd International Conference, CAV 2010,
  Edinburgh, UK, July 15-19, 2010. Proceedings 22, pp. 243–257. Springer, 2010.
Hadi Salman, Jerry Li, Ilya Razenshteyn, Pengchuan Zhang, Huan Zhang, Sebastien Bubeck, and
  Greg Yang. Provably robust deep learning via adversarially trained smoothed classifiers. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hadi Salman, Mingjie Sun, Greg Yang, Ashish Kapoor, and J Zico Kolter. Denoised smoothing: A
  provable defense for pretrained classifiers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:21945–21957, 2020.
Zhouxing Shi, Yihan Wang, Huan Zhang, Jinfeng Yi, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Fast certified robust training
  with short warmup. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18335–18349, 2021.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
Florian Tramer, Nicholas Carlini, Wieland Brendel, and Aleksander Madry. On adaptive attacks to
  adversarial example defenses. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1633–1645,
  2020.
Yusuke Tsuzuku, Issei Sato, and Masashi Sugiyama. Lipschitz-margin training: Scalable certification
  of perturbation invariance for deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 31, 2018.
Shiqi Wang, Kexin Pei, Justin Whitehouse, Junfeng Yang, and Suman Jana. Efficient formal safety
  analysis of neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Lily Weng, Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Zhao Song, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Luca Daniel, Duane Boning,
  and Inderjit Dhillon. Towards fast computation of certified robustness for relu networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5276–5285. PMLR, 2018.
Greg Yang, Tony Duan, J Edward Hu, Hadi Salman, Ilya Razenshteyn, and Jerry Li. Randomized
  smoothing of all shapes and sizes. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10693–
  10705. PMLR, 2020.
Yi Zeng, Zhouxing Shi, Ming Jin, Feiyang Kang, Lingjuan Lyu, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Ruoxi Jia.
  Towards robustness certification against universal perturbations. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Di He, Huan Zhang, Boqing Gong, Pradeep Ravikumar, Cho-Jui Hsieh,
  and Liwei Wang. Macer: Attack-free and scalable robust training via maximizing certified radius.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02378, 2020.
Bohang Zhang, Du Jiang, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Rethinking lipschitz neural networks and certified
  robustness: A boolean function perspective. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2022.
Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Chaowei Xiao, Sven Gowal, Robert Stanforth, Bo Li, Duane Boning,
  and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Towards stable and efficient training of verifiably robust neural networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06316, 2019.


                                                11
