Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U SING A PPROXIMATE M ODELS FOR E FFICIENT E X -
PLORATION IN R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In model-based reinforcement learning, an agent uses a learned model of environ-
         ment dynamics to improve a policy. Using a learned model of the environment to
         select actions has many benefits. It can be used to generate experience for learning
         a policy or simulate potential outcomes in planning. It allows flexible adaptation to
         new tasks and goals without having to relearn the underlying fundamentals of the
         environment from scratch. These sample efficiency and generalisation gains from
         model use are restricted by the model’s accuracy. An imperfect model can lead to
         failure if trusted by the agent in regions of the state space where predictions are
         inaccurate. It is well-documented in cognitive and developmental psychology that
         humans use approximate intuitive models of physics when navigating the world
         in everyday scenarios. These intuitive models, despite being imperfect, enable
         humans to reason flexibly about abstract physical concepts (for example, gravity,
         collisions and friction), and to apply these concepts to solve novel problems with-
         out having to relearn them from scratch. In other words, humans efficiently make
         use of imperfect models. In this paper, we learn dynamics models for intuitive
         physics tasks using graph neural networks that explicitly incorporate the abstract
         structure of objects, relations and events in their design. We demonstrate that
         these learned models can flexibly generalise to unseen tasks and, despite being
         imperfect, can improve the sample efficiency of policy learning through guiding
         exploration to useful regions of the state and action space.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In model-based reinforcement learning, the agent possesses a model of the dynamics of the environ-
ment, and learns from the experience generated by this model (Sutton & Barto, 2018). The model
is either learned or given. Using the experience generated from a model to improve a policy and/or
value function is often referred to as planning. Generating experience or transitions from a model
and learning from this can significantly improve the sample efficiency of learning, since fewer direct
interactions with the environment are required to generate experience. Using a model can enable
flexible adaptation to new tasks and goals without having to relearn the underlying fundamentals
of the environment from scratch (Lake et al., 2016). These sample efficiency and generalisation
gains from model use are restricted by the model’s accuracy. An imperfect model can lead to failure
if trusted by the agent in regions of the state space where predictions are inaccurate (Abbas et al.,
2021). Relating to the use of imperfect or approximate models in the model-based reinforcement
learning literature, there has been a focus on (1) mitigating the impact of model inaccuracies on
policy learning by restricting rollout length or relying less on uncertain predictions (Janner et al.,
2019; Abbas et al., 2021); and (2) learning and using simplified models that abstract away details
that are irrelevant for value-based planning (Grimm et al., 2020; 2021; Schrittwieser et al., 2019),
or, more generally, learning the model in a way that links it to its use in value-based planning (Saleh
et al., 2022).
It is well-documented in cognitive and developmental psychology that humans use approximate intu-
itive models of physics when navigating the world in everyday scenarios (Piloto et al., 2022). These
intuitive models enable humans to reason flexibly about abstract physical concepts such as gravity,
collisions and friction. Humans demonstrate the capacity to construct rich action priors based on
their intuitive models of physics to flexibly solve physical reasoning problems (Allen et al., 2020).
These action priors can be used to guide exploration through biasing and restricting the search over


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


actions to those that have been previously useful, thereby, speeding up learning (Rosman & Ra-
mamoorthy, 2015). Taking inspiration from this, we propose using learned dynamics models to
guide exploration towards rewarding regions of the action space to accelerate learning. Efficient
exploration is a major challenge for reinforcement learning algorithms, especially in environments
with continuous action spaces and where a sequence of precise actions have to be chained together
in order to receive some sparse reward signal from the environment (Ecoffet et al., 2021). By using
approximate and imperfect models to guide exploration only and not generate experience or tran-
sitions from which the reinforcement learning algorithm directly learns, we mitigate the impact of
model error on stable policy learning, while still benefiting from the information contained in the
predictions of these models, however uncertain.
We make the following contributions:

       • We learn dynamics models for intuitive physics tasks that leverage the abstract structure
         of objects, relations and events to flexibly generalise across tasks. To do this, we learn
         the models using graph neural networks based on the Interaction Network (Battaglia et al.,
         2016), that rely on the assumptions of distinct edge update functions for unique pairs of
         object types, dynamic edge activations and relative information.
       • Using the learned approximate dynamics models, we compute the statistics of action distri-
         butions identified as rewarding by the model, and show that sampling from these distribu-
         tions significantly improves the frequency of reward signals obtained from the environment.
       • We incorporate the model-identified rewarding action distributions in an epsilon-greedy
         exploration strategy for reinforcement learning that demonstrates accelerated convergence
         to optimal policies.

2     BACKGROUND
We model the agent’s interaction with the environment as a Markov Decision Process, represented
by a tuple ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩ of states, actions, transition probability function, reward function and
discount factor. At each time step t, the agent observes the environment state st , and then se-
lects an action at . At the next time step, the agent receives reward r(st , at ) and transitions to
the next state st+1 according to some dynamics transition function f : S × A → S. The goal
of reinforcement learning is for an agent to learn a policy π(at |st ), a mapping from states to ac-
tions,
    Pthat  maximises the expected sum of future rewards that can be achieved from the current state
       ∞
Eπ [ i=0 γ i r(St+i , At+i )|St = s].
In model-free reinforcement learning, the dynamics function f and reward function r are unknown
and the agent learns only from direct interaction with the environment. In model-based reinforce-
ment learning, the agent has a model of the environment, which represents the dynamics function
f and reward function r, and learns from the experience generated by this model (Sutton & Barto,
2018). The model is either learned or given. In this work, we assume that the agent has access to the
underlying reward function r and we focus on learning the dynamics function f .

2.1   G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS FOR P HYSICS P REDICTION

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated success in flexible physics prediction, with the
capacity to generalise across variable object counts and scene configurations (Battaglia et al., 2016;
Chang et al., 2017; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020). This success is attributable to their use of strong
relational inductive biases - assumptions about the relationships and interactions among entities
(Battaglia et al., 2018). The Interaction Network (Battaglia et al., 2016) assumes pairwise relations
between entities, enabling scaling to variable object counts. It represents objects as the nodes of a
graph and their relations as edges. The Interaction Network is an example of a Message Passing
Neural Network (Gilmer et al., 2017), which computes the updated node fetaures x′i as follows:
                                                 X
                                 x′i = ψ(xi ,             ϕ(xi , xj , dj,i )),                     (1)
                                                j∈N (i)


where xi ∈ RF denotes the features of node i, dj,i denotes the (optional) edge features from sender
node j to receiver node i, ψ is the per-node differentiable update function, and ϕ is the per-edge


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


differentiable update function that computes the effect of the interaction between receiver node i and
sender node j (usually instantiated as multilayer perceptrons). Note that the GNN is permutation-
invariant because the per-edge update function ϕ is symmetrically applied to all interactions; and the
interaction effects are aggregated using a permutation-invariant operation, in this case, summation.
A larger, more complex system can be represented by a graph structure G = ⟨O, R⟩, where nodes O
represent objects and edges R represent their pairwise relations. The per-node and per-edge update
rules in 1 are applied across the full graph to update the features of receiver nodes for the next step.

2.2   D EEP D ETERMINISTIC P OLICY G RADIENTS (DDPG)

DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2019) is an off-policy reinforcement learning algorithm that uses the
Bellman equation to concurrently learn an action-value or Q-function and a deterministic pol-
icy µ(s). DDPG is adapted for continuous action spaces by using the following approximation
maxa Q(s, a) ≈ Q(s, µ(s)). Since the action space is continuous, the optimal Q∗ (s, a) is differen-
tiable with respect to the action. Since the policies learned are deterministic, noise is added to the
actions sampled from the policy at training time (usually using an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (Uhlenbeck
& Ornstein, 1930) or Gaussian noise process) for exploration.

3     R ELATED W ORK

Approximate models and model-based reinforcement learning. Recently, there has been an in-
creased focus in the model-based reinforcement learning literature on learning useful models as
opposed to accurate models (Saleh et al., 2022). Saleh et al. (2022) motivate that a model that
accurately predicts environment dynamics may not necessarily be the most useful to a learner and
instead focus on learning planning models that can be used to improve value function learning as a
meta objective. Other works have investigated approaches for reducing the detrimental impacts of
inaccurate models on learning. Abbas et al. (2021) propose an approach for estimating model uncer-
tainty and use this uncertainty measure to limit the impact of planning in regions of the state space
where models are inaccurate. Limiting the length of model rollouts to reduce compounding model
error is a widely adopted technique in the literature (Janner et al., 2019; Holland et al., 2019). The
value equivalence principle (Grimm et al., 2020) places emphasis on accurately predicting returns
and not environment transitions. We propose that approximate models can be useful by directing
exploration towards useful regions of the action space in settings with large or continuous action
spaces and where rewards are sparse.
Intuitive physics. It is well-established in cognitive and developmental psychology that people use
approximate and abstract models of physics when interacting with the physical world (Spelke, 1990;
2003; Gerstenberg & Tenenbaum, 2020). Much of the work on learning models for physical intu-
ition focuses on the specialised tasks of block stacking and stability prediction (Battaglia et al., 2013;
Groth et al., 2018; Lerer et al., 2016). Girdhar et al. (2021) and Allen et al. (2020) focus on intuitive
physics puzzles. However, the tasks they investigate are one-step and do not involve the sequential
decision-making typical of traditional reinforcement learning tasks. Allen et al. (2020) also do not
learn a dynamics model, but use a ground truth simulator with added noise for their experiments.
Action priors and hard exploration. Exploration can be difficult in environments with large or
continuous action spaces and where a sequence of precise actions have to be chained together in
order to receive some sparse reward signal from the environment. To enable more effective ex-
ploration, Ecoffet et al. (2021) store states visited during exploration, revisit promising states and
explore starting from the revisited states in a model-free way. This mitigates the issues of the agent
forgetting how to reach previously visited states and not first returning to a state before exploring
from it. Action priors can be used to guide exploration through biasing and restricting the search
over actions to those that have been previously useful, thereby, speeding up learning (Rosman &
Ramamoorthy, 2015). We propose using a learned model to explore from promising states and us-
ing the statistics of promising actions identified by the model to compute cluster distributions of
rewarding actions that can be used to guide exploration.
Graph neural networks for simulating physics. Battaglia et al. (2016) assume a fixed set of nodes
and edges for training, with only node features varying over time. Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2020)
simulate complex physics (fluids, rigid solids, deformable materials) assuming a fixed set of nodes
and dynamic edge structures using a connectivity radius - that is, edges are constructed between
nodes within some specified radius. Saxena & Kroemer (2022) learn time-varying sparse graph


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


structures to scale to tasks with a larger number of ‘distractorqnodes (nodes that are not involved in
any interactions). Edge activations refer to an edge between the relevant nodes existing at a discrete
time point. They focus on robotic gripping tasks where the assumption of longer contact durations
is relevant and use a temporal Gated Recurrent Unit to learn edge activations. In training, they use
a fixed set of nodes. In contrast, our training dataset is noisy with nodes randomly added at regular
intervals.

4     L EARNING AND U SING A PPROXIMATE M ODELS TO G UIDE E XPLORATION
      IN I NTUITIVE P HYSICS S ETTINGS

4.1   L EARNING DYNAMICS M ODELS THAT L EVERAGE S TRUCTURAL I NVARIANCES

In the intuitive physics setting, reasoning at the level of objects, relations and events is a natural
construct that can enable generalisation to variable scene configurations and object counts (Battaglia
et al., 2016; Chang et al., 2017). We leverage this structure through the use of graph neural networks
based on the Interaction Network. To improve the flexibility and generalisation capacity of the
learned models, we make the following additional assumptions:

       • Distinct per-edge update functions: Interactions between different pairs of object types
         are considered to be different edge types, and are encoded by edge update functions that are
         specific to the object pair under consideration. For example, if a ball collides into a wall,
         the effect of this interaction is encoded by an edge update function specific to the ball-wall
         interaction. If a ball rebounds off a floor, a different edge update function specific to the
         ball-floor interaction is used. Learning per-edge update functions specific to object pairs
         enables improved generalisation to various scene configurations, where these object pair
         interactions may be present or absent.
       • Dynamic edge activations: In a node-dynamic graph, the set of nodes varies over time,
         where some nodes may be added or removed (Harary & Gupta, 1997). If a node is removed,
         it is assumed that edges associated with the node are also deleted. In an edge-dynamic
         graph, the set of edges varies over time, meaning edges may be added or removed from the
         graph. We represent the state of the system at time t using a graph Gt = (Vt , Et ), where
         Vt is a set of nodes and Et a set of edges. xit is the state feature vector of node i, vti ∈ Vt ,
         at time t. dji                                               ji
                      t represents the features of the edge et ∈ Et from sender node j to receiver
         node i. Given that we are interested in physical contact interactions, dji     t is the distance
         between nodes vtj and vti . We specify some distance cutoff dcutof f to determine whether
         an edge is active or not. If dji                                    ji
                                             t <= dcutof f , the edge et is active and is added to the set
         of active edges Et . An episode can, thus, be described by a sequence of dynamic graphs
         (G0 , G1 , G2 , . . . , GT ) at discrete time points 0, . . . , T .
       • Relative information: To capture the fact that Newtonian physics is invariant to changes
         in absolute object positions when their relative positions remain the same (all else being
         equal), we construct a dynamic coordinate system that uses the location of a reference
         object as its origin. The reference object is a dynamic or moving object in the scene and
         the positions of other objects are expressed relative to the reference object’s position at each
         time step.

4.2   ACTION C LUSTERS FOR G UIDED E XPLORATION

The two main challenges in model-based reinforcement learning are: (1) model bias or inaccu-
racy, and (2) compounding model error over longer rollout horizons. Intuitive physics models are
only approximate in nature, yet humans are able to use them to achieve flexible physical reasoning.
However, for policy learning, even small model error can be catastrophic for stable policy learning
(Janner et al., 2019). Allen et al. (2020) propose that humans demonstrate efficient search for phys-
ical problem solving because they leverage rich action priors, which they subsequently update as
observations become available. We investigate using learned approximate models in model-based
reinforcement learning in a similar way to humans. That is, we use the model to construct distribu-
tions over actions that it predicts leads to high reward. These can then be used to guide search in a
reinforcement learning setting. The agent samples actions from these model-identified distributions


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


when exploring according to an epsilon-greedy strategy. In environments with large action spaces
(particularly, continuous action spaces) or sparse rewards, the exploration problem is a difficult one
(Ecoffet et al., 2021). An agent being in possession of intuitive information about actions that are
promising for solving a task can direct search towards regions of the state and action spaces that
provide useful signals for learning, thereby, accelerating convergence to an optimal policy.
Our approach to computing these rewarding action distributions using the learned dynamics models
takes the following form:

      1. For each task, we assume a set of subgoals exist that provide reward signals over shorter
         intervals (shorter than the full episode). The use of subgoals serves to mitigate the impact of
         compounding model error over longer rollout horizons, since the agent can receive signals
         about rewarding actions from shorter model rollouts, where predictions are likely to be
         more reliable (Janner et al., 2019). Additionally, the use of subgoals mitigates the credit
         assignment problem through decomposing the task into smaller subproblems (Sutton et al.,
         2000).
      2. Given the initial state for a task and the first subgoal, we roll out the model over a specified
         horizon by randomly sampling actions. The model rollouts are performed multiple times
         and the actions that lead to the first subgoal being achieved as predicted by the model
         are stored as rewarding actions for the first subgoal. We then use K-means clustering to
         identify clusters of the stored rewarding actions for the first subgoal and compute their
         statistics (cluster means and standard deviations).
      3. To limit compounding model error for the next phase of model predictions: starting from
         the initial state, we roll out the real environment over a specified horizon multiple times
         by sampling from the computed high-reward action cluster distributions (approximated as
         normal distributions with the cluster means and standard deviations). The last states of
         these real environment rollouts are then assigned as the initial states for the next set of
         rollouts relating to the next subgoal. For subsequent subgoals, the initial states used for
         model and real environment rollouts will be sampled from this constructed set of initial
         states.
      4. The above is repeated for each subgoal until we reach the final goal.

4.3   E XPLORATION S TRATEGY FOR P OLICY L EARNING

We incorporate the useful action distributions computed using the learned dynamics models within
a policy learning framework using an epsilon-greedy exploration strategy. Given some threshold
value ϵthreshold of epsilon ϵ, where 0 ≤ ϵ ≤ 1: if ϵ <= ϵthreshold , sample actions from the intuitive
priors or cluster distributions, otherwise, sample actions according to the policy with some added
noise sampled from a random process.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   S ETUP

We use the Chain Reaction Tool Environment (CREATE) developed by Jain et al. (2020). It offers
a range of physics-based puzzles that require an agent to place tools in real-time to direct a ball’s
trajectory to reach a goal location. The action space is 2D and continuous - the 2D placement of
the tool at regular time steps (x, y) ∈ R2 , where x, y ∈ [−1, 1].In our experiments we consider
the following tool types: bucket, rotated square, box, wall and floor. The state feature vector for an
object includes its x-velocity, y-velocity, x-position, y-position and a one-hot encoding representing
the object type. The state observation st corresponds to the collection of state feature vectors for
objects in the scene at time t. We assume that an action is taken approximately every 1.33 seconds
in the environment.
Human prediction of collision resolution is inherently noisy (Smith et al., 2013). Yet even from
these noisy intuitive models, humans can construct rich action priors to guide action selection in
order to find an optimal solution. The 2D continuous action space and the precision of sequential
tool placements required to solve tasks makes CREATE a challenging environment for exploration.

                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2   DYNAMICS M ODELS

We learn task-agnostic dynamics models, that is, models that are not trained in the context of specific
tasks. Instead, we collect observations that capture the distinct dynamics of collision interactions
between a moving ball and each of the tool types under consideration (bucket, rotated square, box,
wall and floor). Given a single tool in the scene, a ball is launched at various angles and velocities
at the tool in order to produce observations of the tool’s dynamics. We collect 1000 one-step ob-
servations for each tool type. To make the learned model invariant to absolute positions in a scene
given the same relative positions of objects, we transform the observations to reflect the positions of
the tools relative to the dynamic ball at each step. The dynamic ball’s position is the origin of the
coordinate system at each step.
For a given set of tools in a task, we learn a GNN dynamics model from the combined set of obser-
vations for the tools in the given set. We learn different edge update functions for interactions with
each tool type. For example, for all tasks that involve the bucket and box tools, we use the same
GNN dynamics model learned from the collated observations for the bucket and box tool types,
which includes a ball-bucket edge update function and a ball-box edge update function. A dynamics
model is learned for each unique combination of tool types that are included in the tasks we include
in this paper. See A.1 for details on dynamics model architecture and training hyperparameters.


                          Figure 1: Individual tool dynamics observations.


        Figure 2: Dynamic relative coordinate system with moving ball’s position as origin.


5.3   P OLICY L EARNING

We use DDPG to learn deterministic policies. For each task, we compare the following two ap-
proaches:

       • DDPG with model-guided exploration (DDPG-MGE): Combines the standard DDPG
         approach with guided exploration informed by the learned approximate dynamics models
         as described in 4.2 and 4.3. When not sampling from the learned action clusters, the explo-
         ration policy µ′ used is constructed by adding noise sampled from an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
         process N (Uhlenbeck & Ornstein, 1930) to the actor policy as done in Lillicrap et al.
         (2019):
                                             µ′ = µ(st |θtµ ) + N                                  (2)

       • Standard DDPG (Baseline): A standard model-free DDPG approach that uses the ex-
         ploratory policy in 2.

We learn policies for the tasks shown in 3. See A.2 for details on DDPG policy and critic networks
architecture and training hyperparameters.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              (a) Task 1                    (b) Task 2                     (c) Task 3


              (d) Task 4                    (e) Task 5                      (f) Task 6

                       Figure 3: Tasks used in policy learning experiments.


5.4   R ESULTS


Our experiments aim to answer the following questions:


      • Can the approximate dynamics models learned in a task-agnostic way be used to reli-
        ably identify rewarding regions of the action space across tasks?
        Figure 4 illustrates the distributions of actions selected by sampling from the action clus-
        ter distributions identified by the learned models. Figure 5 compares the frequency of
        goals and subgoals being hit over 1000 episodes using model-guided exploration versus
        random exploration. Here, for model-guided exploration, the agent only samples from the
        model-identified action cluster distributions (ϵthreshold = 1), whereas random exploration
        refers to the agent sampling from its policy and adding noise sampled from an Ornstein-
        Uhlenbeck process. Only for Tasks 1 and 3 does random exploration lead to an occurrence
        of the final goal being hit. The success of model-guided exploration varies across tasks,
        but overall, there is a marked increase the frequency of subgoals and goals being hit under
        model-based exploration compared to random exploration.



      • Can exploration guided by the model be used to accelerate convergence to an optimal
        policy?
        Since models are learned in a task-agnostic way, this means that in total three models
        were used across six tasks (a separate one for each unique combination of tool types in
        the scene). 2000 observations were used to train each model (that is, 2000 interactions
        with the real environment per model). To compute the model-identified action clusters,
        200 rollouts from the real environment were required for each task. Sample efficiency
        gains for policy learning were achieved in four out of six tasks by using model-guided
        exploration (shown in Figure 6). Exploration epsilon refers to the epsilon threshold used -
        a threshold of 0 indicates that no model-guided exploration was used. For ϵthreshold > 0.1,
        an exploration decay strategy was employed to prevent policy learning diverging due to
        excessive exploration.


                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             (a) Task 1                   (b) Task 2                   (c) Task 3


             (d) Task 4                   (e) Task 5                    (f) Task 6

 Figure 4: Actions sampled from cluster distributions computed using learned dynamics models.


                                       (a) Final goal hit


                                        (b) Subgoal hit

Figure 5: Comparison of the frequency of goals and subgoals being hit over 1000 episodes using
model-guided exploration versus random.



                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a) Task 1                     (b) Task 2                     (c) Task 3


               (d) Task 4                     (e) Task 5                     (f) Task 6

Figure 6: Cumulative reward plots at train time comparing DDPG-MGE and DDPG (baseline).
Rolling average is computed over a window of 100 previous episodes and refers to the percentage
of these episodes that achieved the goal.


6   C ONCLUSIONS

Humans rely on approximate models of intuitive physics to flexibly solve a variety of physical
reasoning problems. These models are inherently uncertain, yet are effectively used by humans to
generalise to unseen problems. In this paper, we learn dynamics models for intuitive physics tasks
using graph neural networks that explicitly incorporate the abstract structure of objects, relations
and events in their design. We demonstrate that these learned models can flexibly generalise to
unseen tasks and, despite being imperfect, can improve the sample efficiency of policy learning
through guiding exploration to useful regions of the state and action space.
Relating to the use of imperfect or approximate models in the model-based reinforcement learning
literature, there has been a focus on (1) mitigating the impact of model inaccuracies on policy
learning by restricting rollout length or relying less on uncertain predictions; and (2) learning and
using simplified models that abstract away details that are irrelevant for value-based planning, or,
more generally, learning the model in a way that links it to its use in value-based planning. However,
in environments that are challenging for exploration because of large or continuous action spaces
and sparse reward signals, we propose that approximate models can be used to guide exploration
towards useful regions of the action space to accelerate convergence to an optimal policy.
We show that using graph neural networks based on the Interaction Network (leveraging the
abstract structure of objects, relations and events) with the additional assumptions of distinct edge
update functions for unique pairs of object types, dynamic edge activations and the use of relative
positional information enables effective generalisation to various scene configurations and unseen
tasks. We show that these learned approximate dynamics models trained in a task-agnostic way can
reliably identify rewarding regions of the action space across tasks. Sampling from distributions
over model-identified rewarding actions using an epsilon-greedy exploration strategy within a
reinforcement learning framework achieves sample efficiency gains in terms of accelerated policy
convergence to an optimal solution.
Future work that learns subgoals for tasks instead of relying on them being specified would sig-
nificantly improve our approach to identifying rewarding actions using learned dynamics models.
Additionally, iteratively updating and refining the model-identified distributions over rewarding
actions as real experience is collected by the agent could improve the accuracy of action selection
that result in high rewards as training progresses.



R EFERENCES
Zaheer Abbas, Samuel Sokota, Erin J. Talvitie, and Martha White. Selective dyna-style planning
  under limited model capacity, 2021.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kelsey R. Allen, Kevin A. Smith, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Rapid trial-and-error learning
  with simulation supports flexible tool use and physical reasoning. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 117(47):29302–29310, nov 2020. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1912341117. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.1912341117.
Peter Battaglia, Jessica Hamrick, and Joshua Tenenbaum. Simulation as an engine of physical scene
  understanding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
  110, 10 2013. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1306572110.
Peter W. Battaglia, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew Lai, Danilo Rezende, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Inter-
  action networks for learning about objects, relations and physics, 2016.
Peter W. Battaglia, Jessica B. Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
  Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, Caglar
  Gulcehre, Francis Song, Andrew Ballard, Justin Gilmer, George Dahl, Ashish Vaswani, Kelsey
  Allen, Charles Nash, Victoria Langston, Chris Dyer, Nicolas Heess, Daan Wierstra, Pushmeet
  Kohli, Matt Botvinick, Oriol Vinyals, Yujia Li, and Razvan Pascanu. Relational inductive biases,
  deep learning, and graph networks, 2018.
Michael B. Chang, Tomer Ullman, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. A compositional
 object-based approach to learning physical dynamics, 2017.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O. Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Go-explore: a
  new approach for hard-exploration problems, 2021.
Tobias Gerstenberg and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Intuitive theories. Encyclopedia of Creativity, In-
  vention, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 2020.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry, 2017.
Rohit Girdhar, Laura Gustafson, Aaron Adcock, and Laurens van der Maaten. Forward prediction
  for physical reasoning, 2021.
Christopher Grimm, André Barreto, Satinder Singh, and David Silver. The value equivalence prin-
  ciple for model-based reinforcement learning, 2020.
Christopher Grimm, André Barreto, Gregory Farquhar, David Silver, and Satinder Singh. Proper
  value equivalence, 2021.
Oliver Groth, Fabian B. Fuchs, Ingmar Posner, and Andrea Vedaldi. Shapestacks: Learning vision-
  based physical intuition for generalised object stacking, 2018.
F. Harary and G. Gupta. Dynamic graph models. Math. Comput. Model., 25(7):79–87, apr 1997.
   ISSN 0895-7177. doi: 10.1016/S0895-7177(97)00050-2. URL https://doi.org/10.
   1016/S0895-7177(97)00050-2.
G. Zacharias Holland, Erin J. Talvitie, and Michael Bowling. The effect of planning shape on dyna-
  style planning in high-dimensional state spaces, 2019.
Ayush Jain, Andrew Szot, and Joseph J. Lim. Generalization to new actions in reinforcement learn-
  ing. CoRR, abs/2011.01928, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.01928.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to Trust Your Model: Model-
 Based Policy Optimization. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019.
Brenden M. Lake, Tomer D. Ullman, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Samuel J. Gershman. Building
  machines that learn and think like people, 2016.
Adam Lerer, Sam Gross, and Rob Fergus. Learning physical intuition of block towers by ex-
  ample. In Maria Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of The 33rd
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, pp. 430–438, New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/lerer16.html.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning, 2019.
Luis Piloto, Ari Weinstein, Peter Battaglia, and Matthew Botvinick. Intuitive physics learning in a
  deep-learning model inspired by developmental psychology. Nature Human Behaviour, 6:1–11,
  07 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41562-022-01394-8.
Benjamin Rosman and Subramanian Ramamoorthy. Action priors for learning domain invariances.
  IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 7(47):107–118, 2015. doi: 10.1073/
  pnas.1912341117.
Esra’a Saleh, John D. Martin, Anna Koop, Arash Pourzarabi, and Michael Bowling. Should models
  be accurate?, 2022.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter W.
  Battaglia. Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks, 2020.
Saumya Saxena and Oliver Kroemer. Dynamic inference on graphs using structured transition mod-
  els, 2022.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, and
  David Silver. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model, 2019. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08265. cite arxiv:1911.08265.
Kevin A Smith, E Dechter, JB Tenenbaum, and Edward Vul. Physical predictions over time. In
  Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 2013. URL http:
  //www.evullab.org/pdf/SmithDechterTenenbaumVul-CogSci-2013.pdf.
Elizabeth S. Spelke. Principles of object perception. Cogn. Sci., 14:29–56, 1990.
Elizabeth S. Spelke. What makes us smart? core knowledge and natural language. In Dedre Getner
  and Susan Goldin-Meadow (eds.), Language in Mind: Advances in the Study of Language and
  Thought, pp. 277–311. MIT Press, 2003.
R. S. Sutton, D. Mcallester, S. Singh, and Y. Mansour. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement
  learning with function approximation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 12,
  volume 12, pp. 1057–1063. MIT Press, 2000.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  second edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.
  html.
G. E. Uhlenbeck and L. S. Ornstein. On the theory of the brownian motion. Phys. Rev., 36:823–841,
  Sep 1930. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.36.823. URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
  PhysRev.36.823.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   DYNAMICS M ODEL N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE AND H YPERPARAMETERS

The GNN consists of a set of per-edge update functions ϕ1 , ϕ2 , . . . for each edge type. Each edge
update function is approximated using a 17-layer neural network with hidden size 64 and tanh
activations applied to all layers except the last. The final linear layer of the per-edge update function
outputs an edge embedding vector of size 20, which is summed together with all edge embeddings
for a given receiver node. The sum of the edge embeddings (size 20) is concatenated with the
receiver node’s feature vector and passed as an input to the per-node update function ψ. The per-
node update function ψ has the same architecture as the per-edge update function ϕ. The node
embedding vector of size 20 for the receiver node is finally passed through a 2-layer MLP, with
hidden size 64 and tanh activations, which outputs the predicted x and y positions (in the range
(−1, 1)) for the receiver node at the next time step.
The hyperparameter values used in training the dynamics models are indicated in Table 2. These
values were determined using a sweep over the set of values shown in the Sweep Set column.


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Table 1: Dynamics model hyperparameters

                    Hyperparameters       Values     Sweep Set
                    Number of layers      17         {5, 8, 12, 17}
                    Learning Rate         1e−4       { 1e−3, 1e−4, 1e−5}
                    Num Epochs            5000       { 1000, 2500, 5000, 10000}
                    Batch Size            128        { 32, 64, 128, 256}
                    Optimiser             Adam       { Adam, SGD, RMSprop}


A.2   DDPG: A RCHITECTURES AND H YPERPARAMETERS

The policy and critic networks each consist of 3 layers with hidden size 64.
The hyperparameter values used in training the dynamics models are indicated in Table 2. These
values were determined using a sweep over the set of values shown in the Sweep Set column.

                                 Table 2: DDPG hyperparameters

                   Hyperparameters         Values     Sweep Set
                   Number of layers        3          {3, 6, 10}
                   Policy Learning Rate    1e−4       { 1e−3, 1e−4, 1e−5}
                   Critic Learning Rate    1e−4       { 1e−3, 1e−4, 1e−5}
                   Batch Size              128        { 32, 64, 128, 256}
                   Optimiser               Adam       { Adam, SGD, RMSprop}
                   OU θ                    0.15       { 0.1, 0.15, 0.2}
                   OU µ                    0.0        { 0.0, 0.1, 0.2}
                   OU σ                    0.2        { 0.1, 0.2, 0.4}


                                                12
