Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P REDICATED D IFFUSION : P REDICATE L OGIC -BASED
ATTENTION G UIDANCE FOR T EXT- TO -I MAGE D IFFU -
SION M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Diffusion models have achieved remarkable results in generating high-quality, di-
         verse, and creative images. However, when it comes to text-based image gener-
         ation, they often fail to capture the intended meaning presented in the text. For
         instance, a specified object may not be generated, an unnecessary object may be
         generated, and an adjective may alter objects it was not intended to modify. More-
         over, we found that relationships indicating possession between objects are often
         overlooked. While users’ intentions in text are diverse, existing methods tend to
         specialize in only some aspects of these. In this paper, we propose Predicated Dif-
         fusion, a unified framework to express users’ intentions. We consider that the root
         of the above issues lies in the text encoder, which often focuses only on individual
         words and neglects the logical relationships between them. The proposed method
         does not solely rely on the text encoder, but instead, represents the intended mean-
         ing in the text as propositions using predicate logic and treats the pixels in the
         attention maps as the fuzzy predicates. This enables us to obtain a differentiable
         loss function that makes the image fulfill the proposition by minimizing it. When
         compared to several existing methods, we demonstrated that Predicated Diffusion
         can generate images that are more faithful to various text prompts, as verified by
         human evaluators and pretrained image-text models.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The recent advancements in deep learning have paved the way for the generation of images that
are high-quality, diverse, and creative. This progress is primarily attributed to diffusion models (Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021), which recursively update images to remove noise and to make them
more realistic. Diffusion models are significantly more stable and scalable compared to previous
methods, such as generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Radford et al., 2016)
or autoregressive models (van den Oord et al., 2016; Kolesnikov & Lampert, 2017). Moreover,
the field of text-based image generation is attracting considerable attention, with the goal being to
generate images that are faithful to a text prompt given as input. Even in this area, the contributions
of diffusion models are notable (Ramesh et al., 2021). We can benefit from commercial applications
such as DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), as well as the state-of-
the-art open-source model, Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). These models are trained on
large-scale and diverse text-image datasets, which allows them to respond to a variety of prompts and
to generate images of objects with colors, shapes, and materials not found in the existing datasets.
However, many previous studies have pointed out that these models often generate images that
ignore the intended meanings of a given prompt, as exemplified in Fig. 1 (Feng et al., 2023; Chefer
et al., 2023; Rassin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). When multiple objects are specified in a prompt,
only some are generated, with the others disappearing (see the column missing objects in Fig. 1).
Also, two specified objects are sometimes mixed together to form one object in the generated image
(object mixture). Given an adjective in a prompt, it alters a different object than the one the adjective
was originally intended to modify (attribute leakage). We have found a novel challenge that, when
a prompt specifies an object being held by someone, the object is depicted as if discarded on the
ground (possession failure). Although these challenges need to be addressed, retraining diffusion
models on large-scale datasets is prohibitively expensive. Many studies have proposed methods


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Missing Objects       Object Mixture       Attribute Leakage     Possession Failure
                a yellow car and      a bird and a cat     a green balloon and     a boy grasping
    Prompts        a blue bird                                a purple clock        a soccer ball



     Stable
    Diffusion


 Predicated
 Diffusion
  (Ours)



Figure 1: Visualizations of typical challenges in text-based image generation using diffusion models.
The proposed Predicated Diffusion can solve all of these challenges, but is not limited to them.


offering guidance for the image generation process of pre-trained diffusion models, ensuring that
the images are updated to become more faithful to the prompt. However, these guidances vary
widely, and a unified solution to address the diverse range of challenges has yet to be established.
We hypothesize that the root cause of such challenges lies in the text encoder within diffusion mod-
els failing to correctly capture the logical statements presented in the given prompt. If we could
represent such logical statements by using predicate logic and integrate it into the diffusion model,
it might make the generated images more faithful to the statements. Motivated by this idea, we
introduce Predicated Diffusion in this paper. Herein, we represent the relationships between the
words in the prompt by propositions using predicate logic. By employing attention maps and fuzzy
logic (Hájek, 1998; Prokopowicz et al., 2017), we measure the degree to which the image under
generation fulfills the propositions, providing guidance for images to become more faithful to the
prompt. See the conceptual diagram in Fig. 2. The contribution of this paper is threefold.
Theoretical Justification and Generality: Most existing methods have been formulated based on
deep insights, which makes it unclear how to combine them effectively or how to apply them in
slightly different situations. In contrast, Predicated Diffusion can resolve a variety of challenges
based on the same foundational theory, allowing us to deductively expand it to address challenges
not summarized in Fig. 1.
High Fidelity to Prompt: The images generated by the proposed Predicated Diffusion and com-
parison method were examined by human evaluators and pretrained image-text models (Radford
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022). We confirmed that Predicated Diffusion generates images that are more
faithful to the prompts and is more likely prevent the issues shown in Fig. 1.
New Challenge and Solution: This paper introduces a new challenge, named possession failure,
which occurs when the generated image fails to correctly depict a prompt indicating a subject in
possession of an object. Thus, we broaden the horizons of the current research, which has mainly
focused on the presence or absence of objects and attributes, to encompass actions. The fact that
Predicated Diffusion can successfully address this new challenge is worthy of attention.


2      R ELATED W ORK

Conditional Image Generation A diffusion model was proposed as a parameterized Markov
chain (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020). Taking a given image x as the initial state
x0 , the forward process q(xt+1 |xt ) adds noise to the state xt repeatedly. The model learns the
reverse process p(xt−1 |xt ), reproducing the data distribution p(x) = p(x0 ). Intuitively speaking,
it repeatedly denoises images to be more realistic. The reverse process resembles a discretized


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     (1) Given a text prompt                                              (5) Run a diffusion model under guidance
        A white teddy bear with a green shirt and a smiling girl
     (2) Deduce statements
                                exist                                    𝑡 = 50
                               possess
                                                                                  modification possession   existence
        A white teddy bear with a green shirt and a smiling girl

               modify                modify             modify           𝑡 = 25
     (3) Represent them by propositions
          existence       modification (correspondence)
            ∃𝑥. 𝐺𝑖𝑟𝑙(𝑥)     ∀𝑥. 𝑊ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑒 𝑥 ↔ 𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑟(𝑥)
                ⋮                        ⋮                               𝑡=0
          possession
            ∀𝑥. 𝑆ℎ𝑖𝑟𝑡(𝑥) → 𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑟(𝑥)                                        (6) Get an image faithful to the prompt
     (4) Obtain loss functions on attention maps
        • ℒ ∃𝑥. 𝐺𝑖𝑟𝑙 𝑥 = −log 1−ς𝑖 1−𝐴𝐺𝑖𝑟𝑙 𝑖
        • ℒ ∀𝑥. 𝑊ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑒 𝑥 ↔ 𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑟(𝑥) = −σ𝑖 log 1−𝐴𝑊ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑒 𝑖 × 1−𝐴𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑖
                                       − σ𝑖 log 1−𝐴𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑖 × 1−𝐴𝑊ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑒 𝑖
        • ℒ ∀𝑥. 𝑆ℎ𝑖𝑟𝑡 𝑥 → 𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑟(𝑥) = −σ𝑖 log 1−𝐴𝑆ℎ𝑖𝑟𝑡 𝑖 × 1−𝐴𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑖
                                          ⋮
Figure 2: The conceptual diagram of the proposed Predicated Diffusion, composed of steps (1)–(6).


stochastic differential equation, akin to the Langevin dynamics, which ascends the gradient of the
log-probability, ∇ log p(x) (Song et al., 2021). With a separate classifier p(y|x) for class label y,
the diffusion model can reproduce the conditional probability p(x|y), by ascending the gradient of
the conditional log-probability, ∇ log p(x|y) = ∇ log p(y|x) + ∇ log p(x). Although grounded in
probability theory, what it practically offers is additional guidance ∇ log p(y|x) for updating im-
ages, which is generalized as classifier guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). The diffusion model
can learn the conditional probability p(x|c) directly. The condition c might be text, images, or other
annotations (Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022). The difference between conditional and
unconditional updates serves as classifier-free guidance, which can adjust the fidelity of the gener-
ated image to condition c (Ho & Salimans, 2021). Liu et al. (2022) proposed Composable Diffusion,
inspired by energy-based models (Du et al., 2020). It generates an image conditioned on two con-
cepts, c0 and c1 , by summing their respective conditional updates. It negates or removes a concept
cn from generated images by subtracting the update conditioned on cn , termed as a negative prompt.


Text-Based Image Generation by Cross-Attention Mechanism One of the leading models, Sta-
ble Diffusion, employs the cross-attention mechanism for conditioning (Vaswani et al., 2017). A
convolutional neural network (CNN), U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015), transforms the image x into
an intermediate representation. For text conditions, a text encoder, CLIP (Radford et al., 2021),
transforms text prompt y into a sequence of intermediate representations, each linked to a word c
within the prompt y. Given these representations, the cross-attention mechanism creates an attention
map Ac for each word c. Using these maps as weights, U-Net then updates the image x. Technically,
these processes target not the image x but the latent variable z extracted by a variational autoen-
coder (Kingma & Welling, 2014). Despite its sophistication, Stable Diffusion sometimes fails to
capture the intended meaning of the text prompt, as discussed in the Introduction.
The novelty of Stable Diffusion primarily lies in its structure, which is compatible with existing
guidances such as Composable Diffusion and has inspired new guidances. Structure Diffusion feeds
segmented text prompts to the text encoder to emphasize each clause (Feng et al., 2023). High pixel
intensity in the attention map Ac suggests the presence of a corresponding object or concept c at
that pixel. Hence, recent studies offer guidances based on the attention map, termed as attention
guidance. Attend-and-Excite enhances the intensity of at least one pixel in the attention map Ac to
ensure the existence of the corresponding object c (that is, address missing objects) (Chefer et al.,
2023). SynGen equalizes the intensity distributions for related nouns and adjectives, while differen-
tiating others, thus addressing attribute leakage (Rassin et al., 2023). While these methods are based
on deep insights, they lack comprehensive theoretical justification and generality.
Another branch of studies has proposed attention guidances using external annotations, such
as bounding boxes (Xie et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Mao & Wang, 2023) and segmentation
masks (Park et al., 2023). While effective in intentionally controlling image layout, these meth-
ods sometimes limit the diversity of the generated images.


                                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Propositions and Attention Map.        Table 2: Statements that Predicated Diffusion Can Ex-
                                                press.
    Proposition    Attention Map
    true           1                             Statements                  Example Prompts               Loss
    false          0
    P (x)          AP [i]                        Existence                   There is a dog                (1)
    ¬P (x)         1 − AP [i]                    Concurrent existence        There are a dog and a cat     (2)
    P (x)∧Q(x)     AP [i] × AQ [i]               Adjective                   A black dog                   (3)
    P (x)∨Q(y)     1−(1−AP [i])×(1−AQ [j])       One-to-one correspondence   A black dog and a white cat   (5)
    P (x) → Q(x)   1 − AP [i] × (1 − AQ [i])     Possession                  A man holding a bag           (6)
    ∀x. P (x)
                   Q                             Multi-color                 A green and grey bird         (A1)
                     iAQ P [i]
                                                 Negation                    without snow                  (A2)
    ∃x. P (x)      1 − i (1 − AP [i])



3      M ETHOD : P REDICATED D IFFUSION
Predicate Logic First-order predicate logic is a formal language for expressing knowledge (Gene-
sereth & Nilsson, 1987). Variables like x and y denote unspecified objects. Predicates like P and
Q indicate properties or relationships between objects. Using variables and predicates, we can ex-
press logical statements that define object properties. For example, the proposition P (x) represents
the statement that “x has property P .” If the predicate P indicates the property “being a dog,” the
proposition P (x) represents the statement that “x is a dog.” The existential quantifier, denoted by ∃,
declares the existence of objects satisfying a given property. Thus, the proposition ∃x. P (x) asserts
the existence of at least one object x that satisfies the predicate P , representing that “There is a dog.”

Predicate Logic in Attention Map and Resulting Gauidance Through predicate logic, we pro-
pose an attention-based guidance termed Predicated Diffusion. In a diffusion model for text-based
image generation, a cross-attention mechanism creates attention maps. Each map is linked to a word
in a text prompt and assigns weights to specific regions of the image. We denote the attention map
linked to the word P by AP . The value AP [i] ∈ [0, 1] refers to the intensity of the i-th pixel in AP .
We treat the intensity AP [i] as a continuous form of a proposition P (x). AP [i] = 1 indicates that
the proposition P (x) holds, whereas AP [i] = 0 implies that it does not. 1 − AP [i] indicates the
the negation of the proposition, ¬P (x). The correspondences are summarized in Table 1, which are
inspired by the strong conjugation, strong negation, and material implication of the product fuzzy
logic (Hájek, 1998; Prokopowicz et al., 2017).
Given another proposition Q(x), we consider the conjunction Q(x) ∧ P (x) to correspond to the
product AQ [i] × AP [i] in the attention maps. One can derive any logical operations using both
negation and conjunction. For example, because the disjunction Q(x) ∨ P (x) is equivalent to
¬(¬Q(x) ∧ ¬P (x)), it corresponds to 1 − (1 − AQ [i]) × (1 − AP [i]). The universal Q      quantifier
∀ asserts that a predicate holds for all object. Thus , ∀x. P (x) = ∧x P (x) corresponds to i AP [i].
Using this,Qthe existential proposition ∃x. P (x) can be re-expressed as ¬(∀x. ¬P (x)), correspond-
ing to 1 − i (1 − AP [i]).
For simplicity, we will treat italicized nouns and adjectives as predicates. Specifically, we will use
Dog(x) to represent “x is a dog” rather than P (x). A text
                                                        Q prompt “There is a dog” is represented by
the proposition ∃x. Dog(x). Then, we expect that 1 − i (1 − ADog [i]) = 1. To encourage this, we
consider its negative logarithm,
                                                        Q
                           L[∃x. Dog(x)] = − log(1 − i (1 − ADog [i])),                            (1)
and adopt it as the loss function, making the intensity of at least one pixel approach 1. This loss
function is inspired by the negative log-likelihood for Bernoulli random variables. Moving forward,
we will denote the loss function resulting from the proposition R by L[R]. We provide an overview
of prompts and their corresponding loss functions in Table 2.
The reverse process of a diffusion model, q(xt−1 |xt , c), is typically modeled as a Gaussian distri-
bution q(xt−1 |xt , c) = N (xt−1 |µθ (xt , t, c), Σθ (xt , t, c)). The parameters for this are determined
by neural networks µθ and Σθ which consider the current image xt , time t, and condition c. The
attention map AP serves as a component of these neural networks. We take the gradient of the loss
function with respect to the input image, ∇xt L[R], and subtract it from the mean of the reserve
process as q(xt−1 |xt , c) = N (xt−1 |µθ (xt , t, c) − ∇xt L[R], Σθ (xt , t, c)), which decreases the loss


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


function L[R] and guides the image toward fulfilling the proposition R. This modification of the
reverse process is referred to as guidance. In general, to encourage a proposition to hold, one can
convert it to an equation of the attention map intensity, take its negative logarithm, use it as a loss
function, and integrate it into the reverse process. A visual representation of this is found in Fig. 2.

Concurrent Existence by Logical Conjunction In practice, when text prompts include multiple
objects, one of the objects often disappears. Take, for instance, the prompt “There are a dog and a
cat.” This can be decomposed into two statements: “There is a dog” and “There is a cat.” Given that
a set of statements can be represented through the conjunction of propositions, the prompt can be
represented by the proposition (∃x. Dog(x)) ∧ (∃x. Cat(x)). The corresponding loss function is
               L[(∃x. Dog(x)) ∧ (∃x. Cat(x))] = L[∃x. Dog(x)] + L[∃x. Cat(x)].                       (2)
Minimizing this loss function encourages the concurrent existence of both a dog and a cat.

Adjective by Logical Implication We develop these ideas into logical implication. For a prompt
such as “There is a black dog,” it can be decomposed into: “There is a dog” and “The dog is
black.” The former statement has been previously discussed. The latter can be represented with the
proposition ∀x. Dog(x) → Black (x) = ∀x. ¬(Dog(x) ∧ ¬Black (x)). Thus, the loss function is
                                             P
             L[∀x. Dog(x) → Black (x)] = − i log(1 − ADog [i] × (1 − ABlack [i])).             (3)
To ensure the both statements, we can sum the loss functions (1) and (3).

One-to-One Correspondence As far as we have confirmed, the existing models rarely fail to
generate an object with a specified color. These models might struggle when handling prompts
with multiple adjectives and nouns; one of the specified objects may not be generated properly, one
of the specified adjectives may be ignored, or an adjective may modify a wrong noun. The first
two issues can be addressed using the loss functions (2) and (3). The last issue is often referred
to as attribute leakage. For example, given the prompt “a black dog and a white cat,” leakage
could lead to the generation of a white dog or a black cat. To prevent leakage, we must deduce
statements implicitly suggested by the original prompt. From the prompt, we can deduce not only
“The dog is black” but also “The black object is a dog.” The latter can be represented by the
proposition ∀x. Black (x) → Dog(x). When combined, these two statements can be represented
as a biimplication: ∀x. Dog(x) ↔ Black (x) = (∀x. Dog(x) → Black (x)) ∧ (∀x. Black (x) →
Dog(x)). This leads to the loss function
    L[∀x. Dog(x) ↔ Black (x)] = L[∀x. Dog(x) → Black (x)]+L[∀x. Black (x) → Dog(x)].                 (4)
Furthermore, we can deduce a negative statement, “The dog is not white,” represented by
∀x. Dog(x) → ¬White(x). Thus, the comprehensive loss function for the original statement is:
   Lone−to−one = L[∀x. Dog(x) ↔ Black (x)] + L[∀x. Cat(x) ↔ White(x)]
                                                                                                     (5)
                    + αL[∀x. Dog(x) → ¬White(x)] + αL[∀x. Cat(x) → ¬Black (x)],
where the hyperparameter α ∈ [0, 1] adjusts the weight of the implicitly negative statements. To
further ensure the existence of objects, the loss function (2) can also be applied.

Possession by Logical Implication We introduce another type of implication. Consider the text
prompt “a man holding a bag.” This implies that the bag forms part of the man. Such a relationship
can be represented by the proposition Bag(x) → Man(x), leading to the loss function
                                             P
              L[∀x. Bag(x) → Man(x)] = − i log(1 − ABag [i] × (1 − AMan [i])).                 (6)
Not limited to the word holding, other words indicating possession such as having, grasping, and
wearing can be represented by the logical implication.

Discussions and Potential Extensions Several studies have introduced loss functions or quality
measures for machine learning methods by drawing inspiration from fuzzy logic (Hu et al., 2016;
Diligenti et al., 2017; Mordido et al., 2021; Marra et al., 2023) (see also Giunchiglia et al. (2022) for
a survey). In this context, Predicated Diffusion is the first method to establish the correspondence
between the attention map and the predicates. The propositions and corresponding loss functions


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


can be adapted to a variety of scenarios, including, but not limited to, the concurrent existence of
more than two objects, a single object modified by multiple adjectives, the combination of one-to-
one correspondence and possession, and the negation of existence, modifications, and possessions,
as we will show in the following sections. Some previous studies extracted the structure of sentences
using syntactic parsers or obtained relationships between words from additional data such as scene
graphs (Feng et al., 2023). Such methods can be combined with Predicated Diffusion.
The (weak) conjugation of Gödel fuzzy logic and the product fuzzy logic is achieved by the
minimum operation (Hájek, 1998; Prokopowicz et al., 2017). If we employ this operation and
define the loss function by taking the negative instead of the negative logarithm, the proposi-
tion asserting the concurrent existence, (∃x. Dog(x)) ∧ (∃x. Cat(x)), leads to the loss function
max(1 − maxi ADog [i], 1 − maxi ACat [i]). This is equivalent to the one used for Attend-and-
Excite (Chefer et al., 2023). This comparison suggests that our approach considers Attend-and-
Excite as Gödel fuzzy logic, replaces the underlying logic with the product fuzzy logic, and broad-
ens the scope of target propositions. Similar to the loss function (5), SynGen equalizes the attention
map intensities for related nouns and adjectives (Rassin et al., 2023). SynGen additionally differen-
tiates those for all word pairs except for the adjective-noun pairs. In contrast, the loss function (5)
differentiates those for only specific pairs which could trigger attribute leakage based on inferred
propositions, thereby preventing the disruption of the harmony, as shown in the following section.

4        E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
Experimental Setting We implemented Predicated Diffusion by adapting the official implemen-
tation of Attend-and-Excite (Chefer et al., 2023)1 . The reverse process spans 50 steps; following
Attend-and-Excite and SynGen, we applied the guidance of Predicated Diffusion only to the initial
25 steps. See Appendix A.1 for more details. For comparative evaluation, we also prepared Com-
posable Diffusion (Liu et al., 2022), Structure Diffusion (Feng et al., 2023), and SynGen (Rassin
et al., 2023), in addition to Stable Diffusion and Attend-and-Excite. All models used the officially
pretrained Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022)2 as backbones.
We conducted four experiments for assessing each method’s performance. We provided each method
with the same prompt and random seed, and then generated a set of images. Human evaluators were
tasked with the visual assessment of these generated images. Instructions and evaluation criteria
provided to the evaluators are detailed in Appendix A.2.
      (i) Concurrent Existence: We prepared 400 random prompts, each mentioning “[Object A] and
          [Object B]”, and generated 400 sets of images. The evaluators identified cases of “missing
          objects,” where one or both of the specified two objects were not generated. Some cases in-
          volved an “object mixture”, where, although the two objects were generated, their boundaries
          were unclear. The evaluators tallied the cases of “missing objects” based on two criteria: a
          lenient criterion where “object mixture” was not counted as “missing objects”, and a strict
          criterion where it was. For Predicated Diffusion, we used the loss function (2).
     (ii) One-to-One Correspondence: Similarly, we prepared 400 random prompts, each mentioning
          “[Adjective A] [Object A] and [Adjective B] [Object B]”. In addition to identifying missing
          objects, the evaluators identified the cases where adjectives incorrectly altered unrelated ob-
          jects and tallied the number of such cases as “attribute leakage”. For Predicated Diffusion,
          we used the loss function (2)+(5) with α = 0.3.
    (iii) Possession: We prepared 10 prompts, each mentioning “[Subject A] is [Verb C]-ing [Object
          B]”. [Verb C] can be “have,” “hold,” “wear,” or the like. We generated 20 images for each
          of these prompts. In addition to identifying missing objects, the evaluators identified the
          cases where [Verb C] was not executed appropriately, and tallied the number of such cases as
          “possession failure”. For Predicated Diffusion, we used the loss function (2)+(6).
    (iv) Complicated: To demonstrate the generality of Predicated Diffusion, we prepared diverse
          prompts, some of which were taken from the ABC-6K dataset (Feng et al., 2023). Images
          were generated after manually extracting propositions and their respective loss functions.
          While a summary of generated images is presented, numerical evaluations were not under-
          taken due to the diversity of the prompts.
     1
         https://github.com/yuval-alaluf/Attend-and-Excite (MIT license)
     2
         https://github.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion (CreativeML Open RAIL-M)


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Table 3: Results of Experiments (i) and (ii)

                                                  Experiment (i)                                  Experiment (ii)
                                    Missing†                                     Missing†      Attribute
    Models                                         Fidelity    Similarity‡                                   Fidelity     Similarity‡
                                     Objects                                      Objects       Leakage
    Stable Diffusion                54.7 / 66.0      11.0      0.325 / 0.770     64.8 / 73.5     88.5          06.0      0.343 / 0.741
    Composable Diffusion            44.5 / 82.3      02.5      0.318 / 0.740     49.3 / 83.5     88.5          03.8      0.347 / 0.725
    Structure Diffusion             56.0 / 64.5      12.0      0.320 / 0.760     64.3 / 69.5     86.5          05.8      0.342 / 0.737
    Attend-and-Excite               25.3 / 36.3      29.5      0.337 / 0.814     28.0 / 35.8     64.5          19.3      0.367 / 0.781
    SynGen                              —             —             —            23.3 / 29.3     40.3          36.8      0.365 / 0.792
    Predicated Diffusion            18.5 / 28.5      30.3      0.340 / 0.837     10.0 / 16.5     33.0          44.8      0.375 / 0.808
    † Using the lenient and strict criterions. ‡ Text-image similarity and text-text similarity.


                      a crown and a rabbit                         a bird and a cat                        an apple and a lion
 Diffusion
  Stable
 Composable
  Diffusion
 Diffusion
 Structure
 Attend-and-
   Excite
 Predicated
 Diffusion


               Figure 3: Example results of Experiment (i) for concurrent existence. See also Fig. A2.
                   a yellow car and a blue bird               a green frog and a gray cat          a green balloon and a purple clock
 Diffusion
  Stable
 Composable
  Diffusion
 Diffusion
 Structure
 Attend-and-
   Excite
   SynGen
 Predicated
 Diffusion


  Figure 4: Example results of Experiment (ii) for one-to-one correspondence. See also Fig. A3.
                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Table 4: Results of Experiment (iii) for possession

                             Models                    Missing Objects†       Possession Failure     Fidelity
                             Stable Diffusion              31.5 / 36.0                 52.5             33.5
                             Attend-and-Excite             07.5 / 17.0                 51.5             27.5
                             Predicated Diffusion          04.0 / 07.0                 29.5             52.0
                             † Using the lenient and strict criterions.


                     a bear having an apple      a frog wearing a hat       a man holding a rabbit   a girl holding a suitcase
       Diffusion
        Stable
       Attend-and-
         Excite
       Predicated
       Diffusion


                Figure 5: Example results of Experiment (iii) for possession. See also Fig. A4.

The first two experiments were inspired by previous works: Feng et al. (2023); Chefer et al. (2023);
Rassin et al. (2023). In the first three experiments, the evaluators also assessed the fidelity of the
generated images to the prompts. To measure fidelity automatically, we evaluated the similarity
using the pretrained image-text encoder, CLIP, in two manners, following Chefer et al. (2023). We
provided both the prompts and the generated images with CLIP to extract their embedding vectors,
and then calculated their cosine similarity, referred to as text-image similarity. In addition, we fed
the generated images into the pretrained image-captioning model, BLIP, to obtain captions (Li et al.,
2022). Then, we provided both the prompts and the obtained captions with CLIP to extract their
embedding vectors, and then calculated their cosine similarity, referred to as text-text similarity.
The chosen objects, adjectives, and prompts can be found in Appendix A.3.

Results for Concurrent Existence and One-to-One Correspondence Table 3 summarizes the
results of the quantitative assessments from Experiments (i) and (ii). Values except for the similarity
are expressed in percentages. Higher scores are desirable for the fidelity and similarity, while lower
values are preferred for the remaining criteria. Predicated Diffusion notably outperforms other meth-
ods, as it achieved the best outcomes across all 11 criteria. Figures 3 and 4 show example images
for visual evaluation, where images in each column are generated using the same random seed. See
also Figs. A2 and A3 in Appendix. Stable Diffusion, Composable Diffusion, and Structure Diffu-
sion often exhibit missing objects and attribute leakage. The absent of objects is particularly evident
when prompts feature unusual object combinations like “a crown and a rabbit” and “a yellow car
and a blue bird.” When the prompts specify visually similar objects, such as “a bird and a cat,”
the two objects often get mixed together. While Attend-and-Excite effectively prevents the issue of
missing objects, it struggles with attribute leakage in Experiment (ii), due to its lack of a dedicated
mechanism to address this. While SynGen has achieved relatively good results, Predicated Diffusion
outperforms it by further preventing missing objects and attribute leakage and producing images that
are the most faithful to the prompt. Although this aspect was not explicitly part of the evaluation,
SynGen often generates multiple instances of small objects, such as birds and balloons.

Results for Possession Table 4 summarizes the results from Experiment (iii). Compared to the
vanilla Stable Diffusion, Attend-and-Excite succeeds in preventing missing objects, but on the con-
trary, fails to prevent the possession failure and loses fidelity to the prompt. Figures 5 and A4 show
visual samples of generated images. If [Subject A] is an animal, Attend-and-Excite succeeds more
frequently than Stable Diffusion in depicting both objects but often depicts [Object B] as discarded
on the ground or suspended in the air. If [Subject A] is a human, the vanilla Stable Diffusion often
produces satisfactory results. Then, Attend-and-Excite, however, tends to deteriorate the overall


                                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      A white teddy bear with a green shirt          A baby with green hair laying
                         A black bird with red beak             and a smiling girl              in a black blanket next to a teddy bear



    Diffusion
     Stable
    Diffusion
    Structure
      SynGen
    Predicated
    Diffusion
      Proposition


                     (∃x. Bird(x)) ∧ (∃x. Beak (x))   (∃x. Bear (x)) ∧ (∃x. Shirt(x))         (∃x. Baby(x)) ∧ (∃x. Hair (x))
                       ∧(∀x. Bird(x) ↔ Black (x))       ∧(∃x. Girl(x))                         ∧(∃x. Blanket(x))∧(∃x. Bear (x))
                       ∧(∀x. Beak (x) ↔ Red(x))         ∧(∀x. Bear (x) ↔ White(x))             ∧(∀x. Hair (x) ↔ Green(x))
                       ∧(∀x. Beak (x) → Bird(x))        ∧(∀x. Bear (x) ↔ Teddy(x))             ∧(∀x. Blanket(x) ↔ Black (x))
                                                        ∧(∀x. Shirt(x) ↔ Green(x))             ∧(∀x. Bear (x) ↔ Teddy(x))
                                                        ∧(∀x. Girl(x) ↔ Smiling(x))            ∧(∀x. Hair (x) → Baby(x))
                                                        ∧(∀x. Shirt(x) → Bear (x))

Figure 6: Example results of Experiment (iv) using prompts in ABC-6K. See also Figs. A5 and A6.


image quality. With the possession relationship, [Subject A] and [Object B] often overlap. Attend-
and-Excite makes both stand out competitively and potentially disrupts the overall harmony. In
contrast, the loss function (6) is designed to encourage overlap, and hence Predicated Diffusion
adeptly depicts subjects in possession of objects. See Section B in Appendix for an ablation study.

Qualitative Analysis on Complicated Prompts Figures 6, A5, and A6 show example results from
Experiment (iv) along with the propositions used for Predicated Diffusion. Both the vanilla Stable
Diffusion and Structure Diffusion plagued by missing objects and attribute leakage. Experiments
(i) and (ii) confirmed that SynGen often generates numerous small objects. Hence, when tasked
with generating “A black bird with a red beak,” it produced multiple red objects. When generating
“A white teddy bear with a green shirt and a smiling girl,” comparison methods other than Predi-
cated Diffusion often mistakenly identified the girl, not the teddy bear, as the owner of the green
shirt. In comparison to the vanilla Stable Diffusion, SynGen reduced the size of the teddy bear’s
shirt because it differentiates between the intensity distributions on the attention maps of different
objects. A similar tendency is evident in the third case in Fig. 6, where the adjective “green” often
modifies wrong objects, and the green hair is not placed on the baby’s head. Predicated Diffusion
performed well in these scenarios, which include the concurrent existence of more than two objects
with specified colors and possession relationships simultaneously. See Section B in Appendix for
further results and discussions, where we also examined the cases of multiple colors and negation.

5                   C ONCLUSION
This paper proposed Predicated Diffusion, where the intended meanings in a text prompt are rep-
resented by propositions using predicate logic, offering guidance for text-based image generation
by diffusion models. Experiments using Stable Diffusion as a backbone demonstrated that Predi-
cated Diffusion generates images that are more faithful to the prompt compared to other existing
methods and addresses challenges observed in diffusion models: missing objects, attribute leakage,
and possession failure. Moreover, due to the generality of predicate logic, Predicated Diffusion has
the ability to fulfill complicated prompts that include multiple objects, adjectives, and their rela-
tionships. Although predicates cannot represent all meanings present in natural languages, they can
handle most scenarios for adjusting the layout of generated images. In future work, we plan to ex-
plore the automatic extraction of propositions from prompts by syntactic parsers and explore 2-ary
predicates that assert the relationships, such as Above(x, y), which implies “x is above y.”


                                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Details on experimental settings can be found in the first subsection of Section 4. For further infor-
mation, refer to Section A in Appendix. The code and pretrained models on which our experiments
rely are noted in the footnotes. We also provide the experiment code as supplementary material.

R EFERENCES
Mohammadreza Armandpour, Ali Sadeghian, Huangjie Zheng, Amir Sadeghian, and Mingyuan
 Zhou. Re-imagine the Negative Prompt Algorithm: Transform 2D Diffusion into 3D, alleviate
 Janus problem and Beyond. arXiv, 2023.
Hila Chefer, Yuval Alaluf, Yael Vinker, Lior Wolf, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Attend-and-Excite:
  Attention-Based Semantic Guidance for Text-to-Image Diffusion Models. In ACM SIGGRAPH,
  2023.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Michelangelo Diligenti, Marco Gori, and Claudio Saccà. Semantic-based regularization for learning
 and inference. Artificial Intelligence, 244:143–165, 2017.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, and Igor Mordatch. Compositional visual generation with energy based mod-
  els. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Weixi Feng, Xuehai He, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Pradyumna Narayana, Sugato
 Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Training-Free Structured Diffusion Guidance for
 Compositional Text-to-Image Synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
 tions (ICLR), 2023.
Michael R. Genesereth and Nils J. Nilsson. Logical Foundations of Artificial Intelligence. Morgan
 Kaufmann, Los Altos, Calif, 1987.
Eleonora Giunchiglia, Mihaela Catalina Stoian, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. Deep Learning with Log-
  ical Constraints. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), volume 6,
  pp. 5478–5485, 2022.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative Adversarial Nets. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 2672–2680, 2014.
Petr Hájek. Metamathematics of Fuzzy Logic, volume 4 of Trends in Logic. Springer Netherlands,
  Dordrecht, 1998.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-Free Diffusion Guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 6840–6851, 2020.
Zhiting Hu, Xuezhe Ma, Zhengzhong Liu, Eduard Hovy, and Eric Xing. Harnessing Deep Neural
  Networks with Logic Rules. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (ACL), pp. 2410–2420, 2016.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Alexander Kolesnikov and Christoph H. Lampert. PixelCNN Models with Auxiliary Variables for
  Natural Image Modeling. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. BLIP: Bootstrapping Language-Image Pre-
  training for Unified Vision-Language Understanding and Generation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Compositional Visual
  Generation with Composable Diffusion Models. In European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), 2022.

Wan-Duo Kurt Ma, J. P. Lewis, W. Bastiaan Kleijn, and Thomas Leung. Directed Diffusion: Direct
 Control of Object Placement through Attention Guidance. arXiv, 2023.

Jiafeng Mao and Xueting Wang. Training-Free Location-Aware Text-to-Image Synthesis. arXiv,
   2023.

Giuseppe Marra, Francesco Giannini, Michelangelo Diligenti, Marco Maggini, and Marco Gori.
  T-Norms Driven Loss Functions for Machine Learning. Applied Intelligence, 2023.

Goncalo Mordido, Julian Niedermeier, and Christoph Meinel. Assessing Image and Text Generation
  with Topological Analysis and Fuzzy Logic. In IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of
  Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 2012–2021, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 2021. IEEE.

Dong Huk Park, Grace Luo, Clayton Toste, Samaneh Azadi, Xihui Liu, Maka Karalashvili, Anna
  Rohrbach, and Trevor Darrell. Shape-Guided Diffusion with Inside-Outside Attention. arXiv,
  2023.

Piotr Prokopowicz, Jacek Czerniak, Dariusz Mikołajewski, Łukasz Apiecionek, and Dominik Ślȩzak
  (eds.). Theory and Applications of Ordered Fuzzy Numbers, volume 356 of Studies in Fuzziness
  and Soft Computing. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017.

Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised Representation Learning with Deep
  Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations (ICLR), 2016.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-Shot Text-to-Image Generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical Text-
  Conditional Image Generation with CLIP Latents. arXiv, 2022.

Royi Rassin, Eran Hirsch, Daniel Glickman, Shauli Ravfogel, Yoav Goldberg, and Gal Chechik.
  Linguistic Binding in Diffusion Models: Enhancing Attribute Correspondence through Attention
  Map Alignment. arXiv, 2023.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomed-
  ical Image Segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention
  (MICCAI), pp. 234–241, 2015.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim Sal-
  imans, Jonathan Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic Text-to-Image Dif-
  fusion Models with Deep Language Understanding. arXiv, 2022.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-
  vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), volume 3, pp. 2246–2255, 2015.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and
  Ben Poole. Score-Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differential Equations. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Aäron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural networks.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 4, pp. 2611–2620, 2016.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.
Zijie J. Wang, Evan Montoya, David Munechika, Haoyang Yang, Benjamin Hoover, and
  Duen Horng Chau. DiffusionDB: A Large-scale Prompt Gallery Dataset for Text-to-Image Gen-
  erative Models. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp.
  893–911, 2023.
Jinheng Xie, Yuexiang Li, Yawen Huang, Haozhe Liu, Wentian Zhang, Yefeng Zheng, and
   Mike Zheng Shou. BoxDiff: Text-to-Image Synthesis with Training-Free Box-Constrained Dif-
   fusion. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     D ETAILED E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING

A.1    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We confirmed that Predicated Diffusion that directly employed the loss functions in Section 3
worked well. Nonetheless, to further improve the quality of generated images, we implemented
several modifications.
The loss functions are defined using either the summation or product over pixels i, which increase or
decrease unboundedly as the image is scaled. To make these loss functions more suitable for neural
networks and to prevent excessively large values, we replaced the summation with the arithmetic
mean. Additionally, we replaced the finite product in (1) with the geometric mean.
Attention maps are often obtained by performing a softmax operation in the channel direction on
the feature maps of a CNN, where each channel is linked to a single word or token. For calculating
the loss function (1) for existence, we excluded the start-of-text token. Because this token is linked
to the entire text, its omission ensures capturing the response to each individual word, consistent
with the implementation of Attend-and-Excite. For calculating the loss functions (3), (5), and (6)
using (bi)implication, we normalized the intensity of each attention map to a range of 0-1 using the
maximum and minimum values. This allows us to focus on the relative positions, rather than the
absolute intensity (that is, existence).
Drawing inspiration from Attend-and-Excite (Chefer et al., 2023), we performed the iterative refine-
ment at t = T . Specifically, before executing the very first step of the reverse process, we alternated
between the reverse process and the forward process four times each. Note that Attend-and-Excite
performs the iterative refinement at the 10th and 20th steps until the value of the loss function falls
below a certain threshold. However, we found that the very first step is crucial for modifying the
layout of the generated image; therefore, we adjusted our approach as described above.

A.2    I NSTRUCTIONS TO E VALUATORS

Eight evaluators joined the experiments. They are university students aged between 19 and 21,
with no background in machine learning or computer vision. The experiments were conducted in a
double-blind manner: the images were presented in a random order, and the evaluators and authors
were unaware of which image was generated by which model.

Experiment (i): Concurrent Existence We prepared 400 random prompts, each mentioning
“[Object A] and [Object B]” with indefinite articles as needed, and generated 400 sets of images.

      (a) By showing one image at a time at random, we asked, “Are both specified objects generated
          in the image?” The evaluators answered this question with one of the following options:
           1) “No object is generated.”
           2) “Only one of two objects is generated.”
           3) “Two objects are generated, but they are mixed together to form one object.”
           4) “Two objects are generated.”
          Responses 1) and 2) were categorized as “missing objects”, and response 3) was catego-
          rized as “object mixture”. We tallied the number of responses 1) and 2) under the lenient
          criterion and that of responses 1)–3) under the strict criterion.
      (b) By showing a set of images generated with different models, we asked, “Which image
          is the most faithful to the prompt?” The evaluators were instructed to select only one
          image in principle, but were allowed to select more than one image if their fidelities were
          competitive, or not to select any image if none were faithful.

Experiment (ii): One-to-One Correspondence We prepared 400 random prompts, each men-
tioning “[Adjective A] [Object A] and [Adjective B] [Object B]” with indefinite articles as needed.

      (a) The same as above.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Table A1: Candidate Words for Generating Prompts in Experiments (i) and (ii)

                                        cat, dog, bird, bear, lion, horse,
                                        elephant, monkey, frog, turtle, rabbit,
                          Object
                                        glasses, crown, suitcase, chair, balloon,
                                        bow, car, bowl, bench, clock, apple
                                        red, yellow, green, blue, purple, pink,
                          Adjective
                                        brown, gray, black, white

                 Table A2: Prompts for Experiment (iii) and Results for Each Prompt

          [Subject A]    [Verb C]-ing      [Object B]      Models                 ∗1   ∗2   ∗3   ∗4
                                                           Stable Diffusion       12   12   15        5
          rabbit         having            phone           Attend-and-Excite       2    2   12        5
                                                           Predicated Diffusion    1    1   10        9
                                                           Stable Diffusion        2    2    5    10
          bear           having            apple           Attend-and-Excite       0    1   10     1
                                                           Predicated Diffusion    0    1    5    10
                                                           Stable Diffusion       12   12   12     2
          monkey         having            bag             Attend-and-Excite       3    6    6     6
                                                           Predicated Diffusion    0    1    1    12
                                                           Stable Diffusion       13   16   19        1
          panda          having            suitcase        Attend-and-Excite       1    7   11        3
                                                           Predicated Diffusion    1    2    8        7
                                                           Stable Diffusion       12   12   12     8
          lion           wearing           crown           Attend-and-Excite       0    0    0    20
                                                           Predicated Diffusion    0    0    0    20
                                                           Stable Diffusion        9   10   10     3
          frog           wearing           hat             Attend-and-Excite       2    2    5     7
                                                           Predicated Diffusion    1    1    4    11
                                                           Stable Diffusion        0    0    2    12
          man            holding           rabbit          Attend-and-Excite       3    4   12     4
                                                           Predicated Diffusion    4    5    6     7
                                                           Stable Diffusion        1    4    5    12
          woman          holding           dog             Attend-and-Excite       3    8   16     2
                                                           Predicated Diffusion    1    3    3    10
                                                           Stable Diffusion        1    1   16        4
          boy            grasping          soccerball      Attend-and-Excite       1    3   18        2
                                                           Predicated Diffusion    0    0   14        6
                                                           Stable Diffusion        1    3    9    10
          girl           holding           suitcase        Attend-and-Excite       0    1   13     5
                                                           Predicated Diffusion    0    0    8    12
           ∗1 Missing objects in the lenient criterion, ∗2 Missing objects in the strict criterion,
                                    ∗3 Possession failure, ∗4 Fidelity.


    (c) At the same time as question (a), we asked, “Does each adjective exclusively modify the
        intended object?” The evaluators answered this question with a “Yes” or “No”, and the
        response “No” was categorized as “attribute leakage”. If one or both of the two specified
        objects were not generated, that is, the response to question (a) was not 4), then question
        (c) became irrelevant, thereby automatically marking “No” as the response.
    (b) The same as above.

Experiment (iii): Possession We prepared 10 prompts, each mentioning “[Subject A] is [Verb
C]-ing [Object B]” with indefinite articles as needed. We generated 20 images for each of these
prompts.

    (a) The same as above.
    (d) At the same time as question (a), we asked, “Is the [Subject A] performing [Verb C] with
        the [Object B]?” The evaluators answered this question with a “Yes” or “No”, and the


                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            𝑡 = 50


            𝑡 = 25



            𝑡=0


                             Stable Diffusion                     Predicated Diffusion
                                                                      (proposed)
Figure A1: An example visualization of attention maps during the generation. The text prompt was
“A white teddy bear with a green shirt and a smiling girl.”


         response “No” was categorized as “possession failure.” If the response to question (a) was
         not 4), the response to question (d) was automatically assigned “No”.
      (b) The same as above.

A.3    P ROMPTS

For Experiments (i) and (ii), we randomly selected objects and adjectives from Table A1, roughly
following the experiments conducted by Chefer et al. (2023). However, we excluded “mouse” and
“backpack” from the list of objects, and “orange” from the list of adjectives. The term “mouse” often
led to ambiguity, as it could refer to either the animal or a computer peripheral. The term “orange”
also created confusion in all models, as it could indicate either the color or the fruit. Furthermore, it
is challenging to distinguish “backpack” visually from other types of bags. To ensure the accuracy
of the evaluation, we removed these terms from the lists.
We used prompts in Table A2 for Experiment (iii).

B     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
Visualization of Attention Maps We visualized the attention maps linked to the words of interest
in a given prompt in Fig. A1. The attention map is obtained by applying a softmax operation along
the token (word) axis of the feature map of the CNN. Consequently, at most, one attention map
can respond strongly at a specific pixel location. At the start of the reverse process (t = 50), each
attention map responded to the image x to some extent. As depicted in the left half of Fig. A1, the
vanilla Stable Diffusion largely maintained the intensity distributions of the attention maps until the
end of the reverse process, t = 0. This implies that the layout of the generated image is largely
influenced by random initialization, which may not accurately capture the intended meaning of the
prompt. The attention map for “bear” dominates the entire space at t = 50 and leaves no room for
the attention map for “girl” to respond, resulting in the failure to generate a girl in the image. In
contrast, given the proposition ∃x. Girl (x), Predicated Diffusion encourages the attention map for
“girl” to respond, even if it means dampening the response of the attention map for “bear”, thereby
ensuring the presence of a girl.

Detailed Results of Experiment (iii) For reference, we summarize the actual numbers out of 20
responses for each prompt in the right half of Table A2. The successful rate varies greatly depending
on the prompt, but the proposed method, Predicated Diffusion, shows the best results in almost all
combinations of criteria and prompts. The sole exception is the prompt “A man holding a rabbit,”


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      a frog and a chair             a bear and a dog               a bowl and a bench



Diffusion
 Stable
Composable
 Diffusion
Diffusion
Structure
Attend-and-
  Excite
Predicated
Diffusion


              Figure A2: Additional results of Experiment (i) for concurrent existence. See also Fig. 3.

                 a black chair and a blue bow   a black cat and a pink crown   a blue turtle and a white bear
Diffusion
 Stable
Composable
 Diffusion
Diffusion
Structure
Attend-and-
  Excite
  SynGen
Predicated
Diffusion


    Figure A3: Additional results of Experiment (ii) for one-to-one correspondence. See also Fig. 4.


where Stable Diffusion already produced satisfactory results but Predicated Diffusion deteriorated
the scores. When the backbone, Stable Diffusion, can generate images faithful to the prompt, the
additional guidance might disturb the generation process.

Additional Visualizations and Discussion We summarize the additional visual examples of Ex-
periments (i)–(iv) in Figs. A2–A6. While a quantitative comparison is difficult, when Stable Dif-
fusion produces satisfactory results, Predicated Diffusion often retains the original layout. This is
because, as long as logical operations like implications are satisfied, Predicated Diffusion does not
trigger any further changes.


                                                            16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     a rabbit having a phone   a monkey having a bag   a woman holding a dog   a boy grasping a soccerball


       Diffusion
        Stable
       Attend-and-
         Excite
       Predicated
       Diffusion


Figure A4: Additional results of Experiment (iii) for possession. See also Fig. 5 in the main body.


Multi-color by Logical Disjunction Consider cases where multiple colors are specified for a
single object. For instance, the prompt “a green and grey bird” implies that every part of the
bird is either green or grey, not both. This statement can be represented using the disjunction as
∀x. Bird (x) → Green(x) ∨ Grey(x). The corresponding loss function is:
                                              P
L[∀x. Bird (x) → Green(x)∨Grey(x)] = − i log(1−ABird [i]×(1−AGreen [i])×(1−AGrey [i])).
                                                                                              (A1)
When another object is introduced, one can replace the implication with a biimplication, as is the
case with one-to-one correspondence.
The right six columns of Fig. A5 show example results. SynGen produced birds with a mixed hue
because it was designed to equalize the intensity distributions (that is, the regions) of both specified
colors and that of the bird. Conversely, Predicated Diffusion, based on predicate logic, can generate
birds in the given combination of colors.
Note that, when multiple adjectives modify the same noun independently, they can be represented
using the logical conjunction rather than the logical disjunction. For instance, the prompt “long,
black hair” can be decomposed into two statements that can hold simultaneously: “The hair is long”
and “The hair is black.”. Then, the prompt is represented by the conjunction of two propositions that
represent these statements.

Negation by Logical Negation In the right three columns of Fig. A6, we explored the negation of
a concept. Sometimes, we might wish for certain concepts to be absent or negated in the generated
images. If given a prompt “a polar bear”, the output will typically be an image of a polar bear
depicted with snowy landscapes because of their high co-occurrence rate in the dataset. One can
give the prompt “a polar bear without snow”, but Stable Diffusion often struggles to remove the
snow, as depicted in the top row. Alternatively, we could provide a negative prompt “snow”, as
proposed as part of Composable Diffusion (Liu et al., 2022). We also examined Perp-Neg, which
ensures a negative prompt not to interfere with a regular prompt by projecting the former’s update
to be orthogonal to the latter’s update (Armandpour et al., 2023); it often failed to remove the snow.
We consider an alternative way using predicate logic. The absence of snow is represented by the
proposition ¬(∃x. Snow (x)) = ∀x. ¬Snow (x), leading the loss function
                                                   P
                          L[¬(∃x. Snow (x))] = − i log(1 − ĀSnow [i]),                           (A2)
where Āc represents the attention map corresponding to a word c in an auxiliary prompt like a
negative prompt. This approach did not show any clear advantages compared to the negative prompt
but at least demonstrated the generality of Predicated Diffusion.

Ablation Study for Implication In Section 3, we used implications to represent the modification
by adjectives and the possession of objects as ∀x. Noun(x) → Adjective(x) and ∀x. Object(x) →
Subject(x), respectively. In this section, we explored the effects of reversing the direction of these
implications as an ablation study.
Figure A7 summarizes the results for modification. In the first row, a noun implicates an adjective,
indicating that the object represented by the noun is uniformly colored by the hue represented by


                                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Woman wearing a black coat          A green and grey bird in tree          a yellow vase with a blue and white bird
                                    holding up a red cellphone              with white leaves



         Diffusion
          Stable
         Diffusion
         Structure
                SynGen
         Predicated
         Diffusion
                Proposition


                              (∃x. Woman(x)) ∧ (∃x. Coat(x))     (∃x. Bird(x)) ∧ (∃x. Tree(x))           (∃x. Vase(x)) ∧ (∃x. Bird(x))
                                ∧(∃x. Cellphone(x))                ∧(∃x. Leaves(x))                        ∧(∀x. Vase(x) ↔ Yellow (x))
                                ∧(∀x. Coat(x) ↔ Black (x))         ∧(∀x. Bird ↔                            ∧(∀x. Bird ↔
                                ∧(∀x. Cellphone(x) ↔ Red(x))               (Grey(x) ∨ Green(x)))                  (Blue(x) ∨ White(x)))
                                ∧(∀x. Coat(x) → Woman(x))          ∧(∀x. Leaves(x) ↔ White(x))
                                ∧(∀x. Cellphone(x) →
                                               Woman(x))

Figure A5: Example results of Experiment (iv) using prompts in ABC-6K. See also Figs. 6 and A6.

                                 A purple bowl and a blue car          A brown dog and a boy
                                                                                                                        A polar bear (without snow)
                                       and a green sofa                holding a blue suitcase
Diffusion


                                                                                                       Diffusion
 Stable


                                                                                                        Stable
                                                                                                       Composable
Diffusion


                                                                                                        Diffusion
Structure


                                                                                                         Perp-Neg
  SynGen
Predicated


                                                                                                       Predicated
Diffusion


                                                                                                       Diffusion
  Proposition


                     (∃x. Bowl(x)) ∧ (∃x. Car (x))               (∃x. Dog(x)) ∧ (∃x. Boy(x))                        (∃x. Bear(x)) ∧ ¬(∃x. Snow(x))
                       ∧(∃x. Sofa(x))                              ∧(∃x. Suitcase(x))
                       ∧(∀x. Bowl(x) ↔ Purple(x))                  ∧(∀x. Dog(x) ↔ Brown(x))
                       ∧(∀x. Car (x) ↔ Blue(x))                    ∧(∀x. Suitcase(x) ↔ Blue(x))
                       ∧(∀x. Sofa(x) ↔ Green(x))                   ∧(∀x. Suitcase(x) → Boy(x))
                       ∧(∀x. Bowl(x) → ¬Blue(x))
                       ∧(∀x. Bowl(x) → ¬Green(x))
                       ∧(∀x. Car (x) → ¬Purple(x))
                       ∧(∀x. Car (x) → ¬Green(x))
                       ∧(∀x. Sofa(x) → ¬Blue(x))
                       ∧(∀x. Sofa(x) → ¬Purple(x))

Figure A6: Example results of Experiment (iv) using our original prompts. See also Figs. 6 and A5.



the adjective. This allows other objects, such as the background, to share the same color. Con-
versely, when an adjective implicates a noun, the area colored by the adjective becomes a subset
of that of the object, suggesting partial coloring of the object, as shown in the second row. With
a biimplication, the color and object regions perfectly overlap. Therefore, biimplication is prefer-
able to avoid attribute leakage, though implication may be useful depending on the context. A clear
correspondence can be found between the semantics of propositions and the generated results.


                                                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                A blue elephant                  A green dog


                 Adjective
                 Noun→
                 Adjective
                 Noun←
                 Adjective
                 Noun↔


                   Figure A7: Ablation study for the adjective by the implication.

                             A monkey having a bag         A panda having a suitcase
                 Object→
                  Subject
                 Object←
                  Subject
                 Object↔
                  Subject


                  Figure A8: Ablation study for the possession by the implication.


Figure A8 summarizes the results for possession. In the first row, a grammatical object implicates
a grammatical subject, and the results show the subject in possession of the object. Conversely,
the second row shows that when the subject implicates the object, the subject becomes part of the
object. For example, instead of “A monkey having a bag,” the situation resembles “A bag envelops
a monkey.” Similarly, instead of “A panda having a suitcase,” the scene is more like “A panda
serves as a pattern on the suitcase.” In cases of biimplication, the subject and object are often mixed
together to form one object. Thus, implicating the subject by the object most accurately represents
the subject in possession of the object.


                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C   F OR AUTHOR R ESPONSE

                              A lion and a dog                                            A horse and a rabbit


    Dogs are often missing.                                          Rabbits are missing or mixed with horses.


                       A blue frog and a green dog                                    A red bird and a yellow bowl


    Dogs are missing or mixed with frogs. Frogs are sometimes        Attributes leak in both directions.
    painted green.


                       A boy grasping a soccerball                                     A panda having a suitcase


    Soccer balls are never grasped.                                  Pandas tend not to have suitcases but to stay in them.

                Figure A9: Example results of Stable Diffusion XL for author response.


                                                                20
