Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ETA -VBO: U TILIZING P RIOR TASKS IN O PTIMIZING
R ISK M EASURES WITH G AUSSIAN P ROCESSES
 Quoc Phong Nguyen1 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low2 & Patrick Jaillet1
 1
   LIDS and EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
 2
   School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
 qphongmp@gmail.com, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg, jaillet@mit.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         Research on optimizing the risk measure of a blackbox function using Gaussian
         processes, especially Bayesian optimization (BO) of risk measures, has become
         increasingly important due to the inevitable presence of uncontrollable variables
         in real-world applications. Nevertheless, existing works on BO of risk measures
         start the optimization from scratch for every new task without considering the
         results of prior tasks. In contrast, its vanilla BO counterpart has received a thorough
         investigation on utilizing prior tasks to speed up the current task through the body of
         works on meta-BO which, however, have not considered risk measures. To bridge
         this gap, this paper presents the first algorithm for meta-BO of risk measures (i.e.,
         value-at-risk (VaR) and the conditional VaR), namely meta-VBO, by introducing a
         novel adjustment to the upper confidence bound acquisition function. Our proposed
         algorithm exhibits two desirable properties: (i) invariance to scaling and vertical
         shifting of the blackbox function and (ii) robustness to prior harmful tasks. We
         provide a theoretical performance guarantee for our algorithm and empirically
         demonstrate its performance using several synthetic function benchmarks and
         real-world objective functions.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Real world optimization problems, such as maximizing the performance of a manufacturing line,
the crop yield of a farm, and the performance of machine learning (ML) models, often face with
the challenge of dealing with blackbox objective functions (i.e., without closed-form expressions,
convexity, or derivatives) and time-consuming or expensive noisy zeroth-order evaluations (Snoek
et al., 2012; Nguyen et al., 2021b). These issues have attracted significant attention, particularly on
the Bayesian optimization (BO) framework (Srinivas et al., 2010; Snoek et al., 2012; Shahriari et al.,
2015; Hernández-Lobato et al., 2014; Wang and Jegelka, 2017; Garnett, 2022). Recently, there has
been an increasing interest in BO of risk measures, driven by the need to address practical aspects
related to uncontrollable variables referred to as environmental random variables (Cakmak et al.,
2020), e.g., random errors in sensors of the manufacturing line, weather conditions in farms (Nguyen
et al., 2021b;a), and random perturbation in training data of ML models (Bogunovic et al., 2018). BO
of risk measure algorithms specifically search for the controllable decision variables (e.g., applied
torque, input force, nutrient amounts, and ML model hyperparameters) that optimize a risk measure
of the blackbox function where the risk is induced by the environmental random variables. Risk
measures investigated in existing works include the worst-case value (Bogunovic et al., 2018), value-
at-risk (VaR) and conditional VaR (CVaR) (Cakmak et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2021b;a; Picheny
et al., 2022), probability threshold robustness (Iwazaki et al., 2021a), and the variance (Iwazaki et al.,
2021b; Makarova et al., 2021).
While there is an extensive research on BO of risk measures, using learning experiences from
prior tasks to accelerate the optimization of the current task has not been explored. In contrast,
this approach has been shown to effectively reduce the number of costly observations required by
the vanilla BO counterpart through numerous works on meta-BO. These works encompass a wide
spectrum of methodologies, ranging from those that involve the transfer of the probabilistic models
from prior tasks to the current one (Swersky et al., 2013), to more nuanced approaches centered on
transferring the optimization result (Feurer et al., 2018; Wistuba et al., 2016; 2018; Perrone et al.,


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2019; Ramachandran et al., 2019; Volpp et al., 2020; Dai et al., 2022). Although the former category,
such as the multi-task Gaussian processes (GP) (Swersky et al., 2013), is well-defined, it often suffers
from computational challenges as discussed by Dai et al. (2022) and is not specifically tailored to
the goal of optimization - the blackbox function’s maximizer. In contrast, the latter category, which
attracts the majority of research attention, presents greater challenges and lacks a clearly defined
framework. For example, Feurer et al. (2018) transfers the ranking of function evaluations. Perrone
et al. (2019) narrows down the search space. Ramachandran et al. (2019) considers the distribution of
the optima. Dai et al. (2022) considers a weighted average of the acquisition functions.
In this paper, we focus on the challenge of transferring the optimization outcome. Specifically,
we pioneer the first solution to the meta-BO of risk measure problem, namely meta-VBO. Our
work accounts for the risk introduced by the environmental random variables - a crucial aspect not
addressed in any existing meta-BO works. We focus on two well-known risk measures: value-at-
risk (VaR) and conditional VaR (CVaR) (Cakmak et al., 2020; Torossian et al., 2020). Moreover,
our solution also extends to the adversarially robust BO (Bogunovic et al., 2018) and applies to
the meta-BO problem. We assume that the distribution of the environmental random variables is
given, e.g., by estimating from historical data or domain knowledge. Additionally, we assume that
during the optimization, noisy evaluations of the blackbox function can be acquired (queried) at any
realizations of the environmental random variables. In the above examples, this can be achieved
running simulations of manufacturing lines with controlled random errors or growing indoor plants in
a laboratory environment where weather conditions are regulated. After the optimization is completed,
we recommend implementing the best decision variable in the real-world environment where the
environmental random variables are beyond our control. 1 These assumptions are commonly made in
several BO works with risk measures (Cakmak et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2021b;a).
Under the above settings, there are several major challenges in addressing meta-BO of risk measures.
First, the choice of the information to be transferred from prior tasks to the current task should be
tailored to the optimization goal of determining the optima’s locations. Since they are invariant under
scaling and vertical-shifting (i.e., increasing or decreasing the function by a constant) of the blackbox
function, it is crucial to ensure that the proposed meta-BO of risk measure solution maintains this
invariance. Hence, it rules out the use of the function gap (i.e., the maximum difference between
function evaluations) in the theoretical study of Dai et al. (2022) as a similarity measure between
tasks. Second, as the number of prior tasks grows, the possibility of encountering a task that hampers
the current optimization task arises (Feurer et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2022). Thus, it is essential to be
resilient against such prior harmful tasks.
Moreover, one cannot easily extend existing meta-BO solutions to address the BO problem with
risk measures. While the posterior belief of the blackbox function follows a GP in the vanilla BO,
many risk measures including VaR and CVaR do not follow any well-known stochastic process.
Hence, it is challenging to adopt approaches based on the Gaussian posterior distribution in the
works of Ramachandran et al. (2019) and Dai et al. (2022). Furthermore, risk measures are not
directly observed. They are only estimated from noisy evaluations of the blackbox function. As
a result, although Feurer et al. (2018) is able to discover and assign low weights to prior harmful
tasks by proposing a ranking loss function, extending this loss function to tackle risk measures is not
immediately obvious. Last, there are not any existing meta-BO works that possess both theoretical
performance guarantees and robustness against scaling and vertical-shifting of the blackbox function
and prior harmful tasks.
To address the above problems, we introduce a new perspective in constructing our solution, namely
meta-VBO. Specifically, while the classic Gaussian process - upper confidence bound (GP-UCB)
algorithm (Srinivas et al., 2010) offers only one option of the input query at each BO iteration, we
pursue a different approach of construcing a versatile query set (V-set) in Sec. 3.1. Interestingly, we
can obtain a no-regret algorithm by selecting any input in this set as the input query (Theorem 3.2).
To the best of our knowledge, this characteristic has not been introduced in any BO algorithm. On one
hand, it implies that by restricting the choice of the input query to V-set, the algorithm is no-regret
regardless of prior harmful tasks. On the other hand, the flexibility in choosing the input query from
a set (as opposed to one option in GP-UCB) allows us to transfer information from prior tasks to the
current task by assigning different preferences/priorities to inputs in V-set (Sec. 3.2). Essentially,
inputs that are likely to be local (or global) maximizers of many prior tasks are assigned high priorities.
   1
       The notion of the best decision variable is discussed in Sec. 3.3.


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The size of V-set can be tuned via two hyperparameters, which allows a trade-off between the amount
of information to be incorporated from prior tasks and the cumulative regret bound of the current ask.
This reflects the intuition that without knowing the similarity between prior tasks and the current task,
utilizing more information from prior tasks may not benefit the current task. We justify the selected
hyperparameters in the experiments based on the incurred regret. Furthermore, V-set is adaptively
updated as observations are accumulated from one iteration to the next. This naturally adjusts the
effect of prior tasks on the current task as discussed in Remark 3.4, ensuring meta-VBO’s robustness
to prior harmful tasks. In Sec. 3.3, we propose a strategy to recommend an input that approximates
the optimal solution at each iteration such that its instantaneous regret diminishes towards zero as the
iteration progresses (Theorem 3.7). Last, we empirically evaluate the performance of meta-VBO in
optimizing VaR and CVaR of several synthetic and real-world objective functions in Sec. 4.

2     P RELIMINARY
2.1   BO OF R ISK M EASURES

We are interested in maximizing a blackbox objective function f (e.g., the performance of a system)
that depends on both the decision variable x ∈ X and the environmental variable z ∈ Z, where X
                                            ′
and Z are bounded subsets of Rd and Rd , respectively. We assume that X and Z are discrete
for simplicity, though the results can be extended to continuous domains (Srinivas et al., 2010;
Chowdhury and Gopalan, 2017). Furthermore, in the real-world environment, x is controllable
while z (e.g., weather conditions and random errors) is not. Hence, the environmental variable is
represented as a random variable, denoted as Z. We assume that the distribution of Z is known, e.g.,
by estimating from historical data or domain knowledge. These settings are adopted from the existing
works of Cakmak et al. (2020); Nguyen et al. (2021b;a).
Due to the randomness in Z, evaluating the blackbox function at a particular value of x can result in
a high value under one realization of Z but leading to a low value under another realization of Z. In
other words, the evaluation of f at x is a random variable, denoted as f (x, Z), whose randomness is
induced by Z. Therefore, to determine the “optimal” design variable x∗ , one cannot directly compare
the function evaluations at different values of x. An alternative approach is to consider a risk measure
of the distribution of f (x, Z) which accounts for the probability (or the risk) that f (x, Z) suffers
from poor realizations. In this paper, we examine two risk measures for f (x, Z): value-at-risk (VaR),
denoted as vf (x; α), and conditional VaR (CVaR), denoted as cf (x; α). Here, α ∈ (0, 1) represents
a known risk level. VaR and CVaR are defined as follows:
                                                                          1 α
                                                                             Z
       vf (x; α) ≜ inf{γ : P (f (x, Z) ≤ γ) ≥ α}              cf (x; α) ≜         vf (x; α′ ) dα′ .  (1)
                                                                          α 0
While vf (x; α) can be viewed as 100α%-percentile of f (x, Z) (i.e., the event that f (x, Z) suffers
from realizations lower than vf (x; α) happens with a probability of at most α), cf (x; α) is the
expected value of f (x, Z) in the worst 100α% of cases. To avoid unnecessary repetition, we unify
the notations of both VaR and CVaR as ρf (x; α). The notations vf (x; α) and cf (x; α) are only used
when VaR and CVaR require distinct treatments.
Given the risk measure ρf (x; α) and the distribution of Z, the BO of risk measure problem
aims to search for the maximizer x∗ ≜ arg maxx∈X ρf (x; α) (Cakmak et al., 2020). Since f
is unknown, determining this maximizer typically involves iteratively observing noisy evalua-
tions y(xt , zt ) ≜ f (xt , zt ) + ϵ(xt , zt ) for iteration t ≥ 1 where ϵ(xt , zt ) ∼ N (0, σn2 ) are i.i.d. Gaus-
sian noises.2 Furthermore, it is often expensive to obtain these evaluations (e.g., requiring running
expensive simulations). Thus, the crux of the problem lies in devising a selection strategy of the
input query (xt , zt ) at iteration t, considering observations in the previous t − 1 iterations, denoted
as yDt ≜ (y(xt′ , zt′ ))t−1                                   t−1
                          t′ =1 where Dt ≜ ((xt′ , zt′ ))t′ =1 , to quickly discover x∗ .

We model f with a Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006). Specifically, we
use a constant GP prior mean function µ0 and a squared exponential kernel k(x,z),(x′ ,z′ ) ≜
cov[f (x, z), f (x′ , z′ )] = σs2 exp(−0.5(x−x′ )⊤ Λ−2    ′         ′ ⊤ −2    ′
                                                    x (x−x )−0.5(z−z ) Λz (z−z )) where Λx ≜
    2
      We adopt the settings outlined in previous works of Cakmak et al. (2020); Nguyen et al. (2021a) such that z
is controllable during the optimization (discussed in Sec. 1).


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


diag(l1 , . . . , ld ), Λz ≜ diag(ld+1 , . . . , ld+d′ ), and σs2 are the lengthscales and the signal variance,
respectively. Given yDt , the posterior belief of f (x, z) is a Gaussian distribution with the following
mean and variance
 µt (x, z) ≜ µ0 + K(x,z),Dt ΛDt (yDt − µ0 )         σt2 (x, z) ≜ k(x,z) − K(x,z),Dt ΛDt KDt ,(x,z)
                              −1
where ΛDt ≜ KDt ,Dt + σn2 I      , K is the covariance matrix, and I is the identity matrix.
The performance of a BO algorithm is often analyzed through the cumulative regret, denoted
          PT
as RT ≜ t=1 r(xt ) where r(xt ) ≜ ρf (x∗ ; α) − ρf (xt ; α) is the instantaneous regret at the input
query xt . The algorithm is no-regret if its cumulative regret is sublinear, i.e., limT →∞ RT /T → 0.
In such a case, the simple regret ST ≜ mint=1,...,T r(xt ) ≤ RT /T approaches 0. This suggests
that one should recommend the best observed input so far as the outcome of the optimization, e.g.,
in the vanilla BO problem with a small noise. Unfortunately, in BO of risk measures, ρf (xt ; α) is
unobserved due to the unobserved f (xt , z) for (xt , z) ∈
                                                         / Dt . This prevents us from determining the
best observed input. Therefore, we will design a recommendation strategy such that the instantaneous
regret r(x⋆t ) at the recommended input x⋆t approaches zero as t → ∞ in Sec. 3.3.

2.2   M ETA -BO OF R ISK M EASURES

Unlike existing works on BO of risk measures, our approach in this paper considers a set T of prior
tasks. Let f : X × Z → R denote the blackbox function of the current task and fτ : X × Z → R
denote the blackbox function in a prior task τ ∈ T . Furthermore, to facilitate later theoretical
analysis, we follow the works of Chowdhury and Gopalan (2017) to assume that all blackbox
functions belong to the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) associated with the kernel k and
a bounded RKHS norm, i.e., ∥f ∥k ≤ B and ∀τ ∈ T , ∥fτ ∥k ≤ B. The optimization result of a
prior task τ ∈ T includes the GP posterior mean and variance of fτ , denoted as µ    bτ : X × Z → R
and σbτ2 : X × Z → R+ , respectively. Meta-BO of the risk measure ρ aims to utilize (b           bτ2 )τ ∈T
                                                                                            µτ , σ
to improve the optimization of ρf . However, the similarity between f and fτ (hence, between ρf
and ρfτ ) is unknown for all τ ∈ T . In particular, if ρfτ differs from ρf , naively utilizing µ
                                                                                               bτ , σbτ2 to
optimize ρf can deteriorate the optimization of ρf .
Under the assumption that blackbox functions belong to the RKHS space with a norm bounded
by B, we first revisit the well-known confidence bound of f (x, z) from the work of Chowdhury and
Gopalan (2017). Let γt denote the maximum information gain about  p f that can be obtained from
any set of t − 1 observations. Choosing δ ∈ (0, 1), βt = (B + σn 2(γt + 1 + log 1/δ))2 , then the
event that ∀t ≥ 1, ∀x ∈ X , ∀z ∈ Z, lt (x, z) ≤ f (x, z) ≤ ut (x, z) holds with probability ≥ 1 − δ
where the lower and upper confidence bounds are defined as
                                 1/2                                                  1/2
       lt (x, z) ≜ µt (x, z) − βt      σt (x, z)   and       ut (x, z) ≜ µt (x, z) + βt     σt (x, z) , resp.   (2)
Leveraging on the above confidence bounds lt and ut , Nguyen et al. (2021b;a) propose the fol-
lowing confidence interval of the risk measure ρf (x; α) (applicable to both VaR and CVaR): with
probability ≥ 1 − δ,
                         ∀t ≥ 1, ∀x ∈ X , ρf (x; α) ∈ [ρlt (x; α), ρut (x; α)] .                                (3)
where lt and ut are defined in equation (2) and ρf , ρlt , ρut can be replaced by vf , vlt , and vut for
VaR or by cf , clt , cut for CVaR in equation (1). For a prior task τ ∈ T , we denote the confidence
interval of fτ (x, z) as [blτ (x, z), u
                                      bτ (x, z)] which is defined in equation (2) using the GP posterior
belief (b    bτ2 ) of fτ and the index of the last optimization iteration of task τ . Then, the confidence
        µτ , σ
interval of the risk measure ρfτ (x; α) of prior task τ is [ρblτ (x; α), ρubτ (x; α)].

3     O UR P ROPOSED S OLUTION TO M ETA -BO OF R ISK M EASURES
Typically, at each iteration of the GP-UCB algorithm (Srinivas et al., 2010), there is only one option
to select the input query from (assuming a unique maximizer of the GP-UCB acquisition function).
Hence, in order to incorporate the information from prior tasks, the existing RM-GP-UCB (Dai et al.,
2022) takes a weighted average of the GP-UCB acquisition functions of the current task and prior
tasks. However, these weights depend on the maximum difference between f and fτ evaluations,


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  ρut (x+
        t ; α)                                                        max ρblτ (x′ ; α)            max ρblτ (x′ ; α)
                                                                      x′ ∈Vt                       x′ ∈Vt



  ρlt (x−                                                                 ρubτ (x; α)                   ρubτ (x; α)
        t ; α)        x−
                       t
                             x
                            + 1                                           ρblτ (x; α)                   ρblτ (x; α)
                           xt
                                  x2                     Pτ |Vt                           Pτ |Vt
                 x0
                                       x3                  Vt                              Vt

                           (a)                            (b)                             (c)

Figure 1: (a) Plot of Vt = {x0 , x+
                                  t , x2 } with λ = 0 and η = 1. The dashed line shows the confidence
interval of ρf (x∗ ; α). While x−
                                t and x1 violate UC, x3 violates OC. (b) Plot of an informative prior
task τ where Vt \ Pτ |Vt ̸= ∅. (c) Plot of an uninformative prior task τ where Pτ |Vt = Vt .

known as the function gap, at observed inputs. Defining such a gap notion for risk measures is not
obvious. Moreover, the function gap is susceptible to function transformations such as scaling and
vertical-shifting. Last, in order to achieve theoretical performance guarantee, RM-GP-UCB requires
the weights of prior tasks to decay to zero.
In contrast, our meta-VBO approach tackles the problem from a different perspective that not only
exhibits robustness against scaling and vertical-shifting transformations but also eliminates the explicit
need for diminishing the effect of prior tasks via weight decay. Specifically, in the next section, we
offer multiple choices of the input query in the form of a versatile query set (V-set), denoted as Vt
                                                                                                QT
(depending on iteration t), such that any input query sequence in the Cartesian product t=1 Vt
incurs a sublinear cumulative regret,
                                            T                               T
                                            Y                 1          1X
                           ∀(xt )Tt=1 ∈           Vt ,   lim    RT = lim       r(xt ) = 0 .                            (4)
                                                         T →∞ T     T →∞ T
                                            t=1                            t=1

The flexibility of choosing any input query xt ∈ Vt grants us the opportunity to incorporate informa-
tion from prior tasks into the current optimization task as elaborated in Sec. 3.2.

3.1    V ERSATILE Q UERY S ET

Intuitively, the versatile query set (V-set) Vt should (C1) contain those inputs that are likely to be the
maximizer of ρf . Furthermore, we would like to avoid over-exploitation at inputs with well-estimated
risk measures where gathering observations leads to a minimal progress towards discovering x∗ . This
is done by introducing another criterion (C2) to exclude inputs with well-estimated risk measures
from Vt . These two key criteria (C1) and (C2) are formulated as follows.
(C1) To determine whether an input is likely to be the maximizer of ρf , we obtain the following
confidence interval of ρf (x∗ ; α) in App. A. With probability ≥ 1 − δ,
                                   ∀t ≥ 1, ρf (x∗ ; α) ∈ [ρlt (x−             +
                                                                t ; α), ρut (xt ; α)] ,                                (5)

where x−                                         +
           t ≜ arg maxx∈X ρlt (x; α) and xt ≜ arg maxx∈X ρut (x; α). It is noted that xt is the
                                                                                               +

input query at iteration t in V-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021b) and CV-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021a). For
an input x′ to be the maximizer x∗ of ρf (i.e., the above condition (C1)), the confidence interval
of its risk measure ρf (x′ ; α) should overlap with that of the maximum risk measure ρf (x∗ ; α),
i.e., ρut (x′ ; α) ≥ ρlt (x− t ; α) from equation (3) and equation (5). Hence, we propose to formulate
(C1) as the following overlapping condition (OC): For an input x′ to be in Vt ,
                ρut (x′ ; α) ≥ ρlt (x−                 +              −

                                      t ; α) + λ ρut (xt ; α) − ρlt (xt ; α)  for λ ∈ [0, 1] .     (6)
As λ → 1, ρut (x′ ; α) → ρut (x+                                                                     ′
                                   t ; α), i.e., the overlap between the confidence interval of ρf (x ; α)
and that of ρf (x∗ ; α) at iteration t increases. When λ = 1, the set of inputs satisfying OC reduce to
only the input query x+ t of V-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021b) or CV-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021a).

(C2) We would like to exclude inputs with well-estimated risk measures by ensuring that the
uncertainty of their risk measures is relatively high compared to that of the maximum risk mea-
sure ρf (x∗ ; α). Specifically, we propose to formulate (C2) as the following uncertainty condition


                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(UC): For an input x′ to be in Vt ,
                                           1                       −

             ρut (x′ ; α) − ρlt (x′ ; α) ≥    ρut (x+
                                                    t ; α) − ρlt (xt ; α)   for η ∈ [1, 1/λ] .                     (7)
             |           {z            } η |              {z            }
                                   ′                 uncertainty of ρf (x∗ ; α)
                uncertainty of ρf (x ; α)

If η > 1/λ, OC implies UC since ρlt (x−                                                   −
                                      t ; α) ≥ ρlt (x; α) ∀x ∈ X (from the definition of xt ).
Hence, we are only interested in UC when η ≤ 1/λ as specified in equation (7).
To sum up, we define V-set Vt as the set of inputs x ∈ X that satisfy both OC in equation (6) and
UC in equation (7) (illustrated in Fig. 1a). The conditions of λ ≤ 1 and η ≥ 1 ensure Vt is always
non-empty which follows from the following Lemma 3.1 (proved in App. B).
Lemma 3.1. For all t ≥ 1, Vt contains x+  t .

We note that the size of Vt is non-decreasing when λ decreases or η increases. Specifically, λ = 1
implies η = 1 (since η ∈ [1, 1/λ]) and OC implies UC. In this case, Vt = {x+    t } (assuming ρut has a
unique maximizer), i.e., Vt reduces to the UCB-typed input query such as those in V-UCB (Nguyen
et al., 2021b) and CV-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021a). There is not any flexibility in choosing xt
from Vt = {x+ t }, which prevents us from incorporating the information of prior tasks into the current
task. However, when λ < 1 and η ∈ [1, 1/λ], Vt contains other inputs than the popular input query x+   t
of UCB-typed algorithms. This is a trade-off between prior tasks (existing knowledge) and the current
                                                   +
task (new knowledge). When λ = 1 (Vt = {xt }), we utilize only observations from the current
task. Conversely, decreasing λ (increasing |Vt |) promotes the exploitation/utilization of prior tasks to
select an input query in Vt . This task-specific trade-off is distinct from the conventional (function-
evaluation-specific) exploration-exploitation trade-off associated with estimating the maximizer in
V-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021b) and CV-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021a) (pertaining to a particular task).
Given the selected xt ∈ Vt , we adopt the choice of zt in the existing works of Nguyen et al. (2021b;a).
In particular, if the risk measure is VaR, then zt is selected as a lacing value (LV) w.r.t. xt , lt , ut ,
and α.3 If the risk measure is CVaR, we first find the risk level αt ≜ arg maxα′ ∈(0,α] vut (xt ; α′ ) −
vlt (xt ; α′ ). Then, zt is selected as an LV w.r.t. xt , lt , ut , and αt .
Interestingly, given the above choice of zt , any choice of xt in our proposed Vt results in a sublinear
cumulative regret as shown in the following Theorem 3.2 (proved in App. D). In other words, we
achieve the goal of constructing Vt that satisfies equation (4).
Theorem 3.2. Given the selection of xt as any input in Vt and the selection of zt from the works
of Nguyen et al. (2021b;a), the algorithm achieves a sublinear cumulative regret:
                                                             p
                             ∀T ≥ 1, RT ≤ (η(1 − λ) + 1) C1 T βT γT                                  (8)
holds with probability ≥ 1 − δ where C1 ≜ 8/ log(1 + σn−2 ); γT , βT , δ are defined in equation (2); λ
and η are defined in equation (6) and equation (7), respectively.
Given the flexibility of choosing xt in Vt , we are now able to transfer the information from prior
tasks to the current task by assigning different priorities to inputs in Vt .

3.2    A SSIGNING P RIORITY TO I NPUTS IN V ERSATILE Q UERY S ET Vt

Since selecting any input query xt ∈ Vt results in a no-regret algorithm (Theorem 3.2), we would
like to exploit the results of prior tasks to assign varying degrees of importance (i.e., priorities) to
inputs in Vt . To be robust to scaling and vertical-shifting of the blackbox function, the priority is
based on the location of the maximizer rather than the estimated risk measure value. Besides, to
provide more opportunities for transferring information between tasks, we consider the case that the
global maximizer of the current task is the local maximizer of a prior task. Hence, we assign higher
priorities to inputs that have a higher chance of being a local maximizer (restricted to Vt ) of prior
tasks. For this reason, we propose the notion of the probable local maximizer set, denoted as Pτ |Vt ,
which contains inputs that are probably a local maximizer restricted to Vt of ρfτ :
                              Pτ |Vt ≜ {x ∈ Vt | ρubτ (x; α) ≥ max
                                                               ′
                                                                   ρblτ (x′ ; α)} .                                (9)
                                                                     x ∈Vt

    3
      Lacing values zLV w.r.t. x, lt , ut , and α satisfy lt (x, zLV ) ≤ vlt (x; α) ≤ vut (x; α) ≤ ut (x, zLV ) (Nguyen
et al., 2021b).


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


An alternative assumption is that the global maximizer of the current task is close to that of a prior task,
then we can consider the probable global maximizer set, defined as Pτ |X ≜ {x ∈ X | ρubτ (x; α) ≥
maxx′ ∈X ρblτ (x′ ; α)}. Since using Pτ |X does not substantially change the implementation of meta-
VBO in comparison to using Pτ |Vt , we only focus on the probable local maximizer set Pτ |Vt in
this paper. Figs. 1b and 1c show the set Pτ |Vt of inputs x ∈ Vt such that ρubτ (x; α) is above the
dash-dotted line representing maxx′ ∈Vt ρblτ (x′ ; α)). Essentially, we transfer the information about
the local maximizer restricted to Vt of prior tasks to the current task. This is an unexplored direction
in the current meta-BO literature.
Given the probable local maximizer set Pτ |Vt , the priority of an input x ∈ Vt , denoted as πt (x), is
measured by the number of the probable local maximizer sets that x belongs to, i.e.,
                                                    1x∈Pτ |Vt .
                                               X
                                    πt (x) ≜                                                      (10)
                                                  τ ∈T

The higher πt (x) is, the more likely that x is in the probable local maximizer set of a prior task.
Hence, we select the input query xt as
            xt ≜    max ρut (x; α) where Vt,max ≜ {x ∈ Vt | πt (x) = max
                                                                     ′
                                                                         πt (x′ )} .                   (11)
                   x∈Vt,max                                                    x ∈Vt

Remark 3.3 (Prior harmful tasks). The local maximizers of ρfτ in a prior harmful task restricted
to Vt are different from that of ρf of the current task. Contrary to the intuition suggesting that prior
harmful tasks may bias meta-VBO away from the desirable maximizer x∗ , Theorem 3.2 asserts that
our algorithm maintains a sublinear cumulative regret by constraining the choice of xt to the Vt .
However, one could reasonably anticipate a potential reduction in the convergence rate, as empirically
shown in Sec. 4, due to the influence of prior harmful tasks.
Remark 3.4 (Informativeness of a prior task). If πt (x) is constant for all x ∈ Vt , it results in Vt,max =
Vt and xt = x+   t . This happens when there are not any prior tasks or when the BO results of prior
tasks are uninformative in the local region Vt , i.e., Pτ |Vt = Vt ∀τ ∈ T . As xt = x+     t in these cases,
our meta-VBO algorithm reduces to V-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021b) or CV-UCB (Nguyen et al.,
2021a). Fig. 1c illustrates an iteration t where prior task τ is uninformative as Vt = Pτ |Vt , while
Fig. 1b shows the case that τ is an informative task. It is noted that the informativeness of a prior task
w.r.t. the current task depends on Vt , hence, the iteration t. A prior task may be informative when we
have not gathered many observations on the current task (Vt is large such that Pτ |Vt is a strict subset
of Vt ), but it may become uninformative when many observations are acquired (Vt is small such
that Pτ |Vt = Vt ). When a prior task is uninformative, it does not influence the optimization of the
current task in our meta-VBO algorithm (from the definition of πt (x) in equation (39)). Hence, the
effect of a prior task on the current task is adaptively controlled by Vt as illustrated in Appendix I.1.
This approach contrasts with that of Dai et al. (2022) that explicitly requires a schedule of the weight
decay based on the function gap.
Remark 3.5 (Scaling and vertical-shifting of the blackbox functions). Our proposed meta-VBO
depends on Vt and Pτ |Vt . These sets rely on comparing risk measures at different inputs which
remains unchanged under scaling or vertical-shifting of the blackbox function. Hence, our algorithm
is robust to these transformations.
Remark 3.6 (Meta-VBO for vanilla BO and adversarially robust BO). As our proposed meta-VBO
depends on the upper and lower confidence bounds of function evaluations, it is sufficiently general
to address the vanilla meta-BO problem (see Appendix F). Its potential applicability to the meta-
learning of other UCB-typed algorithms remains an area for future exploration. Furthermore, since
adversarially robust BO is a special case of BO of VaR α → 0+ (Nguyen et al., 2021b), our proposed
meta-VBO directly applies to adversarially robust BO (see App. G).

3.3   D ECISION VARIABLE R ECOMMENDATION S TRATEGY

At iteration t, we propose to recommend x⋆t ≜ x−                                                −
                                                  ζ(t) where ζ(t) ≜ arg maxt′ ∈{1,...,t} ρlt′ (xt′ ; α).
We prove that its instantaneous regret approaches zero in App. E.
Theorem 3.7. Let ζ(t) ≜ arg maxt′ ∈{1,...,t} ρlt′ (x−                                   ⋆     −
                                                     t′ ; α), then, by recommending xt = xζ(t) , the
                                                   p
instantaneous regret at x⋆t is bounded: r(x⋆t ) ≤ η C1 βt γt /t with probability ≥ 1−δ where η, C1 , βt ,
and γt are defined in Theorem 3.2.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As sublinear bounds of γt are established for common kernels such as the SE kernel in the work
of Srinivas et al. (2010), the instantaneous regret at x⋆t ≜ x−
                                                              ζ(t) approaches zero as t → ∞. Further-
more, we should choose η = 1 to minimize the upper confidence bound of r(x⋆t ) in Theorem 3.7.
Given η = 1, we choose λ ∈ [0, 1] to trade off between the flexibility in choosing xt (i.e., the
size of V-set) and the upper confidence bound of the cumulative regret RT at the input queries in
Theorem 3.2. In the experiments, as we want to exploit the solutions of prior tasks, we maximize the
size of V-set by setting λ = 0. In this case, the upper confidence bound of R√  T is two times that of
V-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021b) and CV-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021a): RT ≤ 2 C1 T βT γT .


4    E XPERIMENTS

Given the absence of prior research on meta-BO of risk measures, we compare the performance of our
proposed algorithm under different sets of prior tasks to that of V-UCB (Nguyen et al., 2021b) which
is equivalent to our proposed algorithm when there are not any prior tasks, i.e., T = ∅. Recall that our
emphasis in this paper is on transferring the optimization results, rather than transferring the surrogate
model, as discussed in Sec. 1. Therefore, we exclusively focus on independent GPs. They are also
more practical due to their lower computational overhead, while still enabling us to provide fair
comparisons to empirically demonstrate our advantage over V-UCB.4 Our goal is to empirically verify
whether our proposed algorithm is (i) able to exploit the information from prior informative tasks to
improve its converge rate in comparison to V-UCB even if harmful tasks exist in T and (ii) robust to
prior harmful tasks even if there are not any useful tasks in T . To achieve this, we design different
sets of prior tasks: Tuseful-pos-scale (i.e., positive scaling of the blackbox function of the current
task: fτ (x, z) = af (x, z) for a > 0), Tuseful-vshift (i.e., vertical-shifting fτ (x, z) = f (x, z) + b
for b ∈ R), Tharmful-neg-scale (i.e., negative scaling fτ (x, z) = −f (x, z)), and Tharmful-hshift
(i.e., horizontal-shifting fτ (x, z) = f (x + ξ, z) for ξ ∈ Rd ). Additionally, Tall is the union of the
above 4 sets. We note that Tharmful-neg-scale contains the most harmful task as the function evalua-
tions are negated. On the other hand, horizontal-shifting along the x dimensions in Tharmful-hshift
moves the location of the maximizers away from that of the current task. As explained in Sec. 3.3,
we set λ = 0 and η = 1. We present additional experimental results of meta-BO for CVaR in App. I.
The experiments are performed on 6 synthetic functions: a Gaussian curve, the Branin-Hoo, the
Goldstein-Price, the six-hump camel, the Hartmann-3D, and the Hartmann-6D (obtained from
https://www.sfu.ca/~ssurjano); and using 2 real-world datasets: the yacht hydrodynam-
ics dataset (Dua and Graff, 2017) and a portfolio optimization dataset (obtained from the existing
works of Cakmak et al. (2020); Nguyen et al. (2021a)). In the first 4 experiments, both the dimensions
of x and z are set to d = d′ = 1. In the Hartmann-3D experiment, d = 2 and d′ = 1, while in
the Hartmann-6D experiment, d = 5 and d′ = 1. In the yacht hydrodynamics experiment, the
optimization problem is to minimize VaR of the residuary resistance per unit weight of displacement
of a yacht by controlling the its 5-dimensional hull geometry coefficients. The environmental random
variable is the 1-dimensional Froude number. The blackbox function is generated by fitting a GP to
the yacht hydrodynamics dataset (Dua and Graff, 2017). In the portfolio optimization experiment,
we follow the work of (Cakmak et al., 2020) to optimize a portfolio by controlling d = 3 decision
variables subject to the randomness in the bid-ask spread and the borrow cost (i.e., d′ = 2). The
blackbox function is generated by fitting a GP to the simulated portfolio dataset. The risk level is set
at α = 0.1 for all experiments.
The average and the standard error of r(x⋆t ) (in Sec. 3.3) over 30 random repetitions are shown in
Fig. 2. It is noted that the curves of useful-pos-scale, useful-vshift, and all overlap
each other in Figs. 2a, 2e, and 2g. In these figures, we observe that when T contains only prior
useful tasks in Tuseful-pos-scale and Tuseful-vshift , our proposed meta-VBO outperforms V-UCB
which does not utilize any prior tasks. Notably, even when T contains both harmful and useful tasks
in Tall , meta-VBO still outperforms V-UCB. In the extreme case when T contains only harmful
tasks in Tharmful-neg-scale and Tharmful-hshift , meta-VBO does not outperform V-UCB, but it still
converges to a low-regret solution. In Fig. 2f, meta-VBO given the set Tharmful-neg-scale performs
poorly probably due to the large input space and the function surface of the Hartmann-6D. We can
   4
     When computation cost are affordable, one may combine a method that transfers the surrogate model with
our algorithm by simply replacing independent GPs with a multitask GP because our algorithm only relies on
upper and lower confidence bounds that are readily obtainable from a multitask GP model.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



0.30
                        V-UCB                     Useful-pos-scale                   Useful-vshift                    Harmful-neg-scale                             Harmful-hshift                              All
                                                                                                            1.2
 0.5                                                      2.0                                               1.0                                                      6
 0.4
                                                          1.5                                               0.8
 0.3                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                          1.0                                               0.6
 0.2
                                                                                                            0.4
0.25
 0.1                                                      0.5                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                            0.2
 0.0                                                      0.0                                                                                                        0
        0      10       20        30    40   50      60          0    5    10       15   20   25     30           0     5        10    15    20        25      30        0        5    10        15        20         25   30
                             (a)                                                (b)                                                   (c)                                                   (d)
                                                          0.30                                                                                                       4
 1.50                                                                                                       0.6
 1.25                                                     0.25                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                     3
0.20
 1.00                                                     0.20                                              0.4
 0.75                                                     0.15                                              0.3                                                      2
 0.50                                                     0.10                                              0.2                                                      1
 0.25
                                                          0.05                                              0.1
 0.00                                                                                                                                                                0
        0       10           20        30    40      50           0   10   20       30   40   50     60           0         10         20         30          40         0        10        20        30         40        50
                             (e)                                                (f)                                                   (g)                                                   (h)
0.15
Figure 2: Plots of the regret at the recommended input against the BO iteration in experiments
with (a) a Gaussian curve, (b) the Branin-Hoo function, (c) the Goldstein-Price function, (d) the
six-hump camel function, (e) the Hartmann-3D function, (f) the Hartmann-6D function, (g) the yacht
hydrodynamics dataset, and (h) the portfolio optimization dataset.
               Iteration 5                                      Iteration 20                              Iteration 30                                      Iteration 40
0.10                                                                                                                                                            Iteration 25

                         13.2%                      Previous49.3%
                                                              task                            Previous51.9%
                                                                                                       task                                         50.8%
                                                                                                                                         Previous task                                           Previous task
                                                                      8.2%                                                                            45.5%                                        Previous task
            47.0%            9.3%                   Harmful-hshift      7.5%                  Harmful-hshift    6.9%                     Harmful-hshift         9.7%                             Harmful-hshift
                                                                                                                                         Harmful-neg-scale 3.1%
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Harmful-hshift
                                                    Harmful-neg-scale                         Harmful-neg-scale 3.1%                                         1.5%5.2%                            Harmful-neg-scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Harmful-neg-scale
                                                    Useful-pos-scale                          Useful-pos-scale                           Useful-pos-scale                                        Useful-pos-scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Useful-pos-scale
                         30.5%                      Useful-vshift 35.1%                       Useful-vshift 38.2%                        Useful-vshift 44.6%39.6%                                Useful-vshift
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Useful-vshift
t=5                                           t=20                                       t=30                                          t=40
0.05
Figure 3: Percentage of prior tasks whose probable local maximizer sets contain the input query
(grouped by the transformation) at different BO iterations in the experiment with the Gaussian curve
and the set Tall of prior tasks. The percentage is computed over 30 repeated experiments.
                    0                              10                          20                         30                            40                                   50                                  60

also observe the percentage of prior tasks whose probable maximizer sets Pτ |Vt containing xt in
Fig. 3. It shows that as we gather more observations, the percentage of harmful tasks whose Pτ |Vt
contains xt reduces.

5       C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose meta-VBO which is the first algorithm for meta-BO of risk measures by
proposing a new concept of V-set and leveraging prior tasks to prioritize inputs in this set. Our
algorithm offers a theoretical performance guarantee even when prior tasks are harmful. Furthermore,
we propose a recommendation strategy that suggests an input as the result of the optimization, with
a proof of its instantaneous regret approaching zero. The empirical performance of the proposed
solution is demonstrated through several synthetic function benchmarks and real-world objective
functions. In the future, we would like to study our meta-VBO approach to perform meta-learning
for other BO variants such as federated BO (Dai et al., 2020), preferential BO (González et al., 2017;
Nguyen et al., 2021c), BO for finding Nash equilibria (Tay et al., 2023), and BO with unknown
constraints (Nguyen et al., 2023).

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To ensure the reproducibility of both the theoretical and experimental results in our paper, we
have clearly elaborated on our assumptions, the proofs of the theoretical results, and provided the
implementation of the experiments. In particular, our main assumptions are stated in the third
paragraph in Sec. 1 and the first paragraph in Sec. 3. The details proofs of our theoretical results are
shown in Appendices A, B, D, E, and G.


                                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is supported by AI Singapore, under grant AISG2-RP-2020-018.
This research is supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF), Prime Minister’s Office,
Singapore under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE)
programme. The Mens, Manus, and Machina (M3S) is an interdisciplinary research group (IRG) of
the Singapore MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART) centre.

R EFERENCES
I. Bogunovic, J. Scarlett, S. Jegelka, and V. Cevher. Adversarially robust optimization with Gaussian
   processes. In Proc. NeurIPS, pages 5760–5770, 2018.
S. Cakmak, R. Astudillo, P. I. Frazier, and E. Zhou. Bayesian optimization of risk measures. In Proc.
   NeurIPS, 2020.
S. R. Chowdhury and A. Gopalan. On kernelized multi-armed bandits. In Proc. ICML, pages
   844–853, 2017.
Z. Dai, B. K. H. Low, and P. Jaillet. Federated Bayesian optimization via Thompson sampling. In
  Proc. NeurIPS, pages 9687–9699, 2020.
Z. Dai, Y. Chen, H. Yu, B. K. H. Low, and P. Jaillet. On provably robust meta-Bayesian optimization.
   In Proc. UAI, pages 475–485, 2022.
Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.
M. Feurer, B. Letham, and E. Bakshy. Scalable meta-learning for Bayesian optimization using
 ranking-weighted Gaussian process ensembles. In AutoML Workshop at ICML, volume 7, 2018.
Roman Garnett. Bayesian Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2022. in preparation.
J. González, Z. Dai, A. Damianou, and N. D. Lawrence. Preferential Bayesian optimization. In Proc.
   ICML, pages 1282–1291, 2017.
J. M. Hernández-Lobato, M. W. Hoffman, and Z. Ghahramani. Predictive entropy search for efficient
   global optimization of black-box functions. In Proc. NIPS, pages 918–926, 2014.
S. Iwazaki, Y. Inatsu, and I. Takeuchi. Bayesian quadrature optimization for probability threshold
   robustness measure. Neural Computation, 33(12):3413–3466, 2021a.
S. Iwazaki, Y. Inatsu, and I. Takeuchi. Mean-variance analysis in Bayesian optimization under
   uncertainty. In Proc. AISTAT, pages 973–981, 2021b.
A. Makarova, I. Usmanova, I. Bogunovic, and A. Krause. Risk-averse heteroscedastic Bayesian
  optimization. In Proc. NeurIPS, pages 17235–17245, 2021.
Q. P. Nguyen, Z. Dai, B. K. H. Low, and P. Jaillet. Optimizing conditional value-at-risk of black-box
  functions. In Proc. NeurIPS, pages 4170–4180, 2021a.
Q. P. Nguyen, Z. Dai, B. K. H. Low, and P. Jaillet. Value-at-risk optimization with Gaussian processes.
  In Proc. ICML, pages 8063–8072, 2021b.
Q. P. Nguyen, S. Tay, B. K. H. Low, and P. Jaillet. Top-k ranking Bayesian optimization. In Proc.
  AAAI, volume 35, pages 9135–9143, 2021c.
Q. P. Nguyen, W. T. R. Chew, L. Song, B. K. H. Low, and P. Jaillet. Optimistic Bayesian optimization
  with unknown constraints. In Proc. ICLR, 2023.
V. Perrone, H. Shen, M. W. Seeger, C. Archambeau, and R. Jenatton. Learning search spaces for
  Bayesian optimization: Another view of hyperparameter transfer learning. In Proc. NeurIPS,
  volume 32, 2019.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V. Picheny, H. Moss, L. Torossian, and N. Durrande. Bayesian quantile and expectile optimisation.
   In Proc. UAI, 2022.
A. Ramachandran, S. Gupta, S. Rana, and S. Venkatesh. Information-theoretic transfer learning
  framework for Bayesian optimisation. In Proc. ECML/PKDD, pages 827–842, 2019.
C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams. Gaussian processes for machine learning. MIT Press, 2006.
B. Shahriari, K. Swersky, Z. Wang, R. Adams, and N. de Freitas. Taking the human out of the loop:
  A review of Bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1):148–175, 2015.
J. Snoek, H. Larochelle, and R. Adams. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine learning
   algorithms. In Proc. NIPS, pages 2951–2959, 2012.
N. Srinivas, A. Krause, S. Kakade, and M. Seeger. Gaussian process optimization in the bandit
  setting: No regret and experimental design. In Proc. ICML, pages 1015–1022, 2010.
K. Swersky, J. Snoek, and R. P. Adams. Multi-task Bayesian optimization. In Proc. NeurIPS,
  volume 26, 2013.
S. S. Tay, Q. P. Nguyen, C. S. Foo, and B. K. H. Low. No-regret sample-efficient Bayesian optimization
   for finding Nash equilibria with unknown utilities. In Proc. AISTATS, pages 3591–3619, 2023.
L. Torossian, V. Picheny, and N. Durrande. Bayesian quantile and expectile optimisation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2001.04833, 2020.
M. Volpp, L. P. Fröhlich, K. Fischer, A. Doerr, S. Falkner, F. Hutter, and C. Daniel. Meta-learning
 acquisition functions for transfer learning in Bayesian optimization. In Proc. ICLR, 2020.
Z. Wang and S. Jegelka. Max-value entropy search for efficient Bayesian optimization. In Proc.
  ICML, pages 3627–3635, 2017.
M. Wistuba, N. Schilling, and L. Schmidt-Thieme. Two-stage transfer surrogate model for automatic
  hyperparameter optimization. In Proc. ECML/PKDD, pages 199–214, 2016.
M. Wistuba, N. Schilling, and L. Schmidt-Thieme. Scalable Gaussian process-based transfer surro-
 gates for hyperparameter optimization. Machine Learning, 107(1):43–78, 2018.


                                                 11
