Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N T RAJECTORY AUGMENTATIONS FOR
O FF -P OLICY E VALUATION
 Ge Gao∗         Qitong Gao†        Xi Yang‡        Song Ju∗        Miroslav Pajic†        Min Chi∗



                                             A BSTRACT

          In the realm of reinforcement learning (RL), off-policy evaluation (OPE) holds
          a pivotal position, especially in high-stake human-centric scenarios such as e-
          learning and healthcare. Applying OPE to these domains is often challenging with
          scarce and underrepresentative offline training trajectories. Data augmentation has
          been a successful technique to enrich training data. However, directly employing
          existing data augmentation methods to OPE may not be feasible, due to the Marko-
          vian nature within the offline trajectories and the desire for generalizability across
          diverse target policies. In this work, we propose an offline trajectory augmentation
          approach, named OAT, to specifically facilitate OPE in human-involved scenarios.
          We propose sub-trajectory mining to extract potentially valuable sub-trajectories
          from offline data, and diversify the behaviors within those sub-trajectories by vary-
          ing coverage of the state-action space. Our work was empirically evaluated in
          a wide array of environments, encompassing both simulated scenarios and real-
          world domains like robotic control, healthcare, and e-learning, where the training
          trajectories include varying levels of coverage of the state-action space. By en-
          hancing the performance of a variety of OPE methods, our work offers a promis-
          ing path forward for tackling OPE challenges in situations where human-centric
          data may be limited or underrepresentative.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) has been recognized as an important part of reinforcement learning
(RL), especially for human-involved RLs (Wu et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023a;b;c), in which eval-
uations of online policies can have high stakes (Levine et al., 2020). The objective of OPE is
to evaluate target policies based on offline trajectories collected from behavioral policies differ-
ent from the target ones. One major barrier often lies in the fact that the offline trajectories in
human-involved tasks often only provide limited coverage of the entire state-action space (Chang
et al., 2021; Schweighofer et al., 2021). This can be caused by homogeneous behavioral policies;
for example, during clinical procedures, physicians need to follow certain standardized guidelines.
However, a sub-optimal autonomous control agent (e.g., surgical robots under training) may deviate
from such guidelines, and thus result in trajectories where the state-action space may not be fully
covered by the offline trajectories collected, which introduces great challenges for OPE, as illus-
trated in Figure 1. Therefore, to improve the OPE performance, it is essential to enrich the offline
trajectories.
Data augmentation is a powerful tool for data enrichment by artificially generating new data points
from existing data. It has shown effectiveness in facilitating learning more robust supervised and
unsupervised models (Iwana & Uchida, 2021a; Xie et al., 2020). Specifically, generative methods
such as variational autoencoder (VAE) have achieved superior performance in time-series augmen-
tation (Yoon et al., 2019; Barak et al., 2022). However, an important characteristic of OPE training
data is the Markovian nature, as the environments are usually formulated as a Markov decision pro-
cess (MDP) (Thomas & Brunskill, 2016; Fu et al., 2021). As a result, prior works on time-series
augmentation may not be directly applicable to MDP trajectory augmentation. Recently, though
data augmentation methods have been extended to facilitate RL policy optimization, most existing
    ∗
      North Carolina State University, USA. Emails: {ggao5, mchi}@ncsu.edu.
    †
      Duke University, USA. Emails: {qitong.gao, miroslav.pajic}@duke.edu.
    ‡
      IBM Research, USA. Email: xi.yang@ibm.com.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


works focus on enriching the state space, such as adding noise to input images to generate sufficient
data and improve the generality of agents (Laskin et al., 2020a; Raileanu et al., 2021), but over-
look the coverage of the joint state-action distribution over time. More importantly, the goal of data
augmentation towards OPE is different from RL policy optimization. Data augmentation in RL gen-
erally aims to quickly facilitate identifying and learning from high-reward regions of the state-action
space (Liu et al., 2021; Park et al., 2022). In contrast, the evaluation policies considered by OPE
can be heterogeneous and lead to varied performance, i.e., the policies to be evaluated by OPE do
not necessarily perform well; therefore, it is equally important to allow the agent learning from tra-
jectories resulted from high- and low-reward regions. As a result, OPE methods prefer training data
that provides comprehensive coverage of the state-action space, including the trajectories resulting
from low-performing and sub-optimal policies. To the best of our knowledge, there does not exist a
method that augments historical trajectories specific to OPE.
In this paper, we propose a framework to facilitate OPE
using Augmented Trajectories (OAT). Specifically, moti-


                                                                                                   GOAL
                                                                              GOAL
vated by the intrinsic nature that human-involved systems
(HIS) are often provided limited coverage of the state-
action space, while human may behave diversely when
following different policies (Yang et al., 2020b; Wang Figure 1: A conceptual illustration of
et al., 2022), we propose potential sub-trajectories (PSTs) the discrepancy between human demon-
mining to identify sub-trajectories of historical trajecto- strations (left) versus the empirical tra-
ries whose state-action space is less covered but have jectories resulted from a sub-optimal
great potential to enrich the space. Then a generative policy (right) to be evaluated by OPE.
modeling framework is used to capture the dynamic un- It can be observed that the autonomous
derlying the PSTs and induce augmented sub-trajectories. agent may perform maneuvers unseen
Based on that, we design the fuse process by simultane- from the training (demonstration) tra-
ously taking the augmented sub-trajectories while main- jectories, and thus can potentially hin-
taining the part of the states and actions associated with der OPE’s performance.
non-PSTs. The key contributions of this work are summarized as follows: (i) To the best of our
knowledge, OAT is the first method augmenting historical trajectories to facilitate OPE in HIS. (ii)
We conduct extensive experiments to validate OAT in a variety of simulation and real-world envi-
ronments, including robotics, healthcare, and e-learning. (iii) The experimental results present that
OAT can significantly facilitate OPE performance and outperform all data augmentation baselines.

2   OPE WITH AUGMENTED T RAJECTORIES (OAT)
We propose a framework to facilitate OPE with aug-
mented trajectories (OAT). Specifically, we first in-
troduce offline trajectories and OPE. Then we pro-
pose a sub-trajectory mining method that identifies
the sub-trajectories of trajectories that have great
potential to increase the offline trajectories’ cover-
age over the state-action space, i.e., potential sub-
trajectories (PSTs). A generative modeling frame-
work is used to capture the dynamics underlying the
selected PSTs, followed by a fuse process that gen-
erates augmented trajectories with augmented sub-
trajectories which will be used to train the OPE
methods.
Offline Trajectories. We consider framing an Figure 2: The illustration of OAT. It con-
agent’s interaction with the environment over a se- sists of three steps: (i) Mining of poten-
quence of decision-making steps as a Markov de- tial sub-trajectories (PSTs), where human be-
cision process (MDP), which is formulated as a 6- have similarly under behavioral policies at
tuple (S, A, P, S 0 , r, γ). S is the state space. A the grey-shaded area and may have more po-
is the action space. P defines transition dynamics tential to enrich the coverage of its state-
from the current state and action to the next state. S0 action space; (ii) VAE-MDP for augment-
defines the initial state distribution. r is the reward ing PSTs; (iii) Fuse augmented PSTs back
function. γ ∈ (0, 1] is discount factor. Episodes are to their origins.
of finite horizon T . At each time-step t, the agent observes the state st ∈ S of the environment, then


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


chooses an action at ∈ A following a policy π. The environment accordingly provides a reward
rt = r(st , at ), and the agent observes the next state st+1 determined by P. τ (i) is defined as a
trajectory where τ (i) = [..., (st , at , rt , s′t ), ...]Tt=1 .
Offline Policy Evaluation (OPE). The goal of OPE is to estimate the expected total return over the
                                       PT
evaluation (target) policy π, V π = E[ t=1 γ t−1 rt |at ∼ π], using set of historical trajectories D
collected over a behavioral policy β ̸= π. The historical trajectories D = {..., τ (i) , ...}N
                                                                                             i=1 consist
of a set of N trajectories.
2.1   M INING OF P OTENTIAL S UB - TRAJECTORIES (PST S )
The historical trajectories D collected from HIS are often provided with limited coverage of the
state-action space, due to the intrinsic nature that human may follow homogeneous behavioral poli-
cies or specific guidelines when performing their professions (Yang et al., 2020b; Wang et al., 2022).
For example, a surgeon could perform appendectomy in various ways across patients depending on
each patient’s specific condition; however, they may strictly follow similar steps at the beginning
(e.g., disinfection) and the end of surgeries (e.g., stitching). Therefore, the resulting trajectories may
lead to limited coverage for part of the state-action space representing similar scenarios. However,
a sub-optimal autonomous agent, subject to be evaluated by OPE, may visit states unseen from the
trajectories collected from the surgeon, e.g., towards the beginning/end of the surgery. As a result,
we consider augmenting the part of trajectories, i.e., the PSTs, that are more likely to be insuffi-
ciently covered by the historical trajectories D. Moreover, the downstream generative models, such
as VAEs, do not necessarily need to reconstruct entire trajectories for long horizons and over limited
samples which are the common limitations of data collected from HIS (Yacoby et al., 2020).
To identify the PSTs that are subject to be augmented, we introduce a three-step approach, i.e., (i)
discrete representation mapping, followed by (ii) determining support from discrete representations,
where the support is used in step (iii) to identify PSTs to be augmented.
Step (i) – Discrete Representation Mapping. Trajectories collected from HIS can be complex,
due to the unobservable underlying human mindset and high-dimensional state space (Mandel et al.,
2014). Discrete representation mapping has been recognized as effectively providing abstractions
from complex original data and helping capture homogeneous behaviors shared across trajecto-
ries (Yang et al., 2021). We assume that states st ∈ S can be mapped into C clusters, where each
st is associated with a cluster from the set K = {K1 , . . . , KC }. After mapping, each state si,t on
trajectory τ (i) is mapped to Ki,t ∈ K.
Step (ii) – Determine Support from Discrete Representations. We assume that each trajectory
τ (i) can be mapped to a corresponding temporal discrete sequence K (i) = [Ki,1 , . . . , Ki,T ] ⊂
ZT , based on the state mapping, where T is the horizon of the environment and Z is the set of
integers. We also define H = {..., K (i) , ...}N
                                               i=1 which is the set of all temporal discrete sequences
                                                                 (i)
mapped from the set of original trajectories D. We define δζ,ζ+W −1 = [Ki,ζ , ..., Ki,ζ+W −1 ] as
a temporal discrete sub-sequence (TDSS) with length W ∈ [1, T ] of K (i) , where ζ ∈ [1, T −
                       (i)
W + 1], denoted as δζ,ζ+W −1 ⊑ K (i) . Note that C is generally greatly smaller than T × N as
considered in discrete representation mapping in general (Hallac et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2021).
                                                                     (i)
Therefore, it is possible that a temporal discrete sub-sequence δζ i ,ζ i +W −1 is “equal” to another
                                    (j)                       (i)                 (j)
temporal discrete sub-sequence δζ j ,ζ j +W −1 , such that δζ i ,ζ i +W −1 = δζ j ,ζ j +W −1 if every Ki,ζ i =
Kj,ζ j given Ki,ζ i , Kj,ζ j ∈ Z. Though ζ i does not necessarily equals to ζ j , we omit the superscript
                                                                              (i)
for concise expression. Then, the support (or frequency) of any TDSS δζ,ζ+W −1 appears in H is the
number of K (i) in H containing the TDSS, i.e.,
                                     N h
                                     X                                                      i
                        (i)                   (j)                     (j)         (i)
           supportH (δζ,ζ+W −1 ) =         1(δζ,ζ+W −1 ⊑ K (j) ) × 1(δζ,ζ+W −1 = δζ,ζ+W −1 ) ,             (1)
                                     j=1

where 1(·) is the indicator function.
                                              (i)                   (i)   (i)   (i)     ′(i)
                                                                                      ζ+W −1
Step (iii) – Identify PSTs. We denote φζ,ζ+W −1 = [..., (ŝt , ât , r̂t , ŝt ), ...]t=ζ    as a sub-
                              (i)                                        (i)
trajectory with length W of τ . Given the mapping from trajectory τ to temporal discrete se-
                                                                                       (i)
quence K (i) (introduced in the step above), we define that each sub-trajectory φζ,ζ+W −1 can be


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              (i)
mapped to a corresponding TDSS δζ,ζ+W −1 . Now we can identify the PSTs that will be used to
train the generative model for reconstructing new sub-trajectories (i.e., augmentation) in Section 2.2,
following the definition below.
Definition 2.1 (Potential Sub-Trajectory (PST)). Given historical trajectories D and a threshold ξ,
                  (i)
a sub-trajectory φζ,ζ+W −1 is considered as a potential sub-trajectory if the support of its mapped
                                      (i)                                    (i)
temporal discrete sub-sequence δζ,ζ+W −1 satisfies supportH (δζ,ζ+W −1 ) ≥ ξ.

An intuitive way to determine the threshold ξ is ranking the TDSSs by their supports in descending
order and picking the top k ones. In this study, we iteratively select the top k distinct TDSSs until
                                              g          1                                    (i)
the support of the set of G selected TDSSs {δζ,ζ+W   −1 } , g ∈ [1, G], i.e., the number of K     in H
                              g
containing any TDSS δ ∈ {δζ,ζ+W −1 }, is greater than or equal to .99N , or we early stop at k = 5.
Following the step above, a set of PSTs is determined for historical trajectories D, from which we
                                                        g
can obtain a set of G distinct corresponding TDSSs {δζ,ζ+W     −1 } mapped from the PSTs. Then
                                                                      (i)                                         (i)
we can obtain G sets of PSTs, such that each set T g = {φζ,ζ+W −1 }, where all φζ,ζ+W −1 ∈ T g
                                        (i)       g
satisfy that their corresponding δζ,ζ+W −1 = δζ,ζ+W     −1 . Each set of PSTs may contain unique
information captured from the original historical trajectories D, as previous works have found that
the PSTs in the same set, T g , are in general associated with similar temporal and cross-attributes
correlations (Gao et al., 2021; 2022a).
                                                                                                   Potential Sub-Trajectory (PST)
2.2 AUGMENTING THE PST S                                                        𝑟%            𝑟$           𝑟!           𝑟#          𝑟"
In this section, we introduce how to adapt VAE to cap-                 𝑠%                𝑠$         𝑠!           𝑠#           𝑠"         𝑠&
ture the MDP transitions, i.e., VAE-MDP, underlying                                                        𝑎!           𝑎#          𝑎"
                                                                                𝑎%            𝑎$
each set of PSTs, T g , as well as reconstruct new PST
samples that will be fused back with the original his-                      Encoding
                                                                                                    𝑧!           𝑧#           𝑧"
torical trajectories D for OPE methods to estimate the                      Decoding                       𝑟̂!          𝑟̂#
returns of evaluation (target) policies. The adaptation                     Original
                                                                                                    𝑠̂!          𝑠̂#          𝑠̂"
                                                                            Transition
mainly consists of three parts: the latent prior, varia-                    Augmented                      𝑎&!          𝑎&#
tional encoder, and generative decoder. Given a set of                      Transition
                                                                                                          Augmented PST
PSTs, T g = {δζ,ζ+W −1 }2 , the formulation of VAE-
MDP consists of three major components, i.e., (i) the la-   Figure 3: Illustration of VAE-MDP
tent prior p(zζ ) ∼ N (0, I) representing the distribution  for Sub-trajectory augmentations. The
of the initial latent states (at the beginning of each PST  PSTs are extracted by PSTs mining
in the set T g ), where I is the identity covariance ma-    from original offline trajectories. Then
trix. (ii) the encoder qω (zt |st−1 , at−1 , st ) that encodes
                                                            VAE-MDP is employed to roll out
the MDP transitions into the latent space, and (iii) the de-new PSTs by reconstructing state-action
coders pη (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ), pη (st |zt ), pη (rt−1 |zt ) that re-
                                                            space and inducing rewards. The aug-
constructs new PST samples. The detailed setup can be       mented trajectory (colored in green) is
found in Appendix A.4, and the overall encoding and de-     formed by fusing back augmented PSTs
coding processes are illustrated in Figure 3.               to offline trajectories.
The training objective for VAE-MDP is to maximize the evidence lower bound (ELBO), which
consists of the log-likelihood of reconstructing the states and rewards, and regularization of the
approximated posterior, i.e.,

                         h Xζ+W −1                           Xζ+W −1
L = −ELBO(ω, η) = −Eqω                    log pη (st |zt ) +           log pη (rt−1 |zt ) − KL qω (zζ |sζ )||p(zζ )
                                t=ζ                              t=ζ+1
    Xζ+W −1                                                      i
  −         KL qω (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st )||pη (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ) .
         t=ζ+1
                                                                                                                                         (2)

The proof of Equation 2 are provided in Appendix A.5. Consequently, given a set of PSTs, T g ,
a VAE-MDP to the set can be trained to reconstruct a set of new PST samples, denoted as Tcg =
   1
     From now we use superscript g to replace (i) for δ’s, since there may exist multiple TDSSs that are equiv-
alent.
   2
     From now on we omit the superscripts of δ for conciseness.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                        ζ+W −1
{φ̂vζ,ζ+W −1 }, v ∈ [1, V ], where φ̂vζ,ζ+W −1 = [..., (ŝvt , âvt , r̂tv , ŝ′v
                                                                               t ), ...]t=ζ    is a augmented PST
and V is the total number of augmented PST samples, generated from VAE-MDP, for the set T g .
2.3   F USE AUGMENTED PST S BACK TO T HEIR O RIGINS
With new augmented sub-trajectories rolled out by the VAE-MDP, we fuse them back to the orig-
inal historical trajectories D for the OPE methods to leverage. This fusing process is designed to
(i) provide enhanced coverage over the state-action space where the corresponding PSTs do not ex-
plicitly capture homogeneous behaviors, and still (ii) maintain the part of the covered state-action
distribution associated with non-PSTs, since those may indicate object-specific information that is
not shared across all trajectories, e.g., the part of the surgical procedure specific to each patient,
following from the surgery analogy above. Below we introduce how to fuse Tcg with the original
trajectories from D. A graphical illustration of this step can be found in Figure 2.
Given a trajectory τ (i) ∈ D, the G sets of PSTs {T 1 , ..., T G } mined from D following Section 2.1,
and G sets of augmented sub-trajectories {Tc1 , ..., T d  G } generated from G corresponding VAE-

MDPs following Section 2.2, an augmented trajectory τ̂ (i) corresponding to τ (i) can be obtained
            h                                                                                              iT
                                                                                      (i)   (i) (i) ′(i)
by τ̂ (i) = 1(t ∈ [ζ, ζ + W − 1])(ŝvt , âvt , r̂tv , ŝ′v
                                                         t ) ∨ 1(t ∈
                                                                   / [ζ, ζ + W − 1])(st , at , rt , st )      ;
                                                                                                          t=1
   v v v ′v                  v            v              g                    v
(ŝt , ât , r̂t , ŝt ) ∈ φ̂ζ,ζ+W −1 , φ̂ζ,ζ+W −1 ∈ T . In this study, the φ̂ζ,ζ+W −1 is selected as the one
                                                      c
whose state and action are the closest to the original state and action at step ζ + W − 1. More details
are provided in Appendix A.6.

3     E XPERIMENTS
3.1   S ETUP
Baselines. We investigate a variety of augmentation methods as baselines, including (i) RL-oriented
methods: TDA (Park et al., 2022) which originally incorporates with rewards learning by randomly
extracting sub-trajectories from trajectories, we replace PST mining by TDA in OAT so that TDA
can be used for OPE with augmentation; permutation, Gaussian jittering, and scaling have been
broadly employed in RL (Laskin et al., 2020b; Liu et al., 2020; Raileanu et al., 2021); (ii) generative
methods: TimeGAN (Yoon et al., 2019) and VAE (Barak et al., 2022); (iii) time-series methods:
SPAWNER (Kamycki et al., 2019) and DGW (Iwana & Uchida, 2021b) that consider similarities
across time series. We implement RL-augmentation methods strictly following original algorithms,
and use open-sourced code provided by the authors for the generative and time-series augmentation
methods. Since generative and time-series methods are not proposed towards trajectories, we treat
trajectories as multivariate time series as their input.
Ablations. One ablation of our approach is to apply VAE-MDP to reconstruct entire trajectories
as augmentations, i.e., without PST mining (Section 2.1) and fusing back (Section 2.3). Moreover,
TDA (Park et al., 2022) and VAE (Barak et al., 2022) can be considered as two ablations as well,
since TDA isolates our PST mining from OAT and VAE augments entire trajectories following the
vanilla VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2013), i.e., without being adapted to the Markovian setting.
OPE methods considered. Outputs from all augmentation methods are fed into five OPE meth-
ods to compare the performance achieved with versus without augmentations. The OPE methods
we consider include importance sampling (IS) (Precup, 2000), fitted Q-evaluation (FQE) (Le et al.,
2019), distribution correction estimation (DICE) (Yang et al., 2020a), doubly robust (DR) (Thomas
& Brunskill, 2016), and model-based (MB) (Zhang et al., 2020a). We use the open-sourced imple-
mentations provided by the Deep OPE (DOPE) benchmark (Fu et al., 2021).
Standard validation metrics. To validate OPE’s performance (for both with and without aug-
mentations), we use standard OPE metrics as introduced in the DOPE benchmark, which include
absolute error, Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (Spearman, 1987), regret@1, and regret@5.
Definitions of the metrics are described in Appendix B.3.

3.2   E NVIRONMENTS

To evaluate our method, OAT, as well as the existing augmentation approaches for OPE, we use
both simulated and real-world environments, spanning the domains of robotics, healthcare, and e-
learning. The environments are human-involved which is generally challenging with highly limited


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


quantity of demonstrations containing underrepresented state space, due to homogeneous interven-
tions when collecting the historical trajectories.
Adroit. Adriot (Rajeswaran et al., 2018) is a simulation environment with four synthetic real-world
robotics tasks, where a simulated Shadow Hand robot is asked to hammer a nail (hammer), open a
door (door), twirl a pen (pen), or pick up and move a ball (relocate). Each task contains three
training datasets with different levels of human-involvements, including full demonstration data
from human (human), induced data from a fine-tuned RL policy (expert), and mixing data with
a 50-50 ratio of demonstration and induced data (cloned). We follow the experimental settings
provided in Deep OPE benchmark, with 11 DAPG-based evaluation policies ranging from random
to expert performance (Fu et al., 2021).
Real-World Sepsis Treatment. We investigate a challenging task in healthcare, sepsis treatments,
which has raised broad attention in OPE (Namkoong et al., 2020; Nie et al., 2022). Specifically,
the trajectories are taken from electronic health records containing 221,700 patient visits collected
from a hospital over two years. The state space is constituted by 15 continuous sepsis-related clinical
attributes that represent patients’ health status, including heart rate, creatinine, etc. The cardinality of
the action space is 4, i.e., two binary treatment options over {antibiotic administration,
oxygen assistance}. Given the four stages of sepsis defined by the clinicians (Delano & Ward,
2016), the rewards are set for each stage: infection (±5), inflammation (±10), organ failure (±20),
and septic shock (±50). Negative rewards are given when a patient enters a worse stage, and positive
rewards are given when the patient recovers to a better stage. The environment considers discrete
time steps, with the horizon being 1160 steps. Five evaluation (target) policies are obtained by
training Deep Q Networks (DQNs) (Mnih et al., 2015) respectively over different hyper-parameters.
More details are provided in Appendix D.
Real-World Intelligent Tutor. Another important human-involved task for OPE is intelligent tutor-
ing, where students interact with intelligent tutors, with the goal of improving students’ engagements
and learning outcomes. Such topics have been investigated in prior OPE works (Mandel et al., 2014;
Nie et al., 2022). Specifically, we collect trajectories recorded from 1,307 students’ interaction logs
with an intelligent tutor, over seven semesters of an undergraduate course at an university. Since
students’ underlying learning states are unobservable (Mandel et al., 2014), we consult with domain
experts who help defines the state space which is constituted by 142 attributes that could possibly
capture students’ learning status from their logs. The cardinality of the action space is 3, i.e., on
each problem, the tutor need to decide whether the student should solve the next problem by
themselves, study a solution provided by the tutor, or work together with the tutor to solve
on the problem. During the tutoring, each student is required to solve 12 problems, thus the horizon
of the environment is considered as 12 discrete steps. Sparse rewards are obtained at the end of the
tutoring, which are defined as students’ normalized learning gains (Chi et al., 2011). We use the
trajectories collected from six semesters as the training data, where the behavior policy follows an
expert policy commonly used in e-learning (Zhou et al., 2019), and test on the upcoming semester.
There are 4 evaluation policies, including three obtained by training DQNs over different hyper-
parameters respectively, in addition to one expert policy. More details are provided in Appendix E.

3.3   R ESULTS
The need of PSTs mining. To better understand the need
of PSTs mining (Section 2.1) conceptually, we visualize
the set of augmented trajectories produced by our method,
against the original set of historical trajectories D, over
the Maze2D-umaze environment which is a toy navi-
gation task requiring an agent to reach a fixed goal lo-
cation (Fu et al., 2020). We uniformly down-sample a
limited number (i.e., 250) of trajectories from the original Figure 4: Visualization of trajectories
dataset provided by D4RL (overall 12k trajectories), and in Maze2D-umaze. Left: the original
use our method to augment this subset such that the to- 250 trajectories; Right: augmented data
tal number of trajectories becomes ten times (×10) larger. with ten times numbers of trajectories
The visualization is shown in Figure 4. It can be observed (×10).
that there exist 3 sets of PSTs (as circled in the figure) that have significantly increased state space
visitation after augmentation, benefiting from the PSTs mining methodology introduced in Sec-
tion 2.1.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3.1   R ESULTS OVER A DROIT

Figure 5 summarizes the averaged improvements
across five OPE methods, over all four tasks (i.e.,
hammer, door, pen, relocate) in Adroit
human, quantified by the percentage increases over
the four validation metrics achieved by the OPE
methods evaluated over the augmented against the
original datasets. Overall, our method significantly
improves OPE methods in terms of all standard val-
idation metrics, and achieves the best performance
compared to all augmentation baselines. This il-
lustrates the effectiveness and robustness of our
proposed methods across environments and tasks.
There is no clear winner among baselines, where
VAE, TimeGAN, and scaling in general perform bet-
ter in terms of MAE, DGW and scaling performs
better in terms of rank correlation, permutation and
jittering perform better in terms of regrest@5. More
specifically, besides the fact that all methods can in   Figure 5: OPE improvement results aver-
general improve MAE, most baselines lead to nega-        aging across 5 OPE methods and 4 tasks
tive effects in terms of the other three metrics. De-    in Adroit human using each augmentation
tailed results are presented in Appendix C.1.            method. Top-left: Mean absolute error
                                                         (MAE) percentage improved. Top-right:
More importantly, it can be observed that the ab-
                                                         rank correlation improvements. Bottom-left
lation baseline VAE-MDP is significantly outper-
                                                         & bottom-right: Regret@1 and @5 improve-
formed by OAT across all metrics, which further jus-
                                                         ments, respectively.
tifies the importance of augmenting over the PSTs
instead of the entire horizon. It can be also observed that VAE-MDP in general outperforms the
vanilla VAE without adaptation to the Markovian setting, illustrating the importance of the adapta-
tion step introduced in Section 2.2. We also find that generative models achieve the best performance
among the baselines over environments that have relatively shorter horizons (e.g., pen), while their
performance is diminished when horizons increased. That further indicates the advantage of PSTs
mining that provides much shorter and representative sub-trajectories for generative learning.


3.3.2   R ESULTS OVER R EAL -W ORLD H EALTHCARE AND E-L EARNING

Figure 6 presents the average MAE improvements
across all OPE methods in e-learning (left), and
improved rank correlation in healthcare (right).
Complete results for empirical study and all val-
idation metrics are provided in Appendix E. Re-
gret@5 is not applicable to both environments,
since the total number of evaluation policies are
less than or equal to five.
Overall, our method can significantly improve
OPE performance in terms of MAE, rank corre-
lation, and regret@1 in both real-world environ- Figure 6: OPE improvement results averaging
ments. In both e-learning and healthcare, most across 5 OPE methods in e-learning (left) and
augmentation baselines lead to neutral to negative healthcare (right).
percentage improvements over the metrics considered, while OAT significantly improves OPE’s per-
formance over all baselines, with the ablation VAE-MDP attains the 2nd best performance. A reason
for baselines perform worse in real-world environments than in simulations can be that real-world
HIS are considered sophisticated, as the human mental states impact their behaviors implicitly. This
further indicates the importance of extracting underlying information from historical trajectories D,
as did in OAT and VAE-MDP, as well as effectively enriching the coverage of state-action space to
provide more comprehensive coverage for OPE methods to leverage, powered by the methodologies
introduced in Section 2.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3.3    M ORE D ISCUSSIONS
We explore the following two major questions that are commonly involved in analyses over HIS.
Will the level of human involvements affect tra-
jectory augmentations for OPE? As presented
in Figure 7, we evaluate augmentation meth-
ods across the four tasks in Adroit environment
with three different levels of human involvements
(LoHI) sorted from the most to least, i.e., human,
cloned, and expert. The results show that our
method achieves the best performance in terms of
all validation metrics when humans are involved in
data collection (i.e., human, cloned). The per-
formance of our method is slightly attenuated (but
still effective) when the LoHI decreased, while our
ablation VAE-MDP leads MAE when the LoHI is
0% (i.e., expert). Though TDA is effective un-
der the case when the LoHI is 0%, it still performs
worse than OAT and consistently worse at other
levels. Such a finding further confirms the effec-
tiveness of PST mining. Moreover, most base-
lines are ineffective when the LoHI is below 50%. Figure 7: OPE improvement results with three
The reason is that the trajectories obtained from human-involving levels, i.e., 100% (human),
demonstrations often provide limited and/or bi- 50% (cloned), 0% (expert), averaging
ased coverage over the state-action space (Fu et al., across 5 OPE methods and 4 tasks in Adroit.
2021; Chang et al., 2021), thus any augmentation
methods that can potentially increase the coverage might be able to improve OPE’s performance.
In contrast, the historical trajectories induced from simulations using fine-tuned policies tend to re-
sult in better coverage over the state-action space in general (Fu et al., 2020), and the augmentation
methods that do not consider the Markovian setting generate trajectories that could be less meaning-
ful (i.e., providing limited or even unrealistic information) to the OPE methods, making them less
effective (e.g., negative effects on OPE when LoHI is 0%). For example, in the realm of surgery,
permutation can result in a trajectory with stitching happened before incision, which is unrealistic.
Can trajectory augmentation facilitate OPE in terms Table 1: Statistical significance test at
of significance test? OPE validation metrics generally the level of ρ < 0.05 with bootstrapping
focus on standard error metrics as proposed in (Fu et al., on three RL-induced policy π1 , π2 , π3
2021), while domain experts emphasis statistical signif- compared to expert policy πexpert from
icance test for real-world HIS (Robertson & Kaptein, real-world intelligent tutoring. The re-
2016; Zhou et al., 2022). For example, rank correlation sults that show significance are in bold.
summarizes the performance of relative rankings of a set          IS result     π1 tp    π2 tp   π3 tp
of policies using averaged returns; in contrast, statistical      No Aug.      7.24.00  7.07.00 -4.48.00

significance tests can examine if the relationships being           OAT        3.10.00  1.33.19 2.11.06
                                                                    TDA       10.14.00 5.82.00 -13.58.00
found are due to randomness. Moreover, they can be eas-             Perm.     -1.78.08 -1.77.08 1.77.08
ier conveyed to and interpreted by domain experts (Guil-          Jittering   -1.89.06 -1.89.06 1.90.06
                                                                   Scaling    -1.33.06 -1.33.06 1.33.06
ford, 1950; Ju et al., 2019).                                       VAE       -1.94.06 -1.92.06 1.54.13
                                                                     TimeGAN      1.90.06   -2.25.03   -2.25.03
One key measurement for RL-induced policies is                       SPAWNER         -1.00.32 -1.00.32 1.00.32
                                                                       DGW           -1.43.06 -1.43.16 1.43.16
whether they significantly outperform the expert policy
                                                                    Empirical result 2.01.04   0.61.54 0.20.84
in HIS (Zhou et al., 2019; 2022). We conduct t-test over
OPE estimations (with and without augmentations) ob-
tained from bootstrapping as introduced in (Hao et al.,
2021), and measure whether there is a significant difference between the mean value of OPE esti-
mation for each RL-induced policy against the expert policy. Interestingly, the results show that IS
performs the best among all 5 OPE methods we considered, in terms of all standard validation met-
rics in e-learning experiments, with and without augmentations using each augmentation method.
This can be caused by the fact that the behavioral policies are intrinsically similar, where 3 out of the
4 policies (i.e., π2 , π3 , πexpert ) lead to similar returns (as shown in Appendix E.1) and the horizon
(i.e., T =12) is not much long, the unbiased nature of IS estimators could dominate it’s high variance
downside. Such characteristics of IS made it broadly used in short-horizon settings (Mandel et al.,


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2014; Xie et al., 2019). The statistical significance results are summarized in Table 1. It can be ob-
served that, without augmentation, IS estimates that all RL-induced policies performs significantly
different from the expert policy. However, in empirical study, only π1 performs significantly better
than expert policy, while the other two, i.e., π2 and π3 not. And our proposed method is the only one
that improves the IS estimation to be aligned with empirical results across all three policies, while
the baselines improve estimation at most one policy. Therefore, the results indicate the effectiveness
of our proposed method in terms of both standard OPE validation metrics and significance test.
4    R ELATED W ORKS
OPE A variety of contemporary OPE methods has been proposed, which can be mainly divided
into three categories (Voloshin et al., 2021b): (i) Inverse propensity scoring (Precup, 2000; Doroudi
et al., 2017), such as Importance Sampling (IS) (Doroudi et al., 2017). (ii) Direct methods that
directly estimate the value functions of the evaluation policy (Nachum et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022c), including but not limited to model-based
estimators (MB) (Paduraru, 2013; Zhang et al., 2021), value-based estimators (Munos et al., 2016;
Le et al., 2019) such as Fitted Q Evaluation (FQE), and minimax estimators (Liu et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2020b; Voloshin et al., 2021a) such as DualDICE (Yang et al., 2020a). (iii) Hybrid methods
combine aspects of both inverse propensity scoring and direct methods (Jiang & Li, 2016; Thomas
& Brunskill, 2016), such as DR (Jiang & Li, 2016). However, a major challenge of applying OPE
to real-world is that many methods can perform unpleasant when human-collected data is highly
limited as demonstrated in (Fu et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2023a; 2024). Therefore, augmentation can
be an important way to facilitate OPE performance.
Data Augmentation for RL In RL, data augmentation has been recognized as effective to improve
generalizability of agents over various tasks (Laskin et al., 2020b;a; Kostrikov et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2021; Raileanu et al., 2021; Joo et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2022). For instance, automatic augmen-
tation selection frameworks are proposed for actor-critic algorithms by regularizing the policy and
value functions (Raileanu et al., 2021). However, most of the prior work only consider image in-
put which may not capture temporal dependencies in trajectories. More importantly, the prior work
is proposed towards RL policy optimization by learning from high-reward regions of state-action
space, while OPE aims to generalize over evaluation policies that can be heterogeneous and lead
to varied performance. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work has extensively investigated
various prior augmentation methods in OPE, nor proposed augmentation towards offline trajectories
to scaffold OPE in real-world domains. More comprehensive review of related works on OPE and
data augmentations in general can be found in Appendix G.
5    C ONCLUSION & L IMITATION
We have proposed OAT, which can capture the dynamics underlying human-involved environments
from historical trajectories that provide limited coverage of the state-action space and induce effec-
tive augmented trajectories to facilitate OPE. This is achieved by mining potential sub-trajectories,
as well as extending a generative modeling framework to capture dynamics under the potential
sub-trajectories. We have validated OAT in both simulation and real-world environments, and the
results have shown that OAT can generally improve OPE performance and outperform a variety
of data augmentation methods. Latent-model-based models such as VAE have been commonly
used for augmentation in offline RL, while they generally rarely come with theoretical error bounds
provided (Hafner et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020; Rybkin et al., 2021). Such a challenge also re-
mains for many data augmentation methods (Zheng et al., 2023). However, once the trajectories
are augmented, one can choose to use the downstream OPE methods which come with guarantees,
such as DR and DICE. Moreover, prior works found that distribution shift could be a challenge for
OPE (Wang et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2021). Though this is beyond the scope of this work, given we
use existing OPE methods as backbones to process the augmented trajectories, a potential future
work is coming up with new OPE methods that can resolve the distribution shift. We conduct exten-
sive experiments to examine the proposed augmentation method, and the results demonstrating its
effectiveness. OAT can be stand-alone to generate trajectories without any assumptions over target
policies. And it can be utilized by built-on-top works such as policy optimization and representation
learning.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S OCIAL I MPACTS
All real-world educational and healthcare data employed in this paper were obtained anonymously
through exempt IRB-approved protocols and were scored using established rubrics. No demographic
data or class grades were collected. All data were shared within the research group under IRB, and
were de-identified and automatically processed for labeling. This research seeks to remove societal
harms that come from lower engagement and retention of students who need more personalized
interventions and developing more robust medical interventions for patients.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the NSF Grants: Integrated Data-driven Technologies for Individ-
ualized Instruction in STEM Learning Environments (1726550), CAREER: Improving Adaptive
Decision Making in Interactive Learning Environments (1651909), Generalizing Data-Driven Tech-
nologies to Improve Individualized STEM Instruction by Intelligent Tutors (2013502), CAREER:
Foundations for Secure Control of Cyber-Physical Systems (1652544), and National AI Institute for
Edge Computing Leveraging Next Generation Wireless Networks (2112562). This research was also
sponsored in part by the AFOSR under award number FA9550-19-1-0169. We would also like to
thank the anonymous reviewers for insightful comments that lead to improved paper presentations.

R EFERENCES
Antreas Antoniou, Amos Storkey, and Harrison Edwards. Data augmentation generative adversarial
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04340, 2017.
Hamoon Azizsoltani and Yeo Jin. Unobserved is not equal to non-existent: Using gaussian processes
  to infer immediate rewards across contexts. In In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019.
Sasan Barak, Ehsan Mirafzali, and Mohammad Joshaghani. Improving deep learning forecast using
  variational autoencoders. Available at SSRN, 2022.
Roger C Bone, Robert A Balk, Frank B Cerra, R Phillip Dellinger, Alan M Fein, William A Knaus,
  Roland MH Schein, and William J Sibbald. Definitions for sepsis and organ failure and guidelines
  for the use of innovative therapies in sepsis. Chest, 101(6):1644–1655, 1992.
Pedro G Campos, Fernando Dı́ez, and Iván Cantador. Time-aware recommender systems: a compre-
  hensive survey and analysis of existing evaluation protocols. User Modeling and User-Adapted
  Interaction, 24:67–119, 2014.
Jonathan Chang, Masatoshi Uehara, Dhruv Sreenivas, Rahul Kidambi, and Wen Sun. Mitigating
  covariate shift in imitation learning via offline data with partial coverage. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:965–979, 2021.
Min Chi, Kurt VanLehn, Diane Litman, and Pamela Jordan. Empirically evaluating the application
 of reinforcement learning to the induction of effective and adaptive pedagogical strategies. User
 Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 21(1):137–180, 2011.
Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Dandelion Mane, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V Le. Autoaugment:
  Learning augmentation strategies from data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 113–123, 2019.
Matthew J Delano and Peter A Ward. The immune system’s role in sepsis progression, resolution,
 and long-term outcome. Immunological reviews, 274(1):330–353, 2016.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Chris Donahue, Julian McAuley, and Miller Puckette. Adversarial audio synthesis. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shayan Doroudi, Philip S Thomas, and Emma Brunskill. Importance sampling for fair policy selec-
  tion. Grantee Submission, 2017.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.
Justin Fu, Mohammad Norouzi, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, Ziyu Wang, Alexander Novikov,
  Mengjiao Yang, Michael R Zhang, Yutian Chen, Aviral Kumar, et al. Benchmarks for deep off-
  policy evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16596, 2021.
Ge Gao, Samiha Marwan, and Thomas W Price. Early performance prediction using interpretable
  patterns in programming process data. In Proceedings of the 52nd ACM technical symposium on
  computer science education, pp. 342–348, 2021.
Ge Gao, Qitong Gao, Xi Yang, Miroslav Pajic, and Min Chi. A reinforcement learning-informed
  pattern mining framework for multivariate time series classification. In Proceedings of the Thirty-
  First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22, pp. 2994–3000, 2022a.
Ge Gao, Farzaneh Khoshnevisan, and Min Chi. Reconstructing missing ehrs using time-aware
  within-and cross-visit information for septic shock early prediction. In 2022 IEEE 10th Interna-
  tional Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI), pp. 151–162. IEEE, 2022b.
Ge Gao, Song Ju, Markel Sanz Ausin, and Min Chi. Hope: Human-centric off-policy evaluation for
  e-learning and healthcare. In AAMAS, 2023a.
Ge Gao, Xi Yang, and Min Chi. Get a head start: On-demand pedagogical policy selection in
  intelligent tutoring. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.
Qitong Gao, Ge Gao, Min Chi, and Miroslav Pajic. Variational latent branching model for off-policy
  evaluation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022c.
Qitong Gao, Ge Gao, Juncheng Dong, Vahid Tarokh, Min Chi, and Miroslav Pajic. Off-policy
  evaluation for human feedback. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023b.
Qitong Gao, Stephen L Schmidt, Afsana Chowdhury, Guangyu Feng, Jennifer J Peters, Katherine
  Genty, Warren M Grill, Dennis A Turner, and Miroslav Pajic. Offline learning of closed-loop deep
  brain stimulation controllers for parkinson disease treatment. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE
  14th International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (with CPS-IoT Week 2023), pp. 44–55,
  2023c.
Anirudh Goyal, Abram Friesen, Andrea Banino, Theophane Weber, Nan Rosemary Ke, Adria Puig-
  domenech Badia, Arthur Guez, Mehdi Mirza, Peter C Humphreys, Ksenia Konyushova, et al.
  Retrieval-augmented reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 7740–7765. PMLR, 2022.
Joy Paul Guilford. Fundamental statistics in psychology and education. 1950.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
David Hallac, Sagar Vare, Stephen Boyd, and Jure Leskovec. Toeplitz inverse covariance-based
  clustering of multivariate time series data. In ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery
  and Data Mining, pp. 215–223, 2017.
Josiah Hanna, Scott Niekum, and Peter Stone. Importance sampling policy evaluation with an
  estimated behavior policy. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2605–2613.
  PMLR, 2019.
Botao Hao, Xiang Ji, Yaqi Duan, Hao Lu, Csaba Szepesvári, and Mengdi Wang. Bootstrapping
  statistical inference for off-policy evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03607, 2021.
Brian Kenji Iwana and Seiichi Uchida. An empirical survey of data augmentation for time series
  classification with neural networks. Plos one, 16(7):e0254841, 2021a.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Brian Kenji Iwana and Seiichi Uchida. Time series data augmentation for neural networks by time
  warping with a discriminative teacher. In 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recog-
  nition (ICPR), pp. 3558–3565. IEEE, 2021b.
Nan Jiang and Lihong Li. Doubly robust off-policy value evaluation for reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 652–661. PMLR, 2016.
Ho-Taek Joo, In-Chang Baek, and Kyung-Joong Kim. A swapping target q-value technique for data
  augmentation in offline reinforcement learning. IEEE Access, 2022.
Song Ju, Shitian Shen, Hamoon Azizsoltani, Tiffany Barnes, and Min Chi. Importance sampling to
  identify empirically valid policies and their critical decisions. In EDM (Workshops), pp. 69–78,
  2019.
Song Ju, Yeo Jin Kim, Markel Sanz Ausin, Maria E Mayorga, and Min Chi. To reduce healthcare
  workload: Identify critical sepsis progression moments through deep reinforcement learning. In
  2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 1640–1646. IEEE, 2021.
Krzysztof Kamycki, Tomasz Kapuscinski, and Mariusz Oszust. Data augmentation with suboptimal
  warping for time-series classification. Sensors, 20(1):98, 2019.
Yeo-Jin Kim and Min Chi. Temporal belief memory: Imputing missing data during rnn training. In
  In Proceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-2018),
  2018.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.             Auto-encoding variational bayes.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Matthieu Komorowski, Leo A Celi, Omar Badawi, Anthony C Gordon, and A Aldo Faisal. The arti-
 ficial intelligence clinician learns optimal treatment strategies for sepsis in intensive care. Nature
 medicine, 24(11):1716–1720, 2018.
Ilya Kostrikov, Denis Yarats, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing
   deep reinforcement learning from pixels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13649, 2020.
Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representa-
 tions for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5639–
 5650. PMLR, 2020a.
Misha Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Rein-
 forcement learning with augmented data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
 19884–19895, 2020b.
Hoang Le, Cameron Voloshin, and Yisong Yue. Batch policy learning under constraints. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3703–3712. PMLR, 2019.
Arthur Le Guennec, Simon Malinowski, and Romain Tavenard. Data augmentation for time se-
  ries classification using convolutional neural networks. In ECML/PKDD workshop on advanced
  analytics and learning on temporal data, 2016.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Alex X Lee, Anusha Nagabandi, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Stochastic latent actor-critic:
  Deep reinforcement learning with a latent variable model. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 33:741–752, 2020.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tuto-
  rial, review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zachary C Lipton, David Kale, and Randall Wetzel. Directly modeling missing data in sequences
  with rnns: Improved classification of clinical time series. In Machine learning for healthcare
  conference, pp. 253–270. PMLR, 2016.
Bo Liu, Zhenguo Zhang, and Rongyi Cui. Efficient time series augmentation methods. In 2020 13th
  international congress on image and signal processing, BioMedical engineering and informatics
  (CISP-BMEI), pp. 1004–1009. IEEE, 2020.
Jinxin Liu, Zhang Hongyin, and Donglin Wang. Dara: Dynamics-aware reward augmentation in
   offline reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Qiang Liu, Lihong Li, Ziyang Tang, and Dengyong Zhou. Breaking the curse of horizon: Infinite-
  horizon off-policy estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Vincent Liu, Gabriel J Escobar, John D Greene, Jay Soule, Alan Whippy, Derek C Angus, and
  Theodore J Iwashyna. Hospital deaths in patients with sepsis from 2 independent cohorts. Jama,
  312(1):90–92, 2014.
Travis Mandel, Yun-En Liu, Sergey Levine, Emma Brunskill, and Zoran Popovic. Offline policy
  evaluation across representations with applications to educational games. In AAMAS, volume
  1077, 2014.
G.S Martin, D.M Mannino, et al. The epidemiology of sepsis in the united states from 1979 through
  2000. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003.
Iris Miliaraki, Klaus Berberich, Rainer Gemulla, and Spyros Zoupanos. Mind the gap: Large-scale
   frequent sequence mining. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGMOD international conference
   on management of data, pp. 797–808, 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Rémi Munos, Tom Stepleton, Anna Harutyunyan, and Marc Bellemare. Safe and efficient off-policy
   reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Ofir Nachum, Yinlam Chow, Bo Dai, and Lihong Li. Dualdice: Behavior-agnostic estimation of dis-
  counted stationary distribution corrections. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32, 2019.
Hongseok Namkoong, Ramtin Keramati, Steve Yadlowsky, and Emma Brunskill. Off-policy policy
  evaluation for sequential decisions under unobserved confounding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 33:18819–18831, 2020.
Allen Nie, Yannis Flet-Berliac, Deon Richmond Jordan, William Steenbergen, and Emma Brunskill.
  Data-efficient pipeline for offline reinforcement learning with limited data. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Cosmin Paduraru. Off-policy evaluation in markov decision processes. 2013.
Jongjin Park, Younggyo Seo, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. Surf:
  Semi-supervised reward learning with data augmentation for feedback-efficient preference-based
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Doina Precup. Eligibility traces for off-policy policy evaluation. Computer Science Department
  Faculty Publication Series, pp. 80, 2000.
Aniruddh Raghu, Matthieu Komorowski, Imran Ahmed, Leo Celi, Peter Szolovits, and Marzyeh
  Ghassemi. Deep reinforcement learning for sepsis treatment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09602,
  2017.
Roberta Raileanu, Maxwell Goldstein, Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, and Rob Fergus. Automatic
  data augmentation for generalization in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:5402–5415, 2021.

                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
  Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement
  learning and demonstrations. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2018.
Judy Robertson and Maurits Kaptein. Modern statistical methods for HCI. Springer, 2016.
Havard Rue and Leonhard Held. Gaussian Markov random fields: theory and applications. CRC
  press, 2005.
Oleh Rybkin, Chuning Zhu, Anusha Nagabandi, Kostas Daniilidis, Igor Mordatch, and Sergey
  Levine. Model-based reinforcement learning via latent-space collocation. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 9190–9201. PMLR, 2021.
Kajetan Schweighofer, Markus Hofmarcher, Marius-Constantin Dinu, Philipp Renz, Angela Bitto-
  Nemling, Vihang Prakash Patil, and Sepp Hochreiter. Understanding the effects of dataset char-
  acteristics on offline reinforcement learning. In Deep RL Workshop NeurIPS 2021, 2021.
Mervyn Singer, Clifford S Deutschman, Christopher Warren Seymour, Manu Shankar-Hari, Djillali
 Annane, Michael Bauer, Rinaldo Bellomo, Gordon R Bernard, Jean-Daniel Chiche, Craig M
 Coopersmith, et al. The third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock
 (sepsis-3). Jama, 315(8):801–810, 2016.
Charles Spearman. The proof and measurement of association between two things. The American
  journal of psychology, 100(3/4):441–471, 1987.
Philip Thomas and Emma Brunskill. Data-efficient off-policy policy evaluation for reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2139–2148. PMLR, 2016.
Masatoshi Uehara, Jiawei Huang, and Nan Jiang. Minimax weight and q-function learning for off-
 policy evaluation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9659–9668. PMLR,
 2020.
Cameron Voloshin, Nan Jiang, and Yisong Yue. Minimax model learning. In International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1612–1620. PMLR, 2021a.
Cameron Voloshin, Hoang Minh Le, Nan Jiang, and Yisong Yue. Empirical study of off-policy
  policy evaluation for reinforcement learning. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021b.
Lu Wang, Ruiming Tang, Xiaofeng He, and Xiuqiang He. Hierarchical imitation learning via sub-
  goal representation learning for dynamic treatment recommendation. In Proceedings of the Fif-
  teenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 1081–1089, 2022.
Ruosong Wang, Yifan Wu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sham Kakade. Instabilities of offline rl with
  pre-trained neural representation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10948–
  10960. PMLR, 2021.
Jingda Wu, Zhiyu Huang, Wenhui Huang, and Chen Lv. Prioritized experience-based reinforcement
   learning with human guidance for autonomous driving. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
   and Learning Systems, 2022.
Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Eduard Hovy, Thang Luong, and Quoc Le. Unsupervised data augmentation
  for consistency training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6256–6268,
  2020.
Tengyang Xie, Yifei Ma, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Towards optimal off-policy evaluation for rein-
  forcement learning with marginalized importance sampling. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Yaniv Yacoby, Weiwei Pan, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Failure modes of variational autoencoders and
  their effects on downstream tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07124, 2020.
Mengjiao Yang, Ofir Nachum, Bo Dai, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. Off-policy evaluation via
 the regularized lagrangian. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6551–6561,
 2020a.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mengjiao Yang, Bo Dai, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Dale Schuurmans. Offline policy selec-
 tion under uncertainty. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
 4376–4396. PMLR, 2022.
Xi Yang, Guojing Zhou, Michelle Taub, Roger Azevedo, and Min Chi. Student subtyping via em-
  inverse reinforcement learning. International Educational Data Mining Society, 2020b.
Xi Yang, Yuan Zhang, and Min Chi. Multi-series time-aware sequence partitioning for disease
  progression modeling. In IJCAI, 2021.
Jinsung Yoon, Daniel Jarrett, and Mihaela Van der Schaar. Time-series generative adversarial net-
   works. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Michael R Zhang, Thomas Paine, Ofir Nachum, Cosmin Paduraru, George Tucker, Mohammad
 Norouzi, et al. Autoregressive dynamics models for offline policy evaluation and optimization. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Michael R Zhang, Tom Le Paine, Ofir Nachum, Cosmin Paduraru, George Tucker, Ziyu Wang,
 and Mohammad Norouzi. Autoregressive dynamics models for offline policy evaluation and
 optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13877, 2021.
Shangtong Zhang, Bo Liu, and Shimon Whiteson. Gradientdice: Rethinking generalized offline
  estimation of stationary values. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11194–
  11203. PMLR, 2020b.
Chenyu Zheng, Guoqiang Wu, and Chongxuan Li. Toward understanding generative data augmen-
  tation. Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Guojing Zhou, Hamoon Azizsoltani, Markel Sanz Ausin, Tiffany Barnes, and Min Chi. Hierarchical
  reinforcement learning for pedagogical policy induction. In International conference on artificial
  intelligence in education, pp. 544–556. Springer, 2019.
Guojing Zhou, Hamoon Azizsoltani, Markel Sanz Ausin, Tiffany Barnes, and Min Chi. Leveraging
  granularity: Hierarchical reinforcement learning for pedagogical policy induction. International
  journal of artificial intelligence in education, 32(2):454–500, 2022.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L IST OF A PPENDICES
Appendix17

A More Details on Methodology                                                                    17
  A.1 Complexity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
      A.1.1 Training Time with VAE-MDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           17
  A.2 More Analysis on Augmented Trajectories from OAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           18
      A.2.1 Scatter Plots on Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18
  A.3 Details of Discrete Representation Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
      A.3.1 TICC Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         19
  A.4 Detailed Formulation of the VAE-MDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          20
  A.5 Proof of Equation 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
  A.6 More Details of Fusing Back Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
  A.7 OAT with Non-temporally-aligned Trajectories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         21

B Experimental Setup                                                                             22
  B.1 Training Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22
  B.2 Implementation Details & Hyper-Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        22
  B.3 Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22

C Adroit                                                                                         23
  C.1 Detailed Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
  C.2 Start and End Time of PSTs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      37

D Real-World Sepsis Treatment                                                                    39
  D.1 Task Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39

E Real-World Intelligent Tutoring                                                                40
  E.1 Task Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40

F Additional Experiments and Results: Gym-Mujoco                                                 42
  F.1 Details of Gym-Mujoco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      42
  F.2 Results on Gym-Mujoco and Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          42

G More Related Works                                                                             43


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     M ORE D ETAILS ON M ETHODOLOGY

A.1     C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS

OAT consists of three main steps, including PSTs mining, PSTs augmentation, and fuse back; thus,
the overall complexity depends on the specific techniques used in each step. In PSTs mining, the
discrete representation mapping uses TICC, which takes O(T N C) time to assign T N states (T is
the horizon, N is the number of trajectories) into C clusters (Hallac et al., 2017). To identify PSTs,
we use MG-FSM (Miliaraki et al., 2013) for sub-trajectory mining which has O(T ) time complexity.
We found that providing complexity for PSTs augmentation could be challenging given that training
VAE requires stochastic gradient descent algorithms with parameter tuning (e.g., for step size and
network architecture). In fusing back, the time complexity is O(N ) if the same amount of augmented
trajectories is added, and we are positive this can be shortened with parallel processing. Overall, as
shown in Table 2, on average, OAT takes less training time of timeGAN and VAE with the same
neural network architecture, respectively, which indicates OAT benefits more in augmenting on
much shorter PSTs than the mining process.
For the cost of reaching effectiveness, the total number of TDSSs from which PSTs are selected
is correlated to the length of the TDSSs which are capped at the horizon, i.e., the total number of
TDSSs is capped at C T . However, in Adroit-human, we noticed that the longest length of the PSTs
found is 10 when ξ is 10 (less than N/2), so T seems like a generous upper bound. For example, in
Adroit door-human, PSTs mining takes 224s over 6.7k data points.



Table 2: Average training time of OAT and generative-model-based methods in Adroit environment.
                        Training time (s)   Pen    Door   Relocate   Hammer
                             OAT            1662    688     734        1476
                             VAE            4247   2266    3184        3756
                           TimeGAN          1888   3027    4178        3716


A.1.1    T RAINING T IME WITH VAE-MDP

We plot the training time of VAE-MDP vs length of PSTs across all 12 Adroit datasets in Figure 8,
obtained from the same architecture of LSTMs and training settings as provided in Appendix B.2.
From the Figure 8, we can observe that the training time of VAE-MDP is increased almost linearly
with the length of PSTs. In experiments, the lengths of PSTs mined from most of the datasets (i.e.,
9 out of 12 datasets) are within 11, which only require less than 1 minute to train the VAE-MDP.


Figure 8: Plots of training time of VAE-MDP (in seconds) vs length of PSTs across all Adroit tasks.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2        M ORE A NALYSIS ON AUGMENTED T RAJECTORIES FROM OAT


A.2.1       S CATTER P LOTS ON R ETURNS


We present scatter plots plotting the true returns of each policy against the estimated returns. Each
point on the plot represents one target policy.


             FQE            MB                  IS             DR               DICE


                                                                                           Before aug.
Estimate


                                                                                          After aug.


                                          Return (𝛾=0.995)


Figure 9: Scatter plots of estimate vs ground truth return before (top) and after (bottom) OAT aug-
mentation in Adroit pen-human environment.


             FQE             MB                  IS             DR                DICE



                                                                                          Before aug.
Estimate


                                                                                          After aug.


                                          Return (𝛾=0.995)


Figure 10: Scatter plots of estimate vs ground truth return before (top) and after (bottom) OAT
augmentation in Adroit relocate-human environment.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             FQE                MB                   IS            DR               DICE



Estimate                                                                                   Before aug.


                                                                                           After aug.


                                               Return (𝛾=0.995)


Figure 11: Scatter plots of estimate vs ground truth return before (top) and after (bottom) OAT
augmentation in Adroit hammer-human environment.


              FQE               MB                  IS            DR              DICE



                                                                                           Before aug.
Estimate


                                                                                           After aug.


                                              Return (𝛾=0.995)


Figure 12: Scatter plots of estimate vs ground truth return before (top) and after (bottom) OAT
augmentation in Adroit door-human environment.


A.3        D ETAILS OF D ISCRETE R EPRESENTATION M APPING

In this work, we leverage Toeplitz inverse covariance-based clustering (TICC) (Hallac et al., 2017)
to map states st ∈ S into C clusters, where each st is associated with a cluster from the set
K = {K1 , . . . , KC }. The states mapped to the same cluster can be considered sharing graphical
connectivity structure of both temporal and cross-attributes information captured by TICC. There are
variations of TICC targeting specific characteristics of data. Specifically, we used MT-TICC (Yang
et al., 2021) which is proposed towards time-awareness and multi-trajectories. The hyperparameter
C can be determined by calculating silhouette score (Hallac et al., 2017).

A.3.1       TICC P ROBLEM
Each cluster c ∈ [1, C] is defined as a Markov random field (Rue & Held, 2005), or correlation net-
work, captured by its Gaussian inverse covariance matrix Σ−1   c ∈R
                                                                       m×m
                                                                            , where m is the dimension
of state space. We also define the set of clusters K = {K1 , . . . , KC } ⊂ R as well as the set of
inverse covariance matrices Σ−1 = {Σ−1                −1
                                         1 , . . . , ΣC }. Then the objective is set to be

                               C h X
                               X                 (i)            (i)        i
                       max                    L(st ; Σ−1
                                                      c ) − ϵ1{st−1 ∈
                                                                    / Kc } ,                            (3)
                      Σ−1 ,K
                               c=1   (i)
                                     st ∈Kc



                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        (i)                            (i)                 (i)
where the first term defines the log-likelihood of st coming from Kc as L(st ; Σ−1            1
                                                                                    c ) = − 2 (st −
      T −1 (i)              1          −1    n
µc k) Σc (st − µc ) + 2 log det Σc − 2 log(2π) with µc being the empirical mean of cluster
                           (i)
Kc , the second term 1{st−1 ∈  / Kc } penalizes the adjacent events that are not assigned to the same
cluster and ϵ is a constant balancing off the scale of the two terms. This optimization problem
can be solved using the expectation-maximization family of algorithms by updating Σ−1 and K
alternatively Hallac et al. (2017).


A.4    D ETAILED F ORMULATION OF THE VAE-MDP


The latent prior p(zζ ) ∼ N (0, I) representing the distribution of the initial latent states (at the
beginning of each PST in the set T g ), where I is the identity covariance matrix.
The encoder qω (zt |st−1 , at−1 , st ) is used to approximate the posterior distribution
                                  p (z   ,at−1 ,zt ,st )
pη (zt |st−1 , at−1 , st ) = R ηp(zt−1 t−1 ,at−1 ,zt ,st )dzt
                                                              , where Z ⊂ Rm and m is the dimension.
                              zt ∈Z
                                                                           Qζ+W −1
Given that qω (zζ:ζ+W −1 |sζ:ζ+W −1 , aζ:ζ+W −2 ) = qω (zζ |sζ ) t=ζ+1 qω (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st ),
both distributions qω (zζ |sζ ) and qω (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st ) follow diagonal Gaussian, where mean and
diagonal covariance are determined by multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) and long short-term memory
(LSTM), with neural network weights ω. Thus, one can infer zζω ∼ qω (zζ |sζ ), ztω ∼ qω (zt |hω      t ),
         ω            ω     ω                                                        ω
with ht = fω (ht−1 , zt−1 , at−1 , st ) where fω represents LSTM layer and ht represents LSTM
recurrent hidden state.
The       decoder       pη (zt , st , rt−1 |zt−1 , at−1 )  is      used      to    sample       new  tra-
jectories.                     Given           pη (zζ+1:ζ+W −1 , sζ:ζ+W −1 , rζ:ζ+W −2 |zζ , β)        =
Qζ+W −1                QT
   t=ζ     pη (st |zt ) t=ζ+1 pη (zt |zt−1 , at−1 )pη (rt−1 |zt ), where at ’s are determined follow-
ing the behavioral policy β, distributions pη (st |zt ) and pη (rt−1 |zt ) follow diagonal Gaussian with
mean and covariance determined by MLPs and pη (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ) follows diagonal Gaussian with
mean and covariance determined by LSTM.
Thus, the generative process can be formulated as, i.e., at initialization, zζη ∼ p(zζ ), sηζ ∼ pη (sζ |zζη ),
aζ ∼ β(aζ |sηζ ); followed by ztη ∼ pη (h̃ηt ), rt−1η
                                                        ∼ pη (rt−1 |ztη ), sηt ∼ pη (st |ztη ), at ∼ β(at |sηt ),
with h̃ηt = gη [fη (hηt−1 , zt−1
                             η
                                 , at−1 )] where gη represents an MLP.


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5    P ROOF OF E QUATION 2

The derivation of the evidence lower bound (ELBO) for the joint log-likelihood distribution can be
found below.

                   log pη (sζ:ζ+W −1 , rζ:ζ+W −2 )                                                          (4)
                       Z
                 = log                  pη (sζ:ζ+W −1 , zζ+1:ζ+W −1 , rζ:ζ+W −2 )dz                         (5)
                         zζ+1:ζ+W −1 ∈Z
                         Z
                                       pη (sζ:ζ+W −1 , zζ+1:ζ+W −1 , rζ:ζ+W −2 )
                 = log                                                           qω (zζ:ζ+W −1 |sζ:ζ+W −1 , aζ:ζ+W −2 )dz
                         zζ+1:ζ+W −1 ∈Z qω (zζ:ζ+W −1 |sζ:ζ+W −1 , aζ:ζ+W −2 )
                                                                                                    (6)
Jensen′ s inequality
        ≥         Eqω [log p(zζ ) + log pη (sζ:ζ+W −1 , zζ+1:ζ+W −1 , rζ:ζ+W −2 |zζ ) − log qω (zζ:ζ+W −1 |sζ:ζ+W −1 , aζ:ζ+W −2 )]
                                                                                                            (7)
                      h                                 Xζ+W −1
                 =Eqω log p(zζ ) + log pη (sζ |zζ ) +                log pη (st , zt , rt−1 |zt−1 , at−1 )
                                                           t=ζ
                                                    Xζ+W −1                                   i
                             − log qω (zζ |sζ ) −               log qω (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st )              (8)
                                                       t=ζ+1
                      h                                                     Xζ+W −1
                 =Eqω log p(zζ ) − log qω (zζ |sζ ) + log pη (sζ |zζ ) +                  log pη (st |zt )pη (rt−1 |zt )pη (zt |zt−1 , at−1 )
                                                                               t=ζ+1
                                Xζ+W −1                                   i
                             −              log qω (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st )                                  (9)
                                    t=ζ+1
                      h Xζ+W −1                        Xζ+W −1
                 =Eqω               log pη (st |zt ) +             log pη (rt−1 |zt )
                            t=ζ                           t=ζ+1
                                                           Xζ+W −1                                                                i
                             − KL qω (zζ |sζ )||p(zζ ) −                    KL qω (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st )||pη (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ) .
                                                                    t=ζ+1
                                                                                                           (10)


A.6    M ORE D ETAILS OF F USING BACK S TEP

We have ensured that the transition from the original trajectory to the beginning of the augmented
PSTs are smoothed, by letting the generation of ŝζ , the initial state in the PST (e.g., ŝ3 in Figure 3),
to be conditioned on sζ−1 which is the last state in the original trajectory (e.g., ŝ2 in Figure 3),
which equivalently set sζ−1 as the underlying initial state for the generated PST. To smooth the end
of PSTs, we select the augmented PSTs with the states and actions that have the least distance to the
original states and actions, at step ζ + W − 1. In experiments, we use the Euclidean distance as the
measure.


A.7    OAT WITH N ON - TEMPORALLY- ALIGNED T RAJECTORIES

In the main context, for notation conciseness, we use horizon T to denote the length of all trajecto-
ries for notational simplicity, since our work is the first one introducing sub-trajectory mining and
augmentation to OPE. Note that OAT can work with non-temporally-aligned trajectories, i.e., tra-
jectories with different lengths and varied start and end times. In the PSTs mining step, the length
W is flexible and the TDSSs can be generated with a small length (e.g., 2) and expanded recursively
until reaching a maximum length (e.g., T ). Since our goal is to extract PSTs whose TDSSs are
shared across trajectories with large supports, a threshold ξ is used to bound the supports of PSTs so
that the PSTs with the greatest supports can be always extracted. Moreover, in our experiment, the
Adroit-human environments contain temporally non-aligned trajectories (e.g., length of trajectories
from door and relocate, varied from 223 to 300, and 297 to 527, respectively). More environ-
mental details are provided in Appendix C. And Appendix C.2 shows the the length of trajectories,
and start and end time of PSTs found on each trajectory can be varied.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

B.1   T RAINING R ESOURCES

We implement the proposed method in Python. Training of our method and baselines are supported
by four NVIDIA TITAN Xp 12GB, three NVIDIA Quadro RTX 6000 24GB, and four NVIDIA
RTX A5000 24GB GPUs.

B.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS & H YPER -PARAMETERS

The cluster number for discrete representation mapping can be determined by silhouette score using
training data following (Hallac et al., 2017), we perform search among [10, 20] for C in all datasets
and the one with the highest silhouette score is selected. In our experiments, C = 18, 10, 19, 16 for
{pen, door, relocate, hammer}-human, respectively; C = 20, 10, 10, 10 for {pen,
door, relocate, hammer}-cloned, respectively; C = 11, 10, 10, 10 for {pen, door,
relocate, hammer}-expert, respectively; C = 14, 17 for e-learning and healthcare, respec-
tively.
The experimental results are obtained with selecting the PSTs using the threshold ξ ∈ [2, N ] at the
top 1, i.e., we use the PST with the highest support of its corresponding TDSS, for easier investiga-
tion of the PSTs mining and comparison to other augmentation baselines such as TDA, and present
straightforward and general effects of our method. The percentage supports of the selected PSTs,
i.e., support(·)/N , are all ≥ 82% across all datasets and all experimental environments, especially
can cover 100% trajectories in all Adroit human tasks, which may further indicates the effectiveness
of PSTs mining. We choose the neural network architectures as follows.
For the components involving LSTMs, which include qω (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , st ) and pη (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ),
their architecture include one LSTM layer with 64 nodes, followed by a dense layer with 64 nodes.
All other components do not have LSTM layers involved, so they are constituted by a neural network
with 2 dense layers, with 128 and 64 nodes respectively. The output layers that determine the
mean and diagonal covariance of diagonal Gaussian distributions use linear and softplus activations,
respectively. The ones that determine the mean of Bernoulli distributions (e.g., for capturing early
termination of episodes) are configured to use sigmoid activations. For training OAT and its ablation
VAE-MDP, maximum number of iteration is set to 100 and minibatch size set to 4 (given the small
numbers of trajectories, i.e., 25 for each task) in Adroit, and 1,000 and 64 for real-world healthcare
and e-learning, respectively. Adam optimizer is used to perform gradient descent. To determine the
learning rate, we perform grid search among {1e − 4, 3e − 3, 3e − 4, 5e − 4, 7e − 4}. Exponential
decay is applied to the learning rate, which decays the learning rate by 0.997 every iteration. For
OPE, the model-based methods are evaluated by directly interacting with each target policy for 50
episodes, and the mean of discounted total returns (γ = 0.995 for Adroit, γ = 0.99 for Healthcare,
γ = 0.9 for e-learning) over all episodes is used as estimated performance for the policy.

B.3   E VALUATION M ETRICS

Absolute error The absolute error is defined as the difference between the actual value and estimated
value of a policy:
                                           AE = |V π − V̂ π |                                     (11)

where V π represents the actual value of the policy π, and V̂ π represents the estimated value of π.
Regret@1 Regret@1 is the (normalized) difference between the value of the actual best policy, and
the actual value of the best policy chosen by estimated values. It can be defined as:

                           R1 = ( max Viπ −        max         Vjπ )/ max Viπ                     (12)
                                   i∈1:P        j∈best(1:P )        i∈1:P


where best(1 : P ) denotes the index of the best policy over the set of P policies as measured by
estimated values V̂ π .


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                    Table 3: Summary of Adroit.
    Task                  State Dim.    Action Dim.     Early Term.   Continuous Ctrl.   Dataset Size
    Pen-human             45            24              Yes           Yes                5000
    Door-human            39            28              No            Yes                6729
    Hammer-human          46            26              No            Yes                11310
    Relocate-human        39            30              No            Yes                9942
    Pen-cloned            45            24              Yes           Yes                5 ∗ 105
    Door-cloned           39            28              No            Yes                106
    Hammer-cloned         46            26              No            Yes                106
    Relocate-cloned       39            30              No            Yes                106
    Pen-expert            45            24              Yes           Yes                5 ∗ 105
    Door-expert           39            28              No            Yes                106
    Hammer-expert         46            26              No            Yes                106
    Relocate-expert       39            30              No            Yes                106

Rank correlation Rank correlation measures the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between the
ordinal rankings of the estimated values and actual values across policies:
                                                  π             π
                                       Cov(rank(V1:P ), rank(V̂1:P ))
                                 ρ=             π ))σ(rank(V̂ π ))
                                                                                                    (13)
                                       σ(rank(V1:P           1:P
              π                                                                                   π
where rank(V1:P  ) denotes the ordinal rankings of the actual values across policies, and rank(V̂1:P )
denotes the ordinal rankings of the estimated values across policies.

C     A DROIT
As shown in Figure 13, Adriot (Rajeswaran
et al., 2018) is a simulation environment with
four synthetic real-world robotics tasks, where
a 24-DoF simulated Shadow Hand robot is
asked to hammer a nail (hammer), open a door
(door), twirl a pen (pen), or pick up and
move a ball (relocate). Each task contains
three training datasets with different levels of
human-involvements, including full demonstra-
tion data from human (human), induced data
from a fine-tuned RL policy (expert), and
mixing data with a 50-50 ratio of demonstra-
tion and induced data (cloned). Task proper-
ties are provided in Table 3.

C.1    D ETAILED R ESULTS
                                                        Figure 13: Four tasks in Adroit environment.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Summary results averaging across five OPE methods without augmentation and with each
augmentation method in Adroit human.
                                     Pen                                         Relocate
               MAE      Rank Corr.    Regret@1     Regret@5   MAE      Rank Corr.     Regret@1   Regret@5
   NoAug.       3014      -0.104           0.184     0.03     1956.4     0.204         0.434      0.298
     OAT       1042.2      0.276           0.166    0.026       537       0.36          0.42      0.158
 VAE-MDP       1527.8      0.226           0.204     0.02      430.8     0.142          0.53      0.256
     VAE       1302.4      -0.03           0.334    0.062      834.8      0.04         0.654      0.484
  TimeGAN      1538.2      0.006           0.216    0.022      1209      0.408         0.604       0.34
 SPAWNER       1817.8     -0.192           0.218    0.144     1560.6     0.338         0.436      0.272
    DGW         1578      -0.028           0.292    0.054     1226.8     0.164         0.434      0.294
 Permutation   1548.6     -0.132            0.27    0.076      1628      0.338          0.51      0.152
   Jittering   1632.8     -0.096           0.202    0.076     1407.4     0.038         0.574      0.168
   Scaling     1308.2      -0.02           0.382    0.076     1462.8     0.244         0.72       0.212
     TDA       1030.4     -0.116           0.262     0.06      832.2     0.182         0.608      0.496
                                   Hammer                                           Door
               MAE      Rank Corr.    Regret@1     Regret@5   MAE      Rank Corr.     Regret@1   Regret@5
   NoAug.       5266       0.344            0.34    0.058     603.8       0.14         0.274      0.004
     OAT       3187.8      0.608           0.084    0.018     477.8      0.676         0.152      0.026
 VAE-MDP       3418.6      0.02            0.454    0.126     497.2      0.336         0.224      0.052
     VAE       3733.2     -0.198            0.47    0.104     642.8      0.482         0.288      0.046
  TimeGAN       4681       0.262            0.34     0.24      507       0.392          0.27       0.03
 SPAWNER       4244.8     -0.156            0.55     0.37     687.6      0.146          0.37      0.186
    DGW        5238.8      0.242           0.296    0.144     578.2      0.342         0.134      0.052
 Permutation   4103.2     -0.202           0.534    0.076     583.4      0.264         0.236      0.088
   Jittering   4256.4      0.004           0.452    0.102     700.2      0.268         0.342      0.056
   Scaling     3832.4      0.166           0.404    0.102     580.8      0.222         0.326      0.078
     TDA        3448      -0.298            0.56    0.078     511.2      0.118         0.376      0.112


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: MAE results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in Adroit human en-
vironment. Results are obtained by averaging over 3 random seeds used for training at a discount
factor of 0.995, with standard deviations shown after ±.
    FQE          pen       door      relocate    hammer     MB     pen       door    relocate   hammer
   NoAug.      3872±140   389±60    593±113     6000±612         1218±23    403±18   353±21     3778±78
     OAT       1231±33    464±17     742±7       3500±42          316±126    461±4   298±5      3372±28
 VAE-MDP         843±44   498±10     419±6       3358±24          541±310    493±3   423±1      2912±13
  TimeGAN      919±141    459±92     962±96     4353±495         1063±450   435±34    413±1      5811±97
     VAE         614±9     531±7     520±2       3746±16           615±14    530±3   421±1        3734±9
 SPAWNER       1508±52    504±35    735±131     6529±172          1107±0     473±4   698±4       3561±11
    DGW         792±222   320±20     787±69     9578±431         1278±175   430±29    810±6      3779±37
 Permutation   924±140    520±41     542±10      4069±56            998±0    483±4   754±4       3324±11
   Jittering   1092±105   403±30      746±0     5526±323          1064±9    539±11   512±60     3257±103
   Scaling      875±52    360±20    624±179     4599±306          961±337    478±5   524±84      3627±63
     TDA       1185±29     469±6     805±10      3407±22          471±248    470±4    810±4      3402±11
     IS          pen       door      relocate    hammer     DR     pen       door    relocate   hammer
   NoAug.      3926±128   870±173   3926±128    7352±1118        2846±200   379±65   606±116    5768±751
     OAT        1364±97     508±5     436±2       3779±32        1015±186    494±6   450±27     3815±142
 VAE-MDP       1315±383    499±6      437±4       3678±83        2954±883   502±10   451±23     3811±262
  TimeGAN      1752±212    591±12     1995±5      5683±12        1352±282   494±70   667±122    4224±138
     VAE        1896±87     513±5     930±7      3628±174         784±155    515±7   545±16     3832±166
 SPAWNER        2769±0     1007±9    2871±19      3567±10          870±39   450±86    591±69    4008±444
    DGW          2360±0    541±10      534±8      5289±11          861±99   545±55    573±38     4270±92
 Permutation    2433±11    520±13    3093±20      5332±11         787±149   368±42   613±84     4467±245
   Jittering    2350±0     1114±2    2111±28      5334±10        1058±127   419±12    519±28    3841±274
   Scaling      1284±40     523±8    2118±72      3710±16         822±132    525±7   642±29     3892±239
     TDA       1269±101     572±5     882±25     3418±134         991±193   477±11   857±156    3613±261
   DICE          pen       door      relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      3208±22     978±10   4304±68      3432±6
     OAT        1285±5     462±5    759±14      1473±12
 VAE-MDP       1986±40      494±5     424±3      3334±9
  TimeGAN      2605±15      556±6   2008±15      3334±9
     VAE        2603±3    1125±11   1758±10     3726±18
 SPAWNER       2835±11    1004±10   2908±49     3559±12
    DGW         2599±0    1055±10   3430±63      3278±9
 Permutation    2601±2    1026±11   3138±49     3324±10
   Jittering    2600±1    1026±11   3149±51     3324±10
   Scaling      2599±0    1018±11   3406±60     3334±10
     TDA        1236±8      568±5    807±14     3400±11


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Rank correlation results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in Adroit
human environment. Results are obtained by averaging over 3 random seeds used for training at a
discount factor of 0.995, with standard deviations shown after ±.
    FQE           pen          door       relocate     hammer      MB      pen         door       relocate     hammer
   NoAug.       0.31±0.21   0.07±0.09    0.62±0.11     0.14±0.10        -0.12±0.33   0.13±0.13   0.16±0.10     0.29±0.23
     OAT       -0.02±0.65    0.55±0.60   -0.05±0.55    0.34±0.92        0.67±0.08    0.99±0.01   0.40±0.78     0.62±0.47
 VAE-MDP       -0.02±0.64    0.68±0.24   -0.86±0.04   -0.44±0.72         0.12±0.34   0.14±0.58   0.71±0.16     0.29±0.00
  TimeGAN      -0.17±0.28    0.39±0.20   0.76±0.07     0.37±0.06        0.52±0.48    0.18±0.13   -0.02±0.19    0.16±0.23
     VAE       -0.52±0.38    0.39±0.20   -0.83±0.11   -0.61±0.46         0.46±0.28   0.93±0.02   0.25±0.30     0.11±0.67
 SPAWNER        0.12±0.20   0.44±0.17     0.62±0.11   -0.11±0.31         0.13±0.44   0.04±0.79   0.19±0.60    -0.82±0.02
    DGW        -0.12±0.25    0.47±0.21    0.17±0.36    0.47±0.16        -0.02±0.15   0.29±0.19   0.35±0.31     0.20±0.19
 Permutation   -0.17±0.18    0.50±0.05    0.43±0.09    0.48±0.03        -0.18±0.56   0.02±0.74   0.23±0.07    -0.85±0.10
   Jittering   -0.17±0.21    0.45±0.00   -0.33±0.78   -0.29±0.26         0.05±0.04   0.31±0.01   0.17±0.42    -0.22±0.20
   Scaling      0.36±0.24    0.53±0.06    0.40±0.15    0.35±0.34        -0.35±0.38   0.21±0.65   0.24±0.33     0.35±0.15
     TDA       -0.26±0.68   -0.41±0.35   -0.27±0.89   -0.12±0.52         0.09±0.09   0.72±0.11   0.71±0.12    -0.21±0.60
     IS           pen          door       relocate     hammer      DR                  door       relocate     hammer
   NoAug.       0.28±0.28    0.12±0.35    0.23±0.07    0.39±0.07        0.36±0.29    0.01±0.18   0.65±0.19     0.04±0.25
     OAT        0.57±0.31    0.81±0.06    0.82±0.07    0.75±0.14        0.04±0.64    0.45±0.46   0.29±0.70     0.74±0.16
 VAE-MDP        0.48±0.36    0.12±0.71    0.22±0.70   -0.28±0.51        0.34±0.68    0.50±0.11   0.72±0.18    -0.35±0.79
  TimeGAN      -0.01±0.80    0.38±0.75        -       -0.85±0.01        -0.20±0.64   0.53±0.10   0.65±0.08     0.40±0.03
     VAE             -       0.65±0.00   -0.31±0.00    0.31±0.86        -0.17±0.64   0.29±0.29   -0.04±0.69    0.06±0.75
 SPAWNER         -0.83±0         -            -        0.81±0.16        -0.09±0.20   0.36±0.26   0.62±0.09     0.47±0.16
    DGW              -      -0.03±0.61    0.82±0.16    0.26±0.57        0.02±0.06    0.63±0.15   0.09±0.67     0.27±0.36
 Permutation   -0.21±0.74    0.37±0.56   -0.70±0.00        -            -0.12±0.37   0.57±0.14   0.38±0.31     0.27±0.36
   Jittering   -0.28±0.79    0.12±0.38    0.85±0.00    0.23±0.73        -0.08±0.51   0.64±0.18   -0.04±0.42    0.18±0.84
   Scaling           -       0.24±0.42    0.65±0.00    0.66±0.14        -0.15±0.67   0.26±0.45   0.09±0.67     0.09±0.67
     TDA       -0.15±0.53    0.37±0.28   -0.67±0.00    0.81±0.13        -0.11±0.63   0.18±0.34   -0.22±0.85   -0.28±0.79
   DICE           pen          door       relocate     hammer
   NoAug.      -0.01±0.39    0.61±0.34   -0.18±0.45    0.94±0.01
     OAT        0.12±0.70   0.58±0.29    0.35±0.88     0.52±0.67
 VAE-MDP        0.21±0.59    0.24±0.53   0.02±0.68     0.38±0.73
  TimeGAN      -0.11±0.19    0.48±0.09   0.27±0.84     0.38±0.73
     VAE        0.08±0.45   0.15±0.74    0.17±0.76    -0.24±0.16
 SPAWNER       -0.29±0.59   -0.11±0.71   0.26±0.83    -0.32±0.58
    DGW        -0.02±0.54    0.35±0.57   0.24±0.87    -0.55±0.28
 Permutation   0.02±0.64    -0.14±0.59   0.28±0.88    -0.21±0.75
   Jittering    0.00±0.58   -0.18±0.60   0.27±0.84    -0.50±0.45
   Scaling      0.04±0.67   -0.13±0.58   0.25±0.87    -0.61±0.30
     TDA       -0.15±0.64   -0.27±0.62   0.32±0.91    -0.21±0.84


                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Regret@1 results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in Adroit human
environment. Results are obtained by averaging over 3 random seeds used for training at a discount
factor of 0.995, with standard deviations shown after ±.
    FQE          pen         door       relocate    hammer     MB     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.07±0.05   0.05±0.08   0.17±0.14   0.46±0.23        0.15±0.15   0.44±0.42   0.73±0.36   0.15±0.17
     OAT       0.20±0.26   0.26±0.36   0.99±0.01   0.34±0.48        0.12±0.17   0.00±0.00   0.35±0.46   0.00±0.00
 VAE-MDP       0.38±0.21   0.01±0.01   1.00±0.01   0.81±0.30        0.13±0.11   0.39±0.45   0.41±0.28   0.42±0.16
  TimeGAN      0.19±0.13   0.23±0.13   0.39±0.24   0.15±0.17        0.22±0.25   0.51±0.36   1.00±0.00   0.19±0.24
     VAE       0.57±0.00   0.05±0.05   1.00±0.01   0.73±0.26        0.09±0.06   0.00±0.01   0.03±0.02   0.34±0.48
 SPAWNER       0.03±0.00   0.01±0.00   0.27±0.32   0.94±0.11        0.12±0.12   0.35±0.48   0.41±0.43   1.02±0.00
    DGW        0.23±0.17   0.14±0.08   0.32±0.42   0.02±0.01        0.33±0.12   0.12±0.09   0.67±0.47   0.14±0.18
 Permutation   0.37±0.16   0.15±0.16   0.87±0.11   0.05±0.03        0.19±0.13   0.37±0.47   0.09±0.09   1.02±0.00
   Jittering   0.11±0.06   0.12±0.00   0.67±0.47   0.73±0.26        0.08±0.07   0.63±0.10   0.48±0.41   0.45±0.31
   Scaling     0.13±0.16   0.17±0.11   0.81±0.12   0.25±0.22        0.50±0.10   0.68±0.48   0.94±0.04   0.14±0.08
     TDA       0.35±0.25   0.79±0.29   0.68±0.45   0.81±0.30        0.26±0.23   0.12±0.10   0.31±0.30   0.72±0.37
     IS          pen         door       relocate    hammer     DR     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.17±0.15   0.45±0.40   0.63±0.41   0.19±0.30        0.09±0.00   0.05±0.09   0.17±0.15   0.46±0.23
     OAT       0.12±0.17   0.06±0.05   0.02±0.02   0.00±0.00        0.20±0.19   0.00±0.01   0.37±0.45   0.05±0.05
 VAE-MDP       0.05±0.03   0.37±0.47   0.37±0.45   0.30±0.34        0.16±0.22   0.00±0.01   0.05±0.00   0.71±0.43
  TimeGAN      0.38±0.27   0.13±0.17   1.00±0.00   1.00±0.02        0.16±0.21   0.13±0.17   0.26±0.33   0.33±0.32
     VAE       0.44±0.19   0.68±0.48   1.00±0.00   0.19±0.25        0.36±0.15   0.21±0.25   0.74±0.37   0.37±0.46
 SPAWNER       0.57±0.00   1.03±0.00   1.00±0.00   0.34±0.45        0.12±0.08   0.01±0.01   0.00±0.00   0.02±0.25
    DGW        0.44±0.19   0.15±0.16   0.00±0.00   0.59±0.28        0.25±0.24   0.03±0.02   0.68±0.44   0.03±0.00
 Permutation   0.44±0.19   0.05±0.06   0.91±0.13   0.74±0.39        0.10±0.06   0.08±0.12   0.31±0.19   0.50±0.40
   Jittering   0.44±0.19   0.34±0.48   0.68±0.45   0.36±0.46        0.10±0.05   0.09±0.11   0.54±0.31   0.35±0.47
   Scaling     0.57±0.00   0.06±0.05   0.67±0.47   0.26±0.18        0.39±0.19   0.19±0.26   0.68±0.44   0.68±0.44
     TDA       0.10±0.13   0.05±0.06   1.00±0.00   0.00±0.01        0.39±0.19   0.35±0.46   0.68±0.44   0.60±0.43
   DICE          pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.44±0.19   0.38±0.46   0.47±0.40   0.44±0.01
     OAT       0.19±0.14   0.44±0.09   0.37±0.45   0.03±0.05
 VAE-MDP       0.30±0.22   0.35±0.15   0.82±0.26   0.03±0.05
  TimeGAN      0.13±0.12   0.35±0.15   0.37±0.45   0.03±0.05
     VAE       0.21±0.15   0.50±0.35   0.50±0.39   0.72±0.37
 SPAWNER       0.25±0.11   0.45±0.32   0.50±0.39   0.43±0.39
    DGW        0.21±0.11   0.23±0.23   0.50±0.39   0.70±0.42
 Permutation   0.25±0.11   0.53±0.22   0.37±0.45   0.36±0.44
   Jittering   0.28±0.15   0.53±0.22   0.50±0.39   0.37±0.43
   Scaling     0.32±0.20   0.53±0.22   0.50±0.39   0.69±0.41
     TDA       0.21±0.15   0.57±0.16   0.37±0.45   0.67±0.47


                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Regret@5 results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in Adroit human
environment. Results are obtained by averaging over 3 random seeds used for training at a discount
factor of 0.995, with standard deviations shown after ±.
    FQE          pen         door       relocate    hammer     MB     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.01±0.02   0.00±0.01   0.75±0.22   0.13±0.09        0.03±0.04   0.02±0.03   0.03±0.02   0.01±0.01
     OAT       0.01±0.02   0.13±0.18   0.15±0.21   0.07±0.09        0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.00±0.00
 VAE-MDP       0.06±0.08   0.00±0.00   0.87±0.10   0.13±0.09        0.01±0.01   0.08±0.12   0.00±0.00   0.17±0.05
  TimeGAN      0.03±0.04   0.00±0.01   0.47±0.35   0.13±0.09        0.00±0.00   0.01±0.01   0.02±0.02   0.02±0.01
     VAE       0.06±0.08   0.00±0.00   0.75±0.22   0.13±0.09        0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.09
 SPAWNER       0.02±0.01   0.01±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.01±0.01        0.02±0.01   0.19±0.26   0.07±0.10   0.17±0.05
    DGW        0.01±0.02   0.00±0.00   0.68±0.32   0.10±0.08        0.03±0.04   0.01±0.01   0.15±0.10   0.01±0.01
 Permutation   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.01±0.01        0.10±0.06   0.19±0.26   0.00±0.00   0.23±0.12
   Jittering   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.45±0.37   0.02±0.01        0.08±0.07   0.01±0.01   0.07±0.10   0.05±0.04
   Scaling     0.00±0.00   0.01±0.01   0.03±0.02   0.00±0.01        0.08±0.07   0.08±0.12   0.07±0.10   0.01±0.01
     TDA       0.07±0.08   0.27±0.23   0.56±0.41   0.01±0.01        0.10±0.06   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.10   0.15±0.17
     IS          pen         door       relocate    hammer     DR     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.10   0.01±0.02        0.10±0.08   0.00±0.01   0.32±0.46   0.14±0.18
     OAT       0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00        0.06±0.08   0.00±0.01   0.32±0.46   0.01±0.01
 VAE-MDP       0.01±0.01   0.09±0.11   0.30±0.43   0.14±0.18        0.01±0.01   0.00±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.16±0.16
  TimeGAN      0.01±0.01   0.08±0.12   0.97±0.00   1.02±0.00        0.06±0.08   0.00±0.01   0.09±0.09   0.00±0.00
     VAE       0.19±0.27   0.00±0.00   0.95±0.03   0.13±0.18        0.05±0.06   0.08±0.12   0.40±0.41   0.14±0.18
 SPAWNER       0.57±0.00   0.56±0.00   0.97±0.00   1.02±0.00        0.04±0.04   0.01±0.01   0.00±0.00   0.60±0.43
    DGW        0.19±0.27   0.15±0.16   0.00±0.00   0.46±0.40        0.01±0.01   0.01±0.01   0.34±0.45   0.00±0.01
 Permutation   0.19±0.27   0.04±0.06   0.44±0.00   0.00±0.00        0.03±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.01
   Jittering   0.19±0.27   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.15±0.17        0.05±0.06   0.00±0.01   0.02±0.02   0.13±0.18
   Scaling     0.18±0.00   0.05±0.06   0.32±0.46   0.01±0.01        0.06±0.08   0.08±0.12   0.34±0.45   0.34±0.45
     TDA       0.01±0.02   0.00±0.01   0.97±0.00   0.00±0.00        0.06±0.08   0.00±0.00   0.56±0.41   0.16±0.16
   DICE          pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.01±0.01   0.00±0.01   0.32±0.42   0.00±0.00
     OAT       0.06±0.08   0.00±0.00   0.30±0.43   0.01±0.02
 VAE-MDP       0.01±0.01   0.09±0.11   0.09±0.09   0.03±0.05
  TimeGAN      0.01±0.02   0.06±0.00   0.15±0.21   0.03±0.05
     VAE       0.01±0.02   0.15±0.16   0.32±0.42   0.05±0.03
 SPAWNER       0.07±0.08   0.16±0.12   0.32±0.42   0.05±0.04
    DGW        0.03±0.04   0.09±0.11   0.30±0.43   0.15±0.17
 Permutation   0.06±0.08   0.21±0.15   0.30±0.43   0.14±0.18
   Jittering   0.06±0.08   0.27±0.22   0.30±0.43   0.16±0.16
   Scaling     0.06±0.08   0.17±0.11   0.30±0.43   0.15±0.17
     TDA       0.06±0.08   0.29±0.21   0.32±0.46   0.07±0.05


                                                        28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: MAE results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in resampled Adroit
cloned environment. The data are randomly sampled from original training data as the same data
points as the corresponding task in human environment. Results are obtained by averaging over 3
random seeds used for training at a discount factor of 0.995, with standard deviations shown after
±.
    FQE          pen      door     relocate   hammer    MB     pen       door     relocate   hammer
   NoAug.       715±11   359±16    371±5      3714±34        622±102    1009±92   357±6      4119±7
     OAT        663±24    336±7    438±3      3780±20         607±2      537±3    339±1      3743±18
 VAE-MDP         323±9    539±6    384±4      3624±16        813±674     538±3    386±1       3611±4
  TimeGAN      1237±25    572±7    539±4      5268±24        1065±118    573±4    541±1      5268±15
     VAE         412±8    561±6    384±2      3823±14         409±19     561±3    385±1      3814±10
 SPAWNER        1173±0    502±5    443±2       3988±6         1173±0     502±3    446±1       3988±6
    DGW         1176±0    550±5    864±8       4127±6         1176±0     550±3    871±4       4127±6
 Permutation    1176±0    537±5    822±11     4128±6          1176±0     536±3    832±4       4128±6
   Jittering    1176±0    537±5    820±11     4128±6          1176±0     536±3    833±4       4128±6
   Scaling      1176±0    517±6     696±5      4123±6         1176±0     517±3    705±4       4123±6
     TDA         610±4    526±6     438±3     3746±16          599±0     527±3    441±1      3715±14
     IS          pen      door     relocate   hammer    DR     pen       door     relocate   hammer
   NoAug.       636±21   1072±24   458±13     8162±91        731±115    458±34    475±22     6719±118
     OAT         259±9    563±3     369±2     3905±9          422±9     390±41     371±8     3885±166
 VAE-MDP       300±17     507±4    406±11     3686±47         493±76    542±20    415±40      3689±89
  TimeGAN      978±192    576±4    695±27     5325±85        771±191    606±18    696±26     5514±133
     VAE        300±21    517±2    433±15     3722±15         386±19    540±22     437±20     3764±80
 SPAWNER        1173±0    611±3     506±1      3989±6        1174±0     527±14     509±14      3990±5
    DGW         1176±0    567±3    1149±4      4129±6        1176±0     597±23    1180±35      4129±5
 Permutation    1176±0    557±3    1107±4      4129±6         1176±0    592±25    1110±39      4129±5
   Jittering    1176±0    557±3    1107±4      4129±6         1176±0    588±24    1115±89      4130±5
   Scaling      1176±0    543±3     945±4      4124±6         1176±0    580±31     968±35      4125±5
     TDA         604±6    501±5    445±10     3725±11         261±12    539±34      453±9    3765±142
    DICE         pen      door     relocate   hammer
   NoAug.      1218±41   1138±7    1841±15     3752±8
     OAT       1166±38   536±3      441±1     3750±11
 VAE-MDP         778±5   538±4     1606±8     3614±15
  TimeGAN      1276±42    573±4    1925±10    5252±18
     VAE       1020±14    561±5    1602±10    3813±20
 SPAWNER        1173±0   1067±7     1856±4     3988±6
    DGW         1176±0   1140±3      869±8     4127±6
 Permutation    1176±0   1140±7      832±5     4128±6
   Jittering    1176±0   1140±7      831±8     4128±6
   Scaling      1176±0   1098±7      704±8     4123±6
     TDA         601±0   1119±9     1835±6    3731±15


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 10: Rank correlation results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in resam-
pled Adroit cloned environment. The data are randomly sampled from original training data as
the same data points as the corresponding task in human environment. Results are obtained by av-
eraging over 3 random seeds used for training at a discount factor of 0.995, with standard deviations
shown after ±.
    FQE           pen          door        relocate     hammer       MB      pen          door       relocate     hammer
   NoAug.       0.51±0.25   0.55 ± 0.27   -0.28±0.17   0.50 ± 0.09         0.29±0.19   0.63±0.14    0.45±0.30     0.22±0.12
     OAT       -0.26±0.32    0.95±0.02    0.48±0.51     0.35±0.89         0.31±0.54    0.77±0.05    0.52±0.15     0.38±0.52
 VAE-MDP       -0.18±0.44    0.26±0.52    -0.32±0.65    0.28±0.78         0.10±0.44    0.19±0.18    0.88±0.11     0.05±0.61
  TimeGAN      -0.39±0.43    0.54±0.28    -0.47±0.41   -0.01±0.71         -0.12±0.63   0.58±0.34    0.46±0.71     0.68±0.30
     VAE       -0.69±0.19    0.38±0.48    -0.40±0.62    0.16±0.50          0.37±0.47   0.56±0.29    0.36±0.73    -0.23±0.23
 SPAWNER       -0.19±0.68    0.18±0.59    -0.32±0.73    0.02±0.79         0.05±0.70    0.62±0.06    0.79±0.19     0.40±0.82
    DGW        -0.46±0.49   -0.07±0.67    -0.75±0.11   -0.32±0.82         -0.30±0.20   0.47±0.14    -0.09±0.58    0.09±0.25
 Permutation   -0.36±0.69   -0.28±0.24    0.12±0.59    -0.29±0.79          0.15±0.25   0.60±0.13    0.43±0.75     0.51±0.32
   Jittering   -0.32±0.80    0.54±0.49    -0.17±0.53   -0.47±0.49          0.25±0.60   0.67±0.10    -0.19±0.46    0.45±0.44
   Scaling     -0.19±0.80    0.63±0.22    -0.25±0.64   -0.26±0.83          0.03±0.62   0.45±0.30    0.67±0.29     0.66±0.18
     TDA       -0.26±0.77    0.37±0.26    -0.22±0.48   -0.31±0.87          0.00±0.50   0.35±0.33    0.61±0.27    -0.45±0.62
     IS           pen          door        relocate     hammer       DR      pen          door       relocate     hammer
   NoAug.      0.00±0.00    -0.32±0.59     0.25±0.54    0.79±0.04          0.42±0.24   0.46±0.72    -0.22±0.70   0.29±0.49
     OAT       0.78±0.00     0.96±0.01    0.99±0.00     0.77±0.15         -0.38±0.50    0.23±0.53   0.33±0.78     0.62±0.37
 VAE-MDP       0.15±0.28     0.55±0.06    0.96±0.04    -0.02±0.74         -0.15±0.60   -0.57±0.06   -0.02±0.19   -0.23±0.82
  TimeGAN      0.89±0.00    -0.78±0.27     0.88±0.08    0.50±0.29         -0.43±0.36   -0.42±0.14   -0.10±0.62   -0.18±0.78
     VAE       0.61±0.11    -0.23±0.66     0.88±0.10    0.98±0.01         -0.46±0.34   -0.10±0.62   -0.02±0.70   -0.20±0.76
 SPAWNER       -0.89±0.00   -0.10±0.00    -0.29±0.25    0.37±0.39         -0.23±0.66    0.02±0.64   -0.06±0.64   -0.16±0.78
    DGW             -       -0.45±0.00    -0.67±0.00        -             -0.05±0.32   -0.36±0.31   -0.09±0.63   -0.20±0.77
 Permutation        -       -0.50±0.00    -0.67±0.00        -             -0.18±0.36   -0.43±0.21   -0.20±0.71   -0.22±0.75
   Jittering        -            -        -0.42±0.02        -             -0.31±0.26   -0.33±0.39   0.03±0.74     0.06±0.78
   Scaling          -       -0.67±0.00    -0.24±0.44        -              0.07±0.55   -0.31±0.38   -0.25±0.71   -0.20±0.73
     TDA       0.37±0.42     0.41±0.22    -0.48±0.35    0.79±0.13         -0.22±0.37   -0.32±0.41   -0.05±0.70   -0.25±0.79
   DICE           pen          door        relocate     hammer
   NoAug.       0.03±0.56   0.39±0.51      0.05±0.52    0.31±0.76
     OAT        0.24±0.71    0.41±0.57     0.36±0.89    0.44±0.62
 VAE-MDP       -0.61±0.38    0.26±0.65     0.82±0.17   -0.28±0.79
  TimeGAN      -0.36±0.36    0.06±0.70    0.77±0.24    -0.43±0.62
     VAE       -0.18±0.45    0.18±0.79    0.30±0.61    -0.11±0.64
 SPAWNER       -0.30±0.33   0.47±0.66     -0.18±0.78   -0.19±0.73
    DGW         0.16±0.10    0.38±0.58     0.22±0.85   -0.36±0.45
 Permutation   0.24±0.43    -0.48±0.11     0.96±0.02   -0.20±0.75
   Jittering   -0.39±0.61   0.37±0.43     -0.30±0.82   -0.14±0.77
   Scaling      0.14±0.60    0.40±0.55     0.14±0.81   -0.16±0.70
     TDA       -0.02±0.56   -0.11±0.61     0.30±0.83   -0.31±0.78


                                                             30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 11: Regret@1 results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in resampled Adroit
cloned environment. The data are randomly sampled from original training data as the same data
points as the corresponding task in human environment. Results are obtained by averaging over 3
random seeds used for training at a discount factor of 0.995, with standard deviations shown after
±.
    FQE          pen         door       relocate    hammer     MB     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.10±0.13   0.07±0.04   1.00±0.01   0.03±0.01        0.06±0.06   0.19±0.14   0.34±0.45   0.21±0.18
     OAT       0.47±0.00   0.01±0.01   0.33±0.47   0.34±0.48        0.10±0.13   0.04±0.03   0.48±0.37   0.13±0.18
 VAE-MDP       0.30±0.22   0.13±0.17   0.67±0.47   0.26±0.37        0.20±0.26   0.79±0.19   0.02±0.02   0.39±0.31
  TimeGAN      0.41±0.23   0.39±0.45   1.00±0.00   0.40±0.44        0.31±0.22   0.42±0.44   0.35±0.46   0.08±0.08
     VAE       0.57±0.00   0.46±0.41   0.66±0.47   0.47±0.39        0.12±0.06   0.08±0.12   0.33±0.47   0.94±0.11
 SPAWNER       0.20±0.26   0.44±0.32   0.67±0.47   0.37±0.46        0.13±0.16   0.21±0.25   0.26±0.33   0.26±0.37
    DGW        0.05±0.03   0.43±0.43   0.99±0.02   0.68±0.48        0.57±0.00   0.52±0.41   0.90±0.12   0.01±0.02
 Permutation   0.38±0.27   0.72±0.27   0.74±0.36   0.60±0.43        0.57±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.40±0.42   0.34±0.48
   Jittering   0.35±0.25   0.09±0.11   0.67±0.47   0.47±0.39        0.14±0.11   0.02±0.03   0.81±0.12   0.01±0.02
   Scaling     0.35±0.25   0.09±0.11   0.67±0.47   0.60±0.43        0.24±0.24   0.19±0.26   0.59±0.39   0.01±0.01
     TDA       0.35±0.25   0.19±0.26   0.67±0.47   0.68±0.48        0.17±0.21   0.47±0.42   0.40±0.42   0.81±0.30
     IS          pen         door       relocate    hammer     DR     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.57±0.00   0.47±0.42   0.68±0.45   0.34±0.48        0.22±0.25   0.26±0.36   0.68±0.45   0.26±0.37
     OAT       0.19±0.27   0.05±0.06   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.01        0.28±0.20   0.26±0.36   0.37±0.45   0.00±0.01
 VAE-MDP       0.19±0.13   0.07±0.04   0.00±0.00   0.35±0.47        0.17±0.10   0.93±0.11   0.82±0.26   0.37±0.46
  TimeGAN      0.57±0.00   1.02±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.85±0.09        0.50±0.05   0.93±0.11   0.82±0.26   0.37±0.46
     VAE       0.35±0.24   0.68±0.48   0.00±0.00   0.34±0.46        0.44±0.19   0.62±0.41   0.67±0.47   0.37±0.46
 SPAWNER       0.57±0.00   0.81±0.31   1.00±0.00   0.37±0.43        0.35±0.24   0.60±0.43   0.68±0.45   0.37±0.46
    DGW        0.57±0.00   1.03±0.00   1.00±0.00   1.02±0.00        0.35±0.24   0.93±0.11   0.68±0.45   0.37±0.46
 Permutation   0.57±0.00   1.03±0.00   1.00±0.00   1.02±0.00        0.35±0.25   0.93±0.11   0.68±0.44   0.37±0.46
   Jittering   0.57±0.00   1.03±0.00   1.00±0.00   1.02±0.00        0.54±0.05   0.62±0.41   0.73±0.36   0.37±0.46
   Scaling     0.57±0.00   1.03±0.00   0.91±0.13   1.02±0.00        0.17±0.21   0.62±0.41   0.81±0.26   0.37±0.46
     TDA       0.17±0.21   0.08±0.06   1.00±0.00   0.07±0.09        0.25±0.24   0.62±0.41   0.68±0.45   0.37±0.46
   DICE          pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.26±0.18   0.34±0.48   0.73±0.36   0.34±0.48
     OAT       0.28±0.21   0.35±0.48   0.33±0.47   0.03±0.05
 VAE-MDP       0.36±0.18   0.36±0.30   0.03±0.02   0.67±0.47
  TimeGAN      0.44±0.12   0.60±0.25   0.11±0.08   0.68±0.48
     VAE       0.31±0.24   0.50±0.35   0.35±0.46   0.65±0.46
 SPAWNER       0.26±0.23   0.34±0.48   0.65±0.43   0.40±0.44
    DGW        0.29±0.23   0.36±0.47   0.41±0.43   0.53±0.35
 Permutation   0.50±0.10   0.94±0.12   0.02±0.02   0.40±0.44
   Jittering   0.38±0.27   0.02±0.03   0.68±0.45   0.47±0.42
   Scaling     0.50±0.10   0.34±0.48   0.73±0.36   0.40±0.44
     TDA       0.08±0.06   0.60±0.25   0.37±0.45   0.68±0.48


                                                        31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 12: Regret@5 results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in resampled Adroit
cloned environment. The data are randomly sampled from original training data as the same data
points as the corresponding task in human environment. Results are obtained by averaging over 3
random seeds used for training at a discount factor of 0.995, with standard deviations shown after
±.
    FQE          pen         door       relocate    hammer     MB     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.01        0.00±0.00   0.00±0.01   0.02±0.02   0.01±0.01
     OAT       0.01±0.02   0.00±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.03±0.05        0.01±0.02   0.00±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.01±0.01
 VAE-MDP       0.07±0.08   0.08±0.12   0.34±0.45   0.03±0.05        0.00±0.00   0.02±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.09
  TimeGAN      0.06±0.08   0.00±0.01   0.36±0.43   0.07±0.09        0.01±0.02   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00
     VAE       0.08±0.07   0.00±0.01   0.45±0.37   0.08±0.09        0.01±0.02   0.00±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.01±0.01
 SPAWNER       0.07±0.08   0.13±0.17   0.67±0.47   0.08±0.09        0.05±0.06   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.10   0.03±0.05
    DGW        0.31±0.24   0.23±0.24   0.87±0.10   0.16±0.16        0.19±0.27   0.00±0.00   0.35±0.45   0.00±0.00
 Permutation   0.38±0.27   0.09±0.11   0.15±0.21   0.16±0.16        0.10±0.08   0.00±0.00   0.24±0.34   0.00±0.00
   Jittering   0.07±0.08   0.08±0.12   0.17±0.20   0.16±0.16        0.01±0.01   0.00±0.00   0.64±0.31   0.01±0.01
   Scaling     0.35±0.25   0.02±0.03   0.39±0.30   0.16±0.16        0.07±0.08   0.08±0.12   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00
     TDA       0.07±0.08   0.04±0.06   0.17±0.20   0.10±0.08        0.01±0.02   0.00±0.00   0.09±0.09   0.14±0.08
     IS          pen         door       relocate    hammer     DR     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.18±0.00   0.25±0.00   0.63±0.44   0.13±0.18        0.00±0.00   0.13±0.18   0.56±0.41   0.00±0.00
     OAT       0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00        0.05±0.06   0.13±0.18   0.24±0.34   0.00±0.00
 VAE-MDP       0.01±0.01   0.00±0.01   0.00±0.00   0.14±0.18        0.09±0.06   0.25±0.18   0.02±0.02   0.16±0.16
  TimeGAN      0.02±0.02   0.16±0.12   0.00±0.00   0.01±0.01        0.10±0.08   0.25±0.18   0.40±0.41   0.14±0.18
     VAE       0.10±0.08   0.27±0.23   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00        0.09±0.06   0.19±0.26   0.32±0.46   0.14±0.18
 SPAWNER       0.18±0.00   0.56±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.00±0.01        0.06±0.08   0.13±0.18   0.26±0.33   0.14±0.18
    DGW        0.18±0.00   0.56±0.00   0.97±0.00   0.39±0.00        0.00±0.00   0.15±0.16   0.34±0.45   0.14±0.18
 Permutation   0.18±0.00   0.56±0.00   0.97±0.00   0.39±0.00        0.05±0.06   0.15±0.16   0.56±0.41   0.14±0.18
   Jittering   0.18±0.00   0.56±0.00   0.97±0.00   0.39±0.00        0.01±0.01   0.13±0.17   0.24±0.34   0.13±0.18
   Scaling     0.18±0.00   0.56±0.00   0.11±0.08   0.39±0.00        0.05±0.06   0.13±0.17   0.56±0.41   0.14±0.18
     TDA       0.01±0.01   0.04±0.06   0.65±0.46   0.00±0.00        0.05±0.06   0.13±0.17   0.34±0.45   0.16±0.16
   DICE          pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.05±0.06   0.02±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.03±0.05
     OAT       0.01±0.01   0.35±0.48   0.30±0.43   0.01±0.02
 VAE-MDP       0.06±0.04   0.13±0.17   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.05
  TimeGAN      0.11±0.07   0.19±0.26   0.00±0.00   0.08±0.09
     VAE       0.03±0.04   0.13±0.18   0.15±0.21   0.07±0.05
 SPAWNER       0.02±0.02   0.13±0.18   0.56±0.41   0.07±0.05
    DGW        0.01±0.01   0.00±0.00   0.30±0.43   0.07±0.04
 Permutation   0.00±0.00   0.13±0.18   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.05
   Jittering   0.04±0.04   0.00±0.00   0.60±0.43   0.05±0.04
   Scaling     0.03±0.04   0.00±0.00   0.32±0.46   0.07±0.05
     TDA       0.06±0.04   0.23±0.24   0.30±0.43   0.07±0.05


                                                        32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 13: MAE results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in resampled Adroit
expert environment. The data are randomly sampled from original training data as the same data
points as the corresponding task in human environment. Results are obtained by averaging over 3
random seeds used for training at a discount factor of 0.995, with standard deviations shown after
±.
    FQE          pen       door      relocate   hammer     MB     pen       door      relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      1101±47    1751±52   1729±557    2822±756        2363±135    708±88   621±28      13110±535
     OAT       1254±21    1213±45    419±30     3599±159         1212±2     1233±3   444±2        3383±193
 VAE-MDP        467±5      793±36     468±5      1983±45         1217±1     746±10    474±1       9890±105
  TimeGAN      2012±24    1008±37    994±11     6317±194         3108±2     1027±1   1007±2      19197±1121
     VAE       1250±12     903±14     1605±8     2039±43         3109±1      912±6   1610±6       10031±210
 SPAWNER       1247±11    1264±47    778±10     4738±157         3108±1     2738±6   778±10      21218±915
    DGW        1245±11    1343±29     762±8     7264±117         3109±1     2885±6    762±8       36422±33
 Permutation   1249±12    1270±28     763±8     6350±104         3109±1     2725±6    763±8       31965±28
   Jittering   1247±13    1259±43    1772±19    6267±158         3108±2     2724±6    763±8       29471±76
   Scaling     1247±11    1500±49    1495±15    5729±144        2589±367   1478±13    762±8      27187±209
     TDA       1251±12    1058±45     477±4     3420±186         1217±2    1043±13    481±1      12350±1943
     IS          pen       door      relocate   hammer     DR     pen       door      relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      1881±23    1005±22   1863±43     3659±159        1632±783    970±86   1837±52     3262±856
     OAT        939±31     1089±3    1136±5      3354±64         597±74    1044±51    2078±86    2989±614
 VAE-MDP        676±24     871±23   1858±42     2225±110        1260±299    886±71   1837±52      2494±901
  TimeGAN      833±43     1054±44   1858±42      5929±83        1299±452     972±7    1837±52    5029±1100
     VAE       1579±38    1480±41   1741±46     2481±209        2149±477    654±63   1734±77      2179±158
 SPAWNER       1933±14     2400±6   1526±19       4128±6        2384±309   1089±51    1529±19    3840±606
    DGW         2793±9     2571±6   1496±16       6935±6        3109±347   1172±53   1499±16      6556±643
 Permutation   2675±12     2386±6   1497±16       5820±6        2997±344   1081±61   1500±17      5380±780
   Jittering   2675±14     2386±6   1499±17       5821±6        3038±349   1081±50   1503±17      5465±701
   Scaling     2683±12     2858±6   1498±16       5320±6        3046±392   1288±75   1501±16      4909±707
     TDA        733±27     985±18   2052±113    3542±138        1325±398    963±89   2015±161     3141±902
   DICE          pen       door      relocate   hammer
   NoAug.      3122±106   1250±21   2369±19     4171±47
     OAT        1224±73   1148±10   360±27      3884±46
 VAE-MDP        1146±53     812±6    473±3      1996±44
  TimeGAN      1943±94     570±10    694±5      6637±68
     VAE       3014±140     428±1    387±2      2021±38
 SPAWNER       3067±143    1294±7   1524±19     4985±30
    DGW         3103±37    1363±7   1492±16     7411±26
 Permutation    3108±63    1284±1   1495±16     6510±21
   Jittering   3104±57     1288±7   1495±16     6510±30
   Scaling     3097±52     1531±8   1494±16     5970±30
     TDA        1193±54    1087±7    479±2      3697±29


                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 14: Rank correlation results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in resam-
pled Adroit expert environment. The data are randomly sampled from original training data as
the same data points as the corresponding task in human environment. Results are obtained by av-
eraging over 3 random seeds used for training at a discount factor of 0.995, with standard deviations
shown after ±.
    FQE           pen          door       relocate     hammer      MB      pen          door       relocate     hammer
   NoAug.       0.19±0.22   0.87±0.07    -0.38±0.12    0.29±0.34        0.24±0.30    0.74±0.15     0.86±0.05    0.06±0.35
     OAT       -0.22±0.33   0.97±0.03    0.37±0.87     0.36±0.90        0.26±0.69    0.81±0.12     0.89±0.02   0.23±0.84
 VAE-MDP       -0.18±0.53   0.33±0.47    -0.10±0.51   -0.31±0.90         0.29±0.71   0.86±0.00     0.30±0.73   -0.27±0.41
  TimeGAN      -0.78±0.17   0.94±0.02    -0.10±0.51   -0.20±0.85         0.07±0.75   0.36±0.75     0.30±0.73   -0.25±0.56
     VAE       -0.50±0.35   0.63±0.25    -0.47±0.35   -0.44±0.73         0.09±0.25   0.54±0.61    -0.15±0.72   -0.79±0.14
 SPAWNER       -0.82±0.10   0.96±0.04    -0.22±0.50   -0.31±0.91        -0.40±0.53   0.29±0.60    -0.08±0.61   -0.00±0.68
    DGW        -0.88±0.00   0.21±0.14    -0.96±0.03   -0.32±0.91         0.06±0.53   0.19±0.62     0.27±0.33   -0.01±0.72
 Permutation   -0.79±0.13   0.80±0.19    -0.25±0.78   -0.31±0.92        -0.29±0.70   0.13±0.75     0.14±0.74   -0.65±0.32
   Jittering   -0.82±0.12   0.92±0.09    -0.21±0.60   -0.31±0.92         0.58±0.09   0.23±0.83     0.93±0.05   -0.40±0.66
   Scaling     -0.82±0.11   0.86±0.16    -0.09±0.55   -0.31±0.91         0.22±0.79   0.77±0.29     0.92±0.07   -0.37±0.55
     TDA       -0.68±0.12   0.80±0.25    -0.06±0.80   -0.31±0.92         0.46±0.52   0.55±0.33     0.72±0.24   0.00±0.53
     IS           pen          door       relocate     hammer      DR      pen          door       relocate     hammer
   NoAug.      -0.02±0.48   0.08±0.38    0.96±0.04    0.34±0.50         -0.85±0.03   0.32±0.18    -0.28±0.75   0.33±0.85
     OAT       -0.59±0.11   0.43±0.35    0.84±0.08    0.97±0.02         -0.27±0.26   0.37±0.11     0.21±0.64   0.34±0.88
 VAE-MDP       -0.25±0.32   0.28±0.02    0.96±0.00    1.00±0.00         -0.83±0.08   0.41±0.31    -0.28±0.75   0.15±0.63
  TimeGAN       0.89±0.03   0.87±0.00    0.96±0.00    0.61±0.14         -0.82±0.05   0.42±0.10    -0.28±0.75   0.15±0.80
     VAE            -       0.19±0.04    0.75±0.00    0.49±0.45         -0.89±0.02   0.35±0.46    -0.26±0.38   0.08±0.75
 SPAWNER       -0.89±0.00       -        -0.04±0.64   0.10±0.14         -0.89±0.02   0.08±0.28     0.10±0.69   0.23±0.85
    DGW        -0.32±0.37       -        -0.59±0.26       -             -0.88±0.03   -0.16±0.28   -0.55±0.18   0.22±0.84
 Permutation   -0.23±0.45       -        0.23±0.59        -             -0.90±0.02   0.19±0.16    -0.11±0.27   0.18±0.83
   Jittering    0.11±0.59       -        0.50±0.07        -             -0.90±0.01   0.05±0.20    -0.75±0.16   0.22±0.84
   Scaling     -0.46±0.21       -        0.27±0.62    0.00±0.00         -0.91±0.02   0.32±0.07    -0.52±0.16   0.19±0.84
     TDA        0.31±0.00   0.59±0.35    0.90±0.11    0.80±0.14         -0.87±0.00   0.31±0.33     0.02±0.72   0.24±0.82
   DICE           pen          door       relocate     hammer
   NoAug.      0.23±0.39    -0.33±0.89   0.11±0.62    -0.06±0.73
     OAT       0.89±0.01     0.18±0.81   -0.22±0.01   -0.05±0.72
 VAE-MDP       0.87±0.07    -0.23±0.82   -0.17±0.84   -0.20±0.85
  TimeGAN      0.85±0.05    -0.07±0.61   -0.17±0.84   -0.24±0.86
     VAE       0.65±0.19    -0.16±0.58   0.25±0.67    -0.11±0.59
 SPAWNER       0.55±0.50    0.11±0.74    -0.16±0.67   -0.10±0.78
    DGW        0.86±0.06     0.16±0.77   0.18±0.84    -0.07±0.75
 Permutation   0.93±0.00     0.13±0.73   0.81±0.21    -0.21±0.84
   Jittering   0.72±0.19     0.28±0.85   0.21±0.83    -0.12±0.79
   Scaling     0.81±0.14     0.25±0.81   0.15±0.80    -0.11±0.79
     TDA       0.76±0.08    0.17±0.80    0.23±0.57    -0.26±0.89


                                                            34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 15: Regret@1 results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in resampled Adroit
expert environment. The data are randomly sampled from original training data as the same data
points as the corresponding task in human environment. Results are obtained by averaging over 3
random seeds used for training at a discount factor of 0.995, with standard deviations shown after
±.
    FQE          pen         door       relocate    hammer     MB     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.17±0.14   0.05±0.06   0.91±0.13   0.05±0.04        0.22±0.25   0.07±0.04   0.15±0.10   0.34±0.18
     OAT       0.19±0.27   0.01±0.01   0.33±0.47   0.34±0.48        0.22±0.19   0.04±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.33±0.46
 VAE-MDP       0.26±0.23   0.35±0.48   0.68±0.45   0.68±0.48        0.17±0.21   0.01±0.01   0.41±0.43   0.91±0.09
  TimeGAN      0.54±0.05   0.02±0.03   0.68±0.45   0.60±0.43        0.24±0.24   0.34±0.48   0.41±0.43   0.73±0.26
     VAE       0.38±0.27   0.30±0.33   1.00±0.01   0.60±0.43        0.29±0.00   0.26±0.36   0.66±0.47   0.94±0.11
 SPAWNER       0.46±0.09   0.01±0.01   0.66±0.47   0.68±0.48        0.41±0.17   0.60±0.43   0.57±0.42   0.20±0.16
    DGW        0.46±0.09   0.19±0.26   1.00±0.01   0.68±0.48        0.20±0.19   0.34±0.48   0.41±0.43   0.34±0.48
 Permutation   0.37±0.16   0.05±0.06   0.67±0.47   0.68±0.48        0.36±0.23   0.67±0.48   0.57±0.42   0.94±0.11
   Jittering   0.46±0.09   0.01±0.01   0.68±0.45   0.68±0.48        0.07±0.08   0.34±0.48   0.16±0.08   0.67±0.46
   Scaling     0.50±0.10   0.01±0.01   0.68±0.45   0.68±0.48        0.16±0.22   0.00±0.01   0.02±0.02   0.74±0.39
     TDA       0.37±0.16   0.01±0.01   0.68±0.45   0.68±0.48        0.18±0.14   0.34±0.48   0.41±0.43   0.52±0.41
     IS          pen         door       relocate    hammer     DR     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.14±0.03   0.94±0.12   0.00±0.00   0.05±0.04        0.37±0.16   0.00±0.00   0.68±0.44   0.34±0.48
     OAT       0.46±0.09   0.00±0.01   0.02±0.02   0.00±0.00        0.43±0.05   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.10   0.34±0.48
 VAE-MDP       0.19±0.13   0.39±0.45   0.67±0.47   0.00±0.00        0.37±0.16   0.00±0.01   0.68±0.44   0.20±0.15
  TimeGAN      0.01±0.00   0.69±0.48   0.67±0.47   0.05±0.04        0.46±0.09   0.02±0.03   0.68±0.44   0.38±0.45
     VAE       0.57±0.00   0.38±0.46   0.82±0.26   0.08±0.09        0.46±0.09   0.34±0.48   0.37±0.45   0.40±0.44
 SPAWNER       0.44±0.19   1.03±0.00   0.40±0.41   0.20±0.15        0.46±0.09   0.34±0.48   0.37±0.45   0.34±0.48
    DGW        0.29±0.23   1.03±0.00   0.81±0.26   1.02±0.00        0.37±0.16   0.67±0.48   1.00±0.01   0.35±0.47
 Permutation   0.14±0.15   1.03±0.00   0.24±0.34   1.02±0.00        0.37±0.16   0.67±0.48   1.00±0.01   0.41±0.44
   Jittering   0.17±0.21   1.03±0.00   0.17±0.20   1.02±0.00        0.37±0.16   0.34±0.48   1.00±0.01   0.40±0.44
   Scaling     0.36±0.18   1.03±0.00   0.33±0.47   0.86±0.23        0.46±0.09   0.00±0.00   1.00±0.01   0.41±0.44
     TDA       0.57±0.00   0.01±0.01   0.02±0.02   0.01±0.01        0.37±0.16   0.00±0.00   0.37±0.45   0.35±0.47
   DICE          pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.20±0.26   0.69±0.48   0.30±0.43   0.67±0.47
     OAT       0.02±0.01   0.34±0.48   1.00±0.00   0.67±0.47
 VAE-MDP       0.01±0.01   0.68±0.48   0.64±0.45   0.66±0.46
  TimeGAN      0.00±0.00   0.42±0.44   0.64±0.45   0.67±0.47
     VAE       0.02±0.01   0.76±0.36   0.58±0.42   0.40±0.41
 SPAWNER       0.06±0.05   0.42±0.44   0.66±0.46   0.67±0.47
    DGW        0.02±0.01   0.34±0.48   0.58±0.42   0.67±0.47
 Permutation   0.01±0.01   0.34±0.48   0.31±0.30   0.67±0.47
   Jittering   0.11±0.13   0.34±0.48   0.58±0.42   0.65±0.46
   Scaling     0.02±0.01   0.34±0.48   0.58±0.42   0.67±0.47
     TDA       0.03±0.00   0.34±0.48   0.68±0.45   0.67±0.47


                                                        35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 16: Regret@5 results of OPE without and with each augmentation method in resampled Adroit
expert environment. The data are randomly sampled from original training data as the same data
points as the corresponding task in human environment. Results are obtained by averaging over 3
random seeds used for training at a discount factor of 0.995, with standard deviations shown after
±.
    FQE          pen         door       relocate    hammer     MB     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.02±0.01   0.00±0.01   0.24±0.34   0.00±0.01        0.01±0.01   0.00±0.01   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.09
     OAT       0.05±0.06   0.00±0.00   0.24±0.34   0.03±0.05        0.06±0.08   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.03±0.05
 VAE-MDP       0.10±0.06   0.00±0.01   0.17±0.20   0.13±0.09        0.06±0.08   0.00±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.03±0.00
  TimeGAN      0.08±0.06   0.00±0.00   0.17±0.20   0.10±0.08        0.07±0.08   0.00±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.13±0.09
     VAE       0.01±0.02   0.00±0.01   0.45±0.37   0.13±0.09        0.05±0.06   0.00±0.01   0.45±0.37   0.29±0.14
 SPAWNER       0.12±0.06   0.00±0.00   0.26±0.33   0.13±0.09        0.09±0.07   0.02±0.03   0.09±0.09   0.07±0.09
    DGW        0.14±0.03   0.00±0.01   0.95±0.03   0.16±0.16        0.06±0.08   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.10   0.13±0.18
 Permutation   0.14±0.03   0.00±0.01   0.45±0.37   0.13±0.09        0.08±0.06   0.19±0.26   0.24±0.34   0.20±0.16
   Jittering   0.08±0.06   0.00±0.01   0.17±0.20   0.13±0.09        0.00±0.00   0.19±0.26   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.05
   Scaling     0.08±0.06   0.00±0.01   0.17±0.20   0.13±0.09        0.06±0.08   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.08±0.08
     TDA       0.09±0.04   0.00±0.01   0.24±0.34   0.13±0.09        0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.01±0.02
     IS          pen         door       relocate    hammer     DR     pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.02±0.02   0.23±0.24   0.00±0.00   0.03±0.05        0.14±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.56±0.41   0.13±0.18
     OAT       0.07±0.03   0.00±0.01   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00        0.05±0.06   0.00±0.00   0.07±0.10   0.13±0.18
 VAE-MDP       0.04±0.04   0.23±0.24   0.65±0.46   0.00±0.00        0.14±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.56±0.41   0.07±0.05
  TimeGAN      0.00±0.00   0.37±0.26   0.65±0.46   0.00±0.00        0.11±0.07   0.00±0.00   0.56±0.41   0.13±0.18
     VAE       0.18±0.00   0.21±0.25   0.79±0.25   0.01±0.01        0.14±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.27±0.32   0.13±0.18
 SPAWNER       0.06±0.08   0.56±0.00   0.15±0.10   0.39±0.00        0.14±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.24±0.34   0.13±0.18
    DGW        0.06±0.08   0.56±0.00   0.71±0.21   0.39±0.00        0.14±0.03   0.00±0.01   0.58±0.39   0.13±0.18
 Permutation   0.05±0.03   0.56±0.00   0.15±0.21   0.39±0.00        0.14±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.03±0.02   0.13±0.18
   Jittering   0.04±0.04   0.56±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.39±0.00        0.14±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.70±0.34   0.13±0.18
   Scaling     0.13±0.07   0.56±0.00   0.15±0.21   0.27±0.17        0.14±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.41±0.40   0.13±0.18
     TDA       0.13±0.07   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00   0.00±0.00        0.14±0.03   0.00±0.00   0.30±0.43   0.13±0.18
   DICE          pen         door       relocate    hammer
   NoAug.      0.00±0.00   0.37±0.26   0.15±0.21   0.04±0.04
     OAT       0.00±0.00   0.19±0.26   0.30±0.43   0.04±0.04
 VAE-MDP       0.00±0.00   0.19±0.26   0.05±0.00   0.14±0.18
  TimeGAN      0.00±0.00   0.21±0.25   0.54±0.39   0.07±0.05
     VAE       0.00±0.00   0.17±0.16   0.17±0.20   0.08±0.08
 SPAWNER       0.01±0.01   0.19±0.26   0.56±0.41   0.05±0.04
    DGW        0.00±0.00   0.19±0.26   0.32±0.46   0.05±0.04
 Permutation   0.00±0.00   0.19±0.26   0.02±0.02   0.07±0.05
   Jittering   0.00±0.00   0.19±0.26   0.32±0.46   0.05±0.04
   Scaling     0.00±0.00   0.19±0.26   0.34±0.45   0.04±0.04
     TDA       0.00±0.00   0.19±0.26   0.02±0.02   0.14±0.18


                                                        36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                        Table 17: PST information in Adroit pen-human.
                  trajectory index   trajectory length   PTS start time   PST end time
                  0                  200                 1                7
                  1                  200                 1                7
                  2                  200                 1                7
                  3                  200                 0                6
                  4                  200                 1                7
                  5                  200                 2                8
                  6                  200                 2                8
                  7                  200                 1                7
                  8                  200                 1                7
                  9                  200                 1                7
                  10                 200                 1                7
                  11                 200                 1                7
                  12                 200                 1                7
                  13                 200                 0                6
                  14                 200                 0                6
                  15                 200                 1                7
                  16                 200                 1                7
                  17                 200                 1                7
                  18                 200                 2                8
                  19                 200                 1                7
                  20                 200                 1                7
                  21                 200                 0                6
                  22                 200                 1                7
                  23                 200                 1                7
                  24                 200                 1                7

                        Table 18: PST information in Adroit door-human.
                  trajectory index   trajectory length   PTS start time   PST end time
                  0                  300                 204              217
                  1                  300                 238              251
                  2                  300                 202              215
                  3                  300                 210              223
                  4                  300                 189              202
                  5                  293                 189              202
                  6                  284                 183              196
                  7                  265                 161              174
                  8                  265                 153              166
                  9                  291                 167              180
                  10                 247                 151              164
                  11                 236                 136              149
                  12                 271                 165              178
                  13                 242                 144              157
                  14                 277                 157              170
                  15                 257                 158              171
                  16                 260                 166              179
                  17                 223                 134              147
                  18                 257                 164              177
                  19                 277                 146              159
                  20                 288                 189              202
                  21                 289                 187              200
                  22                 256                 156              169
                  23                 226                 146              159
                  24                 225                 135              148



C.2   S TART AND E ND T IME OF PST S .

We present that the length of trajectories, and start and end time of found PSTs on each trajectory in
Adroit human can be varied, as shown in Tables 17, 18, 19, & 20. It can be observed that PST can
start at different time steps across trajectories, which resolves the non-temporally-aligned cases.


                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Table 19: PST information in Adroit relocate-human.
                trajectory index   trajectory length   PTS start time   PST end time
                0                  352                 19               26
                1                  437                 24               31
                2                  360                 52               59
                3                  402                 30               37
                4                  346                 33               40
                5                  527                 59               66
                6                  412                 28               35
                7                  416                 40               47
                8                  477                 37               44
                9                  382                 32               39
                10                 385                 24               31
                11                 523                 27               34
                12                 451                 33               40
                13                 382                 33               40
                14                 357                 31               38
                15                 375                 39               46
                16                 439                 36               43
                17                 378                 25               32
                18                 377                 31               38
                19                 336                 42               49
                20                 512                 36               43
                21                 333                 32               39
                22                 297                 44               51
                23                 358                 36               43
                24                 328                 31               38


                      Table 20: PST information in Adroit hammer-human.
                trajectory index   trajectory length   PTS start time   PST end time
                0                  537                 153              161
                1                  399                 100              108
                2                  472                 116              124
                3                  624                 115              123
                4                  469                 153              161
                5                  418                 137              145
                6                  456                 110              118
                7                  404                 224              232
                8                  364                 123              131
                9                  529                 120              128
                10                 455                 131              139
                11                 371                 108              116
                12                 496                 180              188
                13                 433                 140              148
                14                 484                 129              137
                15                 398                 102              110
                16                 418                 112              120
                17                 621                 226              234
                18                 467                 121              129
                19                 390                 104              112
                20                 348                 105              113
                21                 464                 86               94
                22                 425                 89               97
                23                 506                 93               101
                24                 362                 82               90


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     R EAL -W ORLD S EPSIS T REATMENT

Sepsis, which is defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction in response to infection, is the leading
cause of mortality and the most expensive condition associated with in-hospital stay (Liu et al., 2014;
Gao et al., 2022b). In particular, septic shock, which is the most advanced complication of sepsis
due to severe abnormalities of circulation and/or cellular metabolism (Bone et al., 1992), reaches a
mortality rate as high as 50% (Martin et al., 2003). It is critical to find an effective policy that can
be followed to prevent septic shock and recover from sepsis.

D.1   TASK D ETAILS

Labels. The hospital provided the EHRs over two years, including 221,700 visits with 35 static
variables such as gender, age, and past medical condition, and 43 temporal variables including vital
signs, lab analytes, and treatments. Our study population is patients with a suspected infection which
was identified by the administration of any type of antibiotic, antiviral, antibacterial, antiparasitic,
or antifungal, or a positive test result of PCR (Point of Care Rapid). On the basis of the Third
International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Singer et al., 2016), our medical
experts identified septic shock as any of the following conditions are met:

       • Persistent hypertension as shown through two consecutive readings (≤ 30 minutes apart).
         Systolic Blood Pressure (SBP) < 90 mmHg Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP) < 65 mmHg
         Decrease in SBP ≥ 40 mmHg with an 8-hour period
       • Any vasopressor administration.

From the EHRs, 3,499 septic shock positive and 81,398 negative visits were identified based on the
intersection of the expert sepsis diagnostic rules and International Codes for Disease 9th division
(ICD-9); the 36,122 visits with mismatched labels between the expert rule and the ICD-9 were
excluded in our study. 2,205 shock visits were obtained by excluding the visits admitted with septic
shock and the long-stay visits and then we did the stratified random sampling from non-shock visits,
keeping the same distribution of age, gender, ethnicity, and length of hospital stay. The final data
constituted 4,410 visits with an equal ratio of shock and non-shock visits.
States. To approximate patient observations, 15 sepsis-related attributes were selected based on the
sepsis diagnostic rules. In our data, the average missing rate across the 15 sepsis-related attributes
was 78.6%. We avoided deleting sparse attributes or resampling with a regular time interval because
the attributes suggested by medical experts are critical to decision making for sepsis treatment, and
the temporal missing patterns of EHRs also provide the information of patient observations. The
missing values were imputed using Temporal Belief Memory (Kim & Chi, 2018) combined with
missing indicators (Lipton et al., 2016).
Actions. For actions, we considered two medical treatments: antibiotic administration and oxygen
assistance. Note that the two treatments can be applied simultaneously, which results in a total of
four actions. Generally, the treatments are mixed in discrete and continuous action spaces according
to their granularity. For example, a decision of whether a certain drug is administrated is discrete,
while the dosage of drug is continuous. Continuous action space has been mainly handled by policy-
based RL models such as actor-critic models (Lillicrap et al., 2015), and it is generally only available
for online RL. Since we cannot search continuous action spaces while online interacting with actual
patients, we focus on discrete actions. Moreover, in this work, the RL agent aims to let the physicians
know when and which treatment should be given to a patient, rather than suggests an optimal amount
of drugs or duration of oxygen control that requires more complex consideration.
Rewards. Two leading clinicians, both with over 20-year experience on the subject of sepsis, guided
to define the reward function based on the severity of septic stages. The rewards were defined as
follows: infection [-5], inflammation [-10], organ failures [-20], and septic shock [-50]. Whenever a
patient was recovered from any stage of them, the positive reward for the stage was gained back.
The data was divided into 80% (the earlier 80% according to the time of the first event recorded
in patients’ visits) for training and (the later) 20% for test, following the common practice while
splitting up time-series for training and testing (Campos et al., 2014).


                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Our intelligent tutor GUI (left) and empirical results with three RL-induced policies and
one expert policy (right).
Policies We assume that the clinical care team is well-trained with sufficient medical knowledge
and follows standard protocols in sepsis treatments, thus we consider the behavioral policy, param-
eterized through behavior cloning (Azizsoltani & Jin, 2019), that generates the trajectories above
as an expert policy. We estimate the behavior policy with behavior cloning as in (Fu et al., 2021;
Hanna et al., 2019). The evaluation policies were trained using off-policy DQN algorithm with dif-
ferent hyper-parameter settings, where DQN was trained using default setting (learning rate 1e − 3,
γ = 0.99), learning rate 1e − 4, learning rate 1e − 5, a different random seed, γ = 0.9, respectively.
Evaluate Performance of Target Policies Since the RL agent cannot directly interact with patients,
it only depends on offline data for both policy induction and evaluation. In similar fashion to prior
studies (Komorowski et al., 2018; Azizsoltani & Jin, 2019; Raghu et al., 2017), the induced policies
were evaluated using the septic shock rate. And the OPE validation metric, rank correlation, can
be calculated by comparing the ranking by OPE estimations versus the rankings of septic shock
rate of target policies. The assumption behind that is (Raghu et al., 2017): when a septic shock
prevention policy is indeed effective, the more the real treatments in a patient trajectory agree with
the induced policy, the lower the chance the patient would get into septic shock; vice versa, the less
the real treatments in a patient trajectory agree with the induced policy (more dissimilar), the higher
the chance the patient would get into septic shock. Specifically, we follow the recent design by (Ju
et al., 2021): We measured agreement rate with the agent policy, which is the number of actions of a
target policy agreed with the agent policy among the total number of actions in a trajectory. Then we
sort the trajectories by their similarity rate in ascending order and calculate the septic shock rate for
the top 10% of trajectories with the highest similarity rate. If the agent policies are indeed effective,
the more the actually executed treatments agree with the agent policy, the less likely the patient is
going to have septic shock.

E     R EAL -W ORLD I NTELLIGENT T UTORING
E.1   TASK D ETAILS

Our data contains a total of 1,307 students’ interaction logs with a web-based ITS collected over
seven semesters’ classroom studies. The ITS is used in an undergraduate STEM course at a col-
lege, which has been extensively used by over 2, 000 students with ∼800k recorded interaction logs
through eight academic years. The ITS is designed to teach entry-level undergraduate students with
ten major probability principles, including complement theorem, Bayes’ rule, etc. The GUI of the
ITS is provided in Figure 14.
States. During tutoring, there are many factors that might determine or indicate students’ learn-
ing state, but many of them are not well understood by educators. Thus, to be conservative, we
extract varieties of attributes that might determine or indicate student learning observations from
student-system interaction logs. In sum, 142 attributes with both discrete and continuous values are
extracted, which can be categorized into the following five groups:
(i) Autonomy (10 features): the amount of work done by the student, such as the number of times
the student restarted a problem;


                                                   40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Figure 15: OPE improvement results averaging across OPE methods in e-learning.



(ii) Temporal Situation (29 features): the time-related information about the work process, such
as average time per step;
(iii) Problem-Solving (35 features): information about the current problem-solving context, such
as problem difficulty;
(iv) Performance (57 features): information about the student’s performance during problem-
solving, such as percentage of correct entries;
(v) Hints (11 features): information about the student’s hint usage, such as the total number of hints
requested.
Actions. For each problem, the ITS agent will decide whether the student should solve the next
problem, study a solution provided by the tutor or work together with the tutor to solve on the
problem. For each problem, the agent makes two levels of granularity: problem first and then step.
For problem level, it first decides whether the next problem should be a worked example (WE),
problem solving (PS), or a collaborative problem solving worked example (CPS). In WEs, students
observe how the tutor solves a problem; in PSs, students solve the problem themselves; in CPSs,
the students and the tutor co-construct the solution. If a CPS is selected, the tutor will then make
step-level decisions on whether to elicit the next step from the student or to tell the solution step to
the student directly.
Rewards. There was no immediate reward but the empirical evaluation matrix (i.e., delayed reward),
which was the students’ Normalized Learning Gain (NLG). NLG measured students’ learning gain
                                                                        scoreposttest −scorepretest
irrespective of their incoming competence. NLG is defined as: N LG =         √                      ,
                                                                                    1−scorepretest
where 1 denotes the maximum score for both pre- and post-test that were taken before and after
usage of the ITS, respectively.
Policies. The study were conducted across seven semesters, where the first six semesters’ data
were collected over expert policy and the seventh semester’s data were collected over four differ-
ent policies (three policies were RL-induced policies and one was the expert policy). The expert
policy randomly picked actions. The three RL-induced policies were trained using off-policy DQN
algorithm with different learning rates lr = {1e − 3, 1e − 4, 1e − 5}.
Evaluate Performance of Target Policies. Target policies are randomly assigned to 140 students
who take the Probability course in one semester. During the studies, all students used the same tutor,
followed the same general procedure, studied the same training materials, and worked through the
same training problems. All students went through the same four phases: 1) reading textbook, 2)
pre-test, 3) working on the ITS, and 4) post-test. During reading textbook, students read a general
description of each principle, reviewed examples, and solved some training problems to get familiar
with the ITS. Then the students took a pre-test which contained a total of 14 single- and multiple-
principle problems. Students were not given feedback on their answers, nor were they allowed
to go back to earlier questions (so as the post-test). Next, students worked on the ITS, where they
received the 12 problems on ITS in the same order. After that, students took the 20-problem post-test,
where 14 of the problems were isomorphic to the pre-test and the remainders were non-isomorphic
multiple-principle problems. Tests were auto-graded following the same grading criteria. Test scores
were normalized to the range of [0, 1].


                                                  41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               State Dim.    Action Dim.   Early Term.    Continuous Ctrl.   Dataset    Dataset Size
                                                                             random        999,000
                                                                             medium-
 Halfcheetah       17             6             No              Yes                        201,798
                                                                              replay
                                                                             medium        999,000
                                                                             medium-
                                                                                          1,998,000
                                                                              expert
                                                                              expert       999,000
                                                                             random        999,999
                                                                             medium-
 Hopper            11             3            Yes              Yes                        401,598
                                                                              replay
                                                                             medium        999,998
                                                                             medium-
                                                                                          1,998,966
                                                                              expert
                                                                              expert       999,061
                                                                             random        999,999
                                                                             medium-
 Walker2d          17             6            Yes              Yes                        301,698
                                                                              replay
                                                                             medium        999,322
                                                                             medium-
                                                                                          1,998,318
                                                                              expert
                                                                              expert       999,000
                                                                             random        999,427
                                                                             medium-
 Ant               27             8            Yes              Yes                        301,698
                                                                              replay
                                                                             medium        999,175
                                                                             medium-
                                                                                          1,998,158
                                                                              expert
                                                                              expert       999,036

Table 21: Summary of the Gym-Mujoco environments and datasets used to train OAT and baselines.


F      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS : G YM -M UJOCO

F.1    D ETAILS OF G YM -M UJOCO

A total of 4 environments are provided by Gym-Mujoco, and we follow the guidelines from DOPE
benchmark to validate our work and baselines (Fu et al., 2020). Moreover, each environment is
provided with 5 training datasets collected using different behavioral policies, resulting in a total of
20 sets of tasks. DOPE also provides 11 target policies for each environment, whose performance
are to be evaluated by the OPE methods. Though the Gym-Mujoco environments may not fit our
major interests, i.e., human-involved tasks, we provide additional validation of our work on them,
given they are popular testbeds and may be interested by readers. Table 21 shows summary of the
Gym-Mujoco environments and datasets.


F.2    R ESULTS ON G YM -M UJOCO AND D ISCUSSIONS

The Table 22 presents summary results on Gym-Mujoco environments using OAT and augmentation
baselines. The results are obtained by calculating the improved percentage (for MAE), or distance
(for Rank Correlation, Regret@1, and Regret@5) after augmentation compared to the original OPE


                                                  42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Halfcheetah                                     Hopper
                  MAE Perc.   Rank Corr.   Regret@1   Regret@5   MAE Perc.   Rank Corr.   Regret@1   Regret@5
    OAT           25.11       0.10        0.08        0.01       5.60        0.17        0.05        0.05
    VAE-MDP       19.01       0.06        0.01        0.01       1.80        0.16        -0.08       0.04
    TDA           15.86       0.04        -0.01       0.00       0.62        0.04        -0.11       0.04
    Permutation   10.14       0.03        0.00        0.00       -3.72       0.01        -0.25       0.00
    Jittering     12.32       0.00        -0.02       0.01       -3.34       0.00        -0.33       0.01
    Scaling       12.08       0.01        -0.02       0.00       -4.13       0.02        -0.27       0.00
    VAE           18.72       0.00        -0.02       -0.01      -3.21       0.14        -0.08       0.04
    TimeGAN       17.56       -0.02       -0.08       0.00       -1.19       0.15        -0.08       0.04
    SPAWNER       8.06        -0.11       -0.15       -0.03      -10.21      -0.02       -0.16       -0.12
    DGW           7.22        -0.12       -0.11       -0.07      -11.38      -0.07       -0.18       -0.15
                                    Walker2d                                         Ant
                  MAE Perc.   Rank Corr.   Regret@1   Regret@5   MAE Perc.   Rank Corr.  Regret@1    Regret@5
    OAT           3.39        0.15        0.06        0.03       1.50        0.27        0.20        0.01
    VAE-MDP       3.37        0.01        0.00        0.02       1.26        0.15        0.06        0.01
    TDA           0.00        0.04        -0.04       0.03       0.42        0.04        -0.03       0.00
    Permutation   -5.39       0.03        -0.05       0.02       -0.13       0.05        0.00        0.01
    Jittering     -5.62       -0.01       -0.08       0.00       -0.11       0.02        -0.04       -0.02
    Scaling       -6.37       0.04        -0.06       0.01       -0.17       0.00        -0.02       0.00
    VAE           -1.12       -0.07       -0.11       0.00       -0.22       0.10        -0.10       -0.02
    TimeGAN       -3.45       -0.03       -0.12       0.01       -0.30       0.08        0.01        0.01
    SPAWNER       -14.91      -0.13       -0.14       -0.02      -1.36       -0.19       -0.15       -0.04
    DGW           -12.67      -0.10       -0.15       0.00       -2.24       -0.20       -0.22       -0.02


Table 22: Summary results of averaged improvements on OPE by OAT and baselines in the Gym-
Mujoco environments and datasets.


results without augmentation. OAT can outperforms the baselines in terms of all four evaluation
metrics (as bold in Table 22).

G     M ORE R ELATED W ORKS
OPE In real-world, deploying and evaluating RL policies online are high stakes in such domains,
as a poor policy can be fatal to humans. It’s thus crucial to propose effective OPE methods. OPE
is used to evaluate the performance of a target policy given historical data drawn from (alternative)
behavior policies. A variety of contemporary OPE methods has been proposed, which can be mainly
divided into three categories (Voloshin et al., 2021b): (i) Inverse propensity scoring (Precup, 2000;
Doroudi et al., 2017), such as Importance Sampling (IS) (Doroudi et al., 2017), to reweigh the
rewards in historical data using the importance ratio between β and π. (ii) Direct methods directly
estimate the value functions of the evaluation policy (Nachum et al., 2019; Uehara et al., 2020;
Xie et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022), including but not limited to model-based
estimators (MB) (Paduraru, 2013; Zhang et al., 2021) that train dynamics and reward models on
transitions from the offline data; value-based estimators (Munos et al., 2016; Le et al., 2019) such
as Fitted Q Evaluation (FQE) which is a policy evaluation counterpart to batch Q learning; minimax
estimators (Liu et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020b; Voloshin et al., 2021a) such as DualDICE that
estimates the discounted stationary distribution ratios (Yang et al., 2020a). (iii) Hybrid methods
combine aspects of both inverse propensity scoring and direct methods (Jiang & Li, 2016; Thomas
& Brunskill, 2016). For example, DR (Jiang & Li, 2016) leverages a direct method to decrease the
variance of the unbiased estimates produced by IS. However, a major challenge of applying OPE to
real world is many methods can perform unpleasant when human-collected data is highly limited
as in (Fu et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2023a), augmentation can be an important way to facilitate OPE
performance.
Data Augmentation Data augmentation has been widely investigated in various domains, includ-
ing computer vision, time series, and RL. In computer vision, images are the major target and
augmentation have improved downstream models’ performance (LeCun et al., 1998; Deng et al.,
2009; Cubuk et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020). However, many image-targeted methods, such as crop
and rotate images, will discard important information in trajectories. In time series, a variety of
data augmentation has been proposed to capture temporal and multivariate dependencies (Le Guen-
nec et al., 2016; Kamycki et al., 2019; Yoon et al., 2019; Iwana & Uchida, 2021a). For instance,
SPAWNER (Kamycki et al., 2019) and DGW (Iwana & Uchida, 2021b) augment time series by
capturing group-level similarities to facilitate supervised learning. Generative models such as GAN


                                                        43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and VAE have achieved state-of-the-art performance in time series augmentation for both supervised
and unsupervised learning (Antoniou et al., 2017; Donahue et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2019; Barak
et al., 2022). However, those approaches for images and time-series do not consider the Markovian
nature in OPE training data, and may not be directly applicable to MDP trajectory augmentation.


                                               44
