Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A N E MULATOR FOR F INE -T UNING L ARGE L ANGUAGE
M ODELS USING S MALL L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Eric Mitchell, Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Chelsea Finn, Christopher D. Manning
 Stanford University
 eric.mitchell@cs.stanford.edu


                                            A BSTRACT
         Widely used language models (LMs) are typically built by scaling up a two-stage
         training pipeline: a pre-training stage that uses a very large, diverse dataset of
         text and a fine-tuning (sometimes, ‘alignment’) stage that uses targeted exam-
         ples or other specifications of desired behaviors. While it has been hypothesized
         that knowledge and skills come from pre-training, and fine-tuning mostly filters
         this knowledge and skillset, this intuition has not been extensively tested. To aid
         in doing so, we introduce a novel technique for decoupling the knowledge and
         skills gained in these two stages, enabling a direct answer to the question, What
         would happen if we combined the knowledge learned by a large model during
         pre-training with the knowledge learned by a small model during fine-tuning (or
         vice versa)? Using an RL-based framework derived from recent developments
         in learning from human preferences, we introduce emulated fine-tuning (EFT),
         a principled and practical method for sampling from a distribution that approxi-
         mates (or ‘emulates’) the result of pre-training and fine-tuning at different scales.
         Our experiments with EFT show that scaling up fine-tuning tends to improve
         helpfulness, while scaling up pre-training tends to improve factuality. Beyond
         decoupling scale, we show that EFT enables test-time adjustment of competing
         behavioral traits like helpfulness and harmlessness without additional training. Fi-
         nally, a special case of emulated fine-tuning, which we call LM up-scaling, avoids
         resource-intensive fine-tuning of large pre-trained models by ensembling them
         with small fine-tuned models, essentially emulating the result of fine-tuning the
         large pre-trained model. Up-scaling consistently improves helpfulness and factu-
         ality of instruction-following models in the Llama, Llama-2, and Falcon families,
         without additional hyperparameters or training. For reference implementation, see
         https://github.com/eric-mitchell/emulated-fine-tuning.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Widely used instruction-following large language models (LLMs) typically follow a two-stage train-
ing procedure, with a stage of unsupervised pre-training on a large, diverse dataset followed by su-
pervised fine-tuning on a much smaller, carefully curated dataset (Raffel et al., 2020; Chung et al.,
2022). While both stages are important in producing models that possess broad world knowledge
and perform a given task reliably, identifying exactly what capabilities emerge in which stage and
at what scale is difficult (Wei et al., 2022; Schaeffer et al., 2023). For example, pre-trained models
typically require careful prompting in order to perform a task; after fine-tuning for instruction fol-
lowing, they typically do not. Evaluation of the extent to which the core capability of ‘instruction
following’ is learned during pre-training vs. during fine-tuning is thus seriously complicated by the
choice of this prompt. To enable more direct attribution of capabilities to a stage of training, we
introduce a principled technique for emulating the result of combining the capabilities gained from
pre-training and fine-tuning at different model scales; see Figure 1. This technique, which we call
emulated fine-tuning (EFT), enables: a) direct study of the capabilities that change as only one stage
is scaled up or down; b) the practical benefit of approximating the result of fine-tuning a large model
without the associated computational expense; and c) the ability to modify the fine-tuning objective
(e.g., the tradeoff between helpfulness and harmlessness) at test time, without additional training.
Emulated fine-tuning is based on a simple factorization of the logits of a fine-tuned language model
into a) the base log probabilities of a pre-trained base model and b) the ‘behavior delta’, or the
difference between the log probabilities of a base model and fine-tuned model. This delta is a


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Emulated fine-tuning (EFT) enables a principled answer to the question of what happens when we
combine what is learned from pre-training a model of one size with what is learned from fine-tuning a model
of a different size? Conventional models combine the learnings of pre-training and fine-tuning at the same
size (A + B, C + D). In contrast, EFT enables choosing these independently, allowing a principled approach to
evaluating the result of A + D and C + B.


compact representation of the behavior change learned in fine-tuning and can be justified through
either a reinforcement learning (Rafailov et al., 2023) or Bayesian inference (Korbak et al., 2022)
framework. EFT thus emulates the result of pre-training at one scale and fine-tuning at another by
adding base log probabilities computed by a model at one size and the behavior delta computed by
models of a different size. For example, using models from the Llama-2 family, we can emulate the
result of pre-training at 70B scale and fine-tuning at 7B scale with the log probability algebra Llama-
2-base 70B + (Llama-2-chat 7B - Llama-2-base 7B). The first term is the base log probabilities
and the term in parentheses is the behavioral delta. Figure 2 shows this example in more detail.
Using emulated fine-tuning, we analyze the results of pre-training and fine-tuning at various scales
for multiple model families and datasets. Our analyses provide evidence supporting the intuition
that pre-training at scale enables greater accumulation of raw knowledge (improved factual correct-
ness), while fine-tuning at larger scale produces greater helpfulness (improved user satisfaction) (cf.
Gudibande et al., 2023). Beyond this scientific finding, we also find that EFT enables boosting the
performance of small fine-tuned models by a process we call up-scaling, essentially ensembling
the small fine-tuned model with a larger pre-trained model, without any fine-tuning or modifica-
tions to either model. Our experiments show that in scenarios where fine-tuning a small language
model is viable (e.g., Falcon-7B) but fine-tuning a larger language model is not due to resource
constraints (e.g., Falcon-180B), up-scaling enables capturing much of the benefits of fine-tuning
the larger model for dialogue, question-answering, and code generation, without performing any
model fine-tuning. Finally, we show that EFT also enables emulating modifications the fine-tuning
objective at test time through the mixing of different behavioral deltas with different weightings.
In summary, our primary contributions are a) the emulated fine-tuning framework; b) clear experi-
mental justification for the claim that scaling pre-training leads to improved factual knowledge while
scaling fine-tuning leads to improved task adherence; and c) the technique of model up-scaling,
which enables a small fine-tuned model and large base model to approximate the result of fine-
tuning the large base model without incurring the computational cost of fine-tuning.

2    R ELATED W ORK
The benefits of unsupervised pre-training in neural networks was first identified in deep belief net-
works (Hinton et al., 2006) and stacked autoencoders (Bengio et al., 2007), with early analyses
noting persistent effects of pre-training even with unlimited fine-tuning data (Erhan et al., 2010). In
natural language processing, pre-trained representations of words (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington
et al., 2014) or entire passages (Devlin et al., 2019; Peters et al., 2018) demonstrated the ability for
task-agnostic pre-training to learn representations useful for many downstream linguistic tasks such
as question-answering, natural language inference, and translation (Devlin et al., 2019; Raffel et al.,
2020). The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) enabled more efficient pre-training on
large datasets, which proved to inject significant amounts of precise factual world knowledge into
pre-trained LMs (Petroni et al., 2019) that can be redirected to downstream tasks through fine-tuning
(Roberts et al., 2020). Most recently, various works have shown that language models pre-trained
with unsupervised objectives can be fine-tuned to engage in general-purpose dialogue, producing a
model that can perform a variety of complex tasks specified in natural language (Thoppilan et al.,
2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Bubeck et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023b). Due to the
widespread usage of such models, our experiments focus on these general-purpose models.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Emulated fine-tuning combines knowledge from pre-training and fine-tuning at different scales.
This example shows up-scaling, which applies the behavioral changes from small-scale fine-tuning to the
knowledge in a large pre-trained model. The small fine-tuned model (green) understands the user’s query
asks about Yo-Yo Ma’s place of birth, not year, does not know the correct city. The small pre-trained model
(light blue) does not understand the user’s query or have reliable knowledge, assigning high probability to the
(correct) year of birth of Yo-Yo Ma and both possible places of birth. Their ratio represents the behavior of
following user intent (responding only with locations). Reweighting the large base model’s factually correct
conditional (that fails to follow user intent) using the small-scale behavioral change ratio, we emulate what a
large scale fine-tuned model would have said: a factually correct response that also follows the user’s intent.


Most similar to our work is Liu et al. (2021), which uses difference in log probabilities between an
‘expert’ and ‘anti-expert’ model to control a particular attribute of a model’s generations, such as
toxicity or sentiment. Our work studies how this mechanism can be used to emulate fine-tuning a
large model using a smaller model, using a reinforcement learning perspective. Past work leverages
the capability differential between large and small models to improve language model sampling
through ‘contrastive decoding,’ subtracting the log probabilities of a small language model (scaled
by a small constant hyperparameter) from the log probabilities of a large language model (Li et al.,
2023). Our work differs by interpreting this log probability difference as a log-importance weight,
re-weighting the conditional distribution of another model and eliminating the added hyperparame-
ter. Gao et al. (2022) study the impact of scale on the reward model used during RLHF, which can
be interpreted as scaling the fine-tuning phase in our work; however, they do not explore pre-training
scale or investigate the impact of either scale on independent model capabilities. In concurrent work,
Deng & Raffel (2023) and Mudgal et al. (2024) train a reward model or value function that reweights
a base model’s conditional distributions during sampling. In contrast, EFT does not require train-
ing a new reward model or value function, enabling the extraction of a reweighting function from
existing small, fine-tuned models.

3     E MULATED F INE -T UNING : D ECOUPLING P RE - TRAINING & F INE - TUNING
We now describe emulated fine-tuning (EFT) and how it enables decoupling of pre-training and
fine-tuning, as well as up-scaling, a special case of EFT that is particularly useful in practice.
3.1    P RELIMINARIES
Emulated fine-tuning views the fine-tuning procedure as reinforcement learning (RL) with a KL-
divergence constraint preventing divergence from a reference model, in this case the pre-trained
model (Peters et al., 2010). That is, we view the result of fine-tuning πft as the solution to
        πft = π ∗ (r, πref ) = arg max Ex∼p(x),y∼π(·|x) [r(x, y) − βKL(π(· | x)∥πref (· | x))] (1)
                                   π
where β controls the strength of the KL constraint to the pre-trained model (the reference model)
and p(x) is a fixed distribution (or dataset) of prompts. Prior work (Peters et al., 2010; Peng et al.,
2019; Korbak et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023) shows that the solution is given by

                         ∗                     1                      1
                       π (r, πref )(y | x) =       πref (y | x) exp     r(x, y) ,                  (2)
                                             Z(x)                     β

                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with Z(x) = y πref (y | x) exp β1 r(x, y) . Crucially, while the EFT framework is justified with
                    P

an RL-based interpretation of fine-tuning, it is applicable to any fine-tuned model, as any language
model can be viewed as the solution to KL-constrained RL with a constraint to the pre-trained model
(Rafailov et al., 2023). Specifically, any fine-tuned language model πft and pre-trained model πref can
be mapped to a reward function rπft (x, y) such that the solution to the KL-constrained RL problem
π ∗ (rπft , πref ) = πft , using rπft (x, y) = β log ππrefft (y|x)
                                                             (y|x) ; note the partition function Z(x) simply equals
one in this case. Using this duality between language models and rewards, for any language model
πft fine-tuned from a pre-trained model πref , we re-write:

                                               1        πft (y | x)                            1
            πft (y | x) = πref (y | x) exp       β log                     = πref (y | x) exp    rπ (x, y) .    (3)
                                               β       πref (y | x)                            β ft
                                                 |           {z        }
                                                 Implicit reward

In other words, the fine-tuned model πft is the optimal policy to the KL-constrained reward maxi-
mization problem with reward function rπft (x, y) = β log ππrefft (y|x)
                                                                  (y|x) , using πref as the reference model
                              1
that we are constraining to. We now have a clear delineation of the loci of information gained
from pre-training and fine-tuning: pre-training knowledge is represented in the base log probabil-
ities, while capabilities gained from fine-tuning are captured in the reward (the behavior delta of
base log probabilities subtracted from fine-tuned model log probabilities). This partitioning enables
independent scaling of these components, which we describe next.

3.2      S CALE D ECOUPLING WITH EFT
To make explicit the size of model used to compute the corresponding conditionals, we add super-
scripts and subscripts to Eq. 3 denoting the scale of the model used to compute each quantity:

               N                1    N
                                                                              π M (y | x)
              πM (y | x) = N        πref (y | x) exp rπM (x, y) ∝ πref
                                                                   N
                                                                       (y | x) M               (4)
                            ZM (x)                                            πref (y | x)
                                                                   M
where the M -scale reward function is rπM (x, y) = log ππM (y|x) (y|x)
                                                                       and the scale-decoupled partition
                                                             ref
               N               N                 M         2               N
                        P
function is ZM (x) =        y πref (y | x) exp r (x, y) .      That is, πM    corresponds to simulating
mixing the knowledge learned by a model of size N during pre-training and the knowledge learned
by a model of size M during fine-tuning. While setting N = M corresponds to simply sampling
from the original policy, in this paper, we particularly explore the setting of N ̸= M . For N < M ,
we simulate mixing the knowledge of a small reference (pre-trained) model with the knowledge
learned by a large model during fine-tuning; for N > M , we simulate mixing the knowledge of a
large pre-trained model with the knowledge learned by a small model during fine-tuning.
Sampling with Emulated Fine-tuning. Our experiments rely on drawing samples from EFT mod-
els. To do so, we compute per-token conditionals according to Eq. 4, but use a per-timestep approx-
imation of the (intractable) sequence-level partition function:
                                         1       N                  π M (yt | x, y<t )
                       π̃(yt | x, y<t ) =       πref (yt | x, y<t ) M                   ,                  (5)
                                     Z(x, y<t )                     πref (yt | x, y<t )
                                                       P       N                  π M (yt |x,y<t )
with per-timestep partition function Z(x, y<t ) =         yt πref (yt | x, y<t ) πref
                                                                                    M (y |x,y
                                                                                        t     <t )
                                                                                                   . A similar
temporally greedy approximation emerges from recent work in preference learning, interpreting
preference learning as learning an advantage rather than a reward function (Knox et al., 2023).

3.3      C OMPUTATIONAL FACTORS AND L ANGUAGE M ODEL U P -S CALING
Emulated fine-tuning enables sampling from an approximation of the result of pre-training and fine-
tuning at different scales. We refer to the case when N > M as up-scaling, as we emulate the result
of fine-tuning a large model; we refer to the case of N < M as down-scaling, as we emulate the
result of fine-tuning a small model. We elaborate here two senses in which up-scaling is the more
practically useful instance of EFT, one regarding fine-tuning and one sense regarding sampling.
   1
       We simply assume β = 1.0 going forward, as different values of β do not change the identity in Eq. 3.
   2
       The partition function appears now in Eq. 4, but not Eq 3, as the two reference models no longer cancel.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


First, down-scaling assumes access to the actual fine-tuned                    Average Normalized Improvement
model at the larger scale, in order to simulate the result of fine-


                                                                       Large reward
                                                                        Small base,
tuning at smaller scale. In this case, simply sampling from the                                                0.73
large fine-tuned model would be cheaper and more efficient.
                                                                                               0.31
In contrast, up-scaling assumes access to a small fine-tuned
model for the specific task or domain of interest (computa-                            Helpfulness            Factuality
tionally cheap to acquire) and a large pre-trained model (many


                                                                        Large base,
                                                                       Small reward
of which are freely released by organizations with consider-                                   0.30
able resources). Second, sampling from an EFT model with
N ≫ M is more efficient: EFT sampling requires computing                                                     0.67
one forward pass of a model at size N (the N -scale pre-trained                0.00     0.25          0.50   0.75     1.00
model) and two forward passes of models at size M (the N -                            Normalized improvement
scale fine-tuned model and the N -scale pre-trained model).
                                                                       Figure 3: Scaling pre-training alone
For N ≫ M , this cost becomes close to sampling from the ac-           mostly benefits factuality; scaling
tual N -scale fine-tuned model. Further, if M is small relative        up fine-tuning alone mostly benefits
to N , a natural adaptation of speculative decoding (Leviathan         helpfulness. The bottom group of
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a) to EFT exists, where the M -         bars shows that emulating a large fine-
scale fine-tuned model proposes chunks of tokens for the full          tuned model with a small fine-tuned
EFT model to check. Section 4.3 shows that speculative de-             model and large base model produces
coding enables a nearly 2.5x speedup for sampling from up-             nearly 70% of the factuality gains com-
scaled models, while preserving the model’s samples.                   pared to the small fine-tuned model
                                                                       alone. Normalized improvements av-
EFT up-scaling is therefore the more practically useful strategy       eraged across Llama-1, Llama-2, and
to boost performance of small, fine-tuned language models.             Falcon model families and Anthropic-
                                                                       HH and ELI5 datasets.
4    E XPERIMENTS
Our experiments primarily address the question what capabilities change when independently scal-
ing pre-training vs fine-tuning? To answer this question, we use EFT to evaluate helpfulness and fac-
tuality of a variety of scale combinations. We also attempt interpolating between different behavior
deltas with EFT, for example to change the desired tradeoff between helpfulness and harmlessness
at test time, without additional training. Next, we show that up-scaling with EFT requires modify-
ing the small fine-tuned model’s conditional for a sparse set of timesteps, enabling a large speedup
in sampling by adapting speculative decoding to EFT up-scaling. We also conduct an ablation to
show some potential benefits of filtering noisy token reweightings. Finally, we conduct a human
evaluation of model-generated responses to validate the accuracy of our GPT-4-based fact-checking.

Datasets Our experiments use two datasets that assess a dialogue agent’s ability to provide helpful,
factual, and harmless assistance to a user and one dataset to measure the coding ability of a language
assistant. First, we use the Anthropic Helpful-Harmless (HH) dialogue dataset (Bai et al., 2022),
which consists of multi-turn dialogue between a human and chatbot. The HH contains several sub-
splits, broadly for measuring ‘helpfulness’ and ‘harmlessness’ of a chatbot. We randomly sample
256 prompts from the complete dataset, filtering only to single-turn dialogues.3 Second, we use
prompts from the ELI5 (Fan et al., 2019) dataset, a dataset of open-ended user-generated questions
about science, history, and everyday life sourced from the Reddit ELI5 forum. We select a random
subset of 256 ELI5 prompts from test split, filtering to queries with no more than 30 words. Prompts
in the HH dataset are more everyday and conversational, asking for movie recommendations or in-
structions for home maintanence tasks. In contrast, ELI5 prompts tend to ask more difficult, targeted
factual questions about scientific or political topics. Finally, we use the HumanEval programming
benchmark (Chen et al., 2021), which contains hand-written Python programming problems; each
problem includes a function signature, docstring, and an average of 7.7 unit tests.

Models. Our experiments use three separate families of pre-trained language models and corre-
sponding fine-tuned models. For our Llama-1 experiments, we use the Llama-1 base models (Tou-
vron et al., 2023a) at 7B and 65B scale and Vicuna fine-tuned models (Chiang et al., 2023) at 7B
and 33B scale (no 70B Vicuna model is available) to compute implicit rewards. Vicuna models are
fine-tuned from Llama-1 base models with publicly-shared conversations that users have had with
  3
    This choice is to prevent GPT-4 evaluating responses in the dialogue history that didn’t come from the EFT
model during evaluation.


                                                      5
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Llama-1                  Llama-2                    Falcon                   Llama-1                   Llama-2                          Falcon

 Large base, Small base,
Small reward Large reward
                                      0.65                      0.91                     0.67                         0.83                     0.69                           0.64

                              0.31                       0.40            -2.39                                       0.79             0.34                   -1.53

                                               Helpfulness       Factuality                                                  Helpfulness              Factuality
                               0.38                    0.31                      0.25                  0.09                            0.40                           0.39

                                        0.77                      1.04                  0.58                  0.43                            0.64                           0.58

                   0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                                     Anthropic-HH improvement                                                                ELI5 improvement
                            (normalized between small & large chat models)                               (normalized between small & large chat models)
  Figure 4: Normalized improvements in factuality and helpfulness from emulated fine-tuning for prompts from
  the Anthropic-HH dialogue (left) and ELI5 open-ended question-answering (right) datasets. Both helpful-
  ness and factuality score are normalized between the scores of the small fine-tuned model (0.0) and the large
  fine-tuned model (1.0). Down-scaling (top row) combines the behavioral adjustments from fine-tuning at large
  scale with the knowledge gained by pre-training at small scale, and tends to provide greater improvements in
  helpfulness. Up-scaling (bottom row) combines the behavioral adjustments from fine-tuning at small scale with
  the knowledge gained by pre-training at large scale, and tends to provide more improvement in factuality.


  ChatGPT. Our Llama-2 experiments use the Llama-2 base models (Touvron et al., 2023b) at 7B and
  70B scale and Llama-2-chat models at 7B and 70B scale to compute implicit rewards. The Llama-2-
  chat models are fine-tuned from the Llama-2 base models with a combination of supervised learning
  and reinforcement learning from human feedback. Finally, for our Falcon experiments, we use Fal-
  con base models (Almazrouei et al., 2023) at 7B and 180B scale and the Falcon instruct/chat models
  at 7B and 180B scale to compute implicit rewards.4 Similarly to Vicuna, Falcon instruct/chat models
  are fine-tuned with supervised learning on shared dialogues between humans and chatbots. All three
  families include base generative models pre-trained with unsupervised pre-training on very large,
  diverse datasets of internet text (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Almazrouei et al., 2023).

  Evaluation. We evaluate helpfulness, factuality, and harmlessness with GPT-4 as a proxy for hu-
  man evaluation. Several existing studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of both pair-wise eval-
  uation (comparing the quality of two responses) and point-wise evaluation (scoring a single response
  along some dimension) using ChatGPT or GPT-4 (Zheng et al., 2023; Dubois et al., 2023; Rafailov
  et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b) as well as these models’ ability to provide well-calibrated judgments
  of truthfulness (Tian et al., 2023). For our experiments, we measure helpfulness by prompting GPT-
  4 to estimate the probability that a critical user is satisfied with the response given by the chatbot; we
  measure helpfulness by prompting GPT-4 to count the factual errors in the given response; we mea-
  sure harmfulness by prompting GPT-4 to estimate the likelihood that a response will cause harm to
  the user or society. In both cases, GPT-4 is required to provide reasoning before its decision, aiding
  interpretability. We sample responses with temperature 0. Complete prompts for GPT-4 evaluations
  can be found in Appendix A. Further, we conduct a comparison with crowd-sourced annotators in
  Appendix B, finding that in the cases of disagreements between GPT-4 and humans, errors in the
  human judgment, rather than GPT-4’s analysis, cause the disagreement nearly 80% of the time. We
  use the HumanEval automated test harness5 to evaluate correctness of the model-generated solution.

  4.1                       W HAT C APABILITIES A RISE FROM S CALING P RE - TRAINING VS F INE - TUNING ?

  Our primary set of experiments studies the result of independently scaling pre-training and fine-
  tuning using emulated fine-tuning. For each dataset and model family, we generate responses to
  all 256 evaluation prompts using four models: a) the small fine-tuned model alone; b) the large
  fine-tuned model alone; c) the EFT up-scaled model, emulating the combination of small-scale
  fine-tuning and large-scale pre-trained knowledge; d) the EFT down-scaled model, emulating the
  combination of large-scale fine-tuning with small-scale pre-trained knowledge. For example, for
  the Llama-2 experiments, we sample from a) Llama-2-chat 7B; b) Llama-2-chat 70B; c) up-scaled
  EFT with Llama-2-base 70B as the pre-trained model and Llama-2-chat 7B/Llama-2-base 7B as the
                    4
       Due to GPU memory constraints, we use Falcon-180B in 8bit inference mode when computing large-scale
  rewards for the Falcon down-scaling experiments; quantization is likely to have some effect on generation
  quality. We use float16 for the up-scaling experiment, because we need only the large base model in that case.
     5
       https://github.com/openai/human-eval/tree/master


                                                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


implicit reward; and c) down-scaled EFT with Llama-2-base 7B as the pre-trained model and Llama-
2-chat 70B/Llama-2-base 70B as the implicit reward. All experiments use temperature sampling
with temperature 1.0, without top-p or top-k (except when specified otherwise).
See Figure 3 for the aggregated results of this experiment, which shows evidence that scaling pre-
training primarily leads to improved factuality, while scaling fine-tuning primarily leads to improved
perceived helpfulness. Figure 4 shows per-model and per-dataset results. Results are normalized
against the performance of the small and large fine-tuned models alone (which are essentially
lower and upper bounds on performance). Here, x=0.0 corresponds to small fine-tuned model per-
formance; x=1.0 corresponds to large fine-tuned model performance. Notably, the more computa-
tionally efficient version of EFT, up-scaling, leads to significant gains in helpfulness and especially
factuality. Sections 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5 further explore the efficiency and performance of up-scaling.

4.2   EFT E NABLES DYNAMIC T EST-T IME R EWARD I NTERPOLATION

While decoupling scale is a clear feature of EFT, an-                                 Dynamic Helpful-Harmful Tradeoff
other benefit of explicitly decoupled pre-training and fine-                                  EFT-7B        EFT-Upscale-70B
                                                                             50
tuning is the ability to make modifications to the reward
                                                                             40
function at sampling time. Consider the case of compet-


                                                               Helpfulness
ing fine-tuning objectives, such as helpfulness and harm-                    30
lessness (Bai et al., 2022). For some user queries (‘How
                                                                             20
can I steal my neighbor’s guitars?’), providing an answer
that helps the user with their goal is directly at odds with                 10

providing a harmless (safe) answer. Thus, one view of                        0
                                                                                  0       2        4    6         8      10
fine-tuning general dialogue agents is attempting to pro-                                     % Harmful Responses
vide maximum helpfulness at a particular budget of harm-
fulness. By varying the harmfulness budget, we can pro-          Figure 5: Dynamically adjusting the de-
duce a helpful-harmful frontier. However, existing fine-         sired tradeoff between helpfulness and
                                                                 harmlessness without retraining. We use
tuning procedures bake in the particular desired tradeoff        EFT to interpolate between two implicit re-
between helpfulness and harmfulness at fine-tuning time;         wards for helpfulness and harmlessness and
this tradeoff cannot be easily modified at sampling time.        plot GPT-4-evaluated helpfulness and harm-
In contrast, with EFT, test-time adjustment of the reward        fulness on Anthropic-HH prompts. Combin-
                                                                 ing reward interpolation with up-scaling en-
is natural and straightforward. To interpolate behaviors at      ables a Pareto improvement in the frontier,
test time with EFT, we assume that two small-scale fine-         all without fine-tuning. Error bars are one
tuned models exist, one fine-tuned for pure helpfulness          standard error.
πhelp , one for pure harmlessness πsafe . For this exper-
iment, we fine-tune these two models with DPO using Llama-2-7B as the base model, and the
helpful-base and harmless-base splits of the Anthropic-HH dataset (Bai et al., 2022). At test time,
instead of using a single reward function rπM (x, y) in Equation 4, we use the interpolated reward
rλM (x, y) = λrhelp
                 M                     M
                    (x, y) + (1 − λ)πsafe , where λ = 1 corresponds to pure helpfulness, and λ = 0
pure harmlessness. Sampling with λ ∈ (0, 1) corresponds to weighting helpfulness and harm-
lessness. We can also combine reward interpolation with model up-scaling in order to emulate
fine-tuning a large pre-trained model with some mixtures of reward functions.
Figure 5 shows the results of interpolating between helpfulness and harmlessness at 7B pre-training
and fine-tuning scale, as well as with up-scaling to 70B. We see clear, smooth frontiers; up-scaling
provides a Pareto improvement, all without retraining to each tradeoff.

4.3   E FFICIENT S AMPLING FROM U P - SCALED M ODELS WITH S PECULATIVE D ECODING

Naively, EFT up-scaling (small-scale fine-tuning + large pre-trained model) requires two forward
passes from the ‘small’ models and one forward pass from the ‘large’ model for each token. Yet
the size asymmetry of EFT makes speculative decoding (Chen et al., 2023a) a natural choice to ac-
celerate inference. Speculative decoding accelerates autoregressive generation from an LLM using
a small proxy model to propose a block of tokens autoregressively, which the large model can then
check in parallel. If the small model approximates the large model well and generates the same
tokens that the large model would have, the number of total forward passes in the large model can
be reduced considerably. For EFT up-scaling, we hypothesize that the small fine-tuned model alone
might approximate the up-scaled model for most tokens; we verify this hypothesis qualitatively in


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Identifying tokens where the up-scaled small policy has high TV distance with the small policy
alone, i.e., significant probability mass is moved. Most tokens have small TV distance, suggesting that for many
tokens, sampling from the small policy alone is ‘safe’ and therefore speculative decoding should be fruitful.
The words in brackets are the words most significantly up-weighted or down-weighted (denoted by arrows).

             Spec. Block size     None     2      4       8      16            70B policy   7B policy
             Toks/sec (HH)         6.0    9.2    12.5   13.8    12.1
                                                                                    9.3        28.0
             Toks/sec (ELI5)       6.1    9.5    13.2   15.1    14.2

Table 1: Left: Speculative decoupled decoding accelerates sampling from a Llama-2-7B policy up-scaled
to 70B parameters by approximately 2.5 times, while producing the same samples. Chunks of sampled to-
kens are proposed by the small policy alone, which are then ‘checked’ by computing the base model importance
weight. Right: For reference, we include the tokens per second for autoregressive sampling from the 70B or
7B policy alone, the latter of which upper bounds the tokens/second of the EFT model.

Figure 6, which shows that the total variation distance between the small fine-tuned model and the
up-scaled model is small for most tokens, and very large for a few tokens.
To speculatively decode from an up-scaled model, the small fine-tuned model proposes a block of
k tokens with normal autoregressive sampling. Both the large and small base models are then run
on this block in a single forward pass (due to the parallel nature of Transformers), allowing the true
EFT conditionals to be calculated, in hindsight. If sampling from the true conditionals produces the
same tokens,6 we simply continue, sampling a new proposed block. In the case of disagreement, we
rewind generation to the last token where the small fine-tuned model and full EFT model agreed. If
no tokens agree, we use the token sampled from the first true hindsight up-scaled conditional.
Table 1 shows the results of this experiment: speculative decoding accelerates sampling by nearly
2.5x when up-scaling Llama-2-7B-chat with Llama-2-70B-base. This improvement closes more
than 50% of the sampling speed gap between sampling the 7B chat model and the 70B chat model.

4.4      A MPLIFIED U P - SCALING E NABLES A DDITIONAL P ERFORMANCE G AINS
In this section, we explore a technique to further boost the performance of up-scaling by simply
amplifying the contrast between the base models of different sizes. Equation 4 presents the EFT
policy π̃ as reweighting a base (or ‘reference’) model of size N with an implicit reward function
computed by the ratio of two policies of size M . As we consider up-scaling in this section, i.e.
N ≫ M ; we thus replace the subscript N with ‘lg’ and M with ‘sm’, for clarity. By simply
grouping terms differently, we have an alternative view of EFT, where we reweight a small fine-
tuned policy using the ratio of the large base model to the small base model:
                                                         lg
  log π̃(yt | x, y<t ) = log π sm (yt | x, y<t ) + (log πref                       sm
                                                             (yt | x, y<t ) − log πref (yt | x, y<t )) +Z, (6)
                                                   |                        {z                       }
                                                                       Up-scaling delta

where Z is simply the normalizing constant of the softmax. The benefits of up-scaling come from
                                                                   sm
the ‘up-scaling delta’, which biases the small fine-tuned policy πref toward tokens that where the
                                                 lg
probability ratio between the large base model πref and the small base model is high, i.e., the large
base model ‘prefers’ the tokens more than the small base model.7
In this section, we explore the impact of simply scaling the up-scaling delta in Equation 6 by a
coefficient β. Past experiments implicitly used β = 1.0. Intuitively, higher values of β exaggerate
                                                                                           lg
more strongly the bias of the final EFT policy π̃ toward tokens that the large base model πref assigns
                                                    sm
higher probability to than the small base model πref . The results, presented in Figure 7, show that
β > 1 significantly improves the correctness of generated code on HumanEval, and the factuality
of responses in question-answering, in both cases accounting for nearly all of the difference in
   6
       We set the random seed to be equal to the timestep, to ensure high-entropy conditionals are not penalized.
   7
       Li et al. (2023) essentially sample from the up-scaling delta alone; we use it to reweight another policy.


                                                         8
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                        ELI5 factuality and helpfulness
                                                          HumanEval coding performance
HumanEval pass@1 solve rate
                                                                                                                                   82                              Plain sampling
                                                                                                                                          70B-chat
                              0.30                                                                   0.280                         81                              EFT up-scaling


                                                                                                               Helpfulness score
                                        Plain sampling
                                        EFT up-scaling                        0.244       0.256                                    80
                              0.25
                                                                   0.220                                                           79
                                                         0.207                                                                     78                      = 1.0
                              0.20
                                                                                                                                   77                  = 1.2
                              0.15                                                                                                 76         = 1.5
                                        0.128                                                                                                                             7B-chat
                                                                                                                                   75
                              0.10
                                       7B-chat       70B-base    EFT 7B 70B EFT 7B 70B EFT 7B 70B   70B-chat                            0.5           0.6    0.7    0.8    0.9
                                                                   ( = 1.0)   ( = 1.2)   ( = 1.5)                                             Factual errors per response
  Figure 7: Left. Up-scaling Llama-2-7B-chat with EFT closes 84% of the gap in solve rate between Llama-
  2-7B-chat (far left bar) and Llama-2-70b-chat (far right bar) on the HumanEval programming benchmark.
  Adjusting the up-scaling factor (i.e., we raise the reference model probabilities to the power of β) enables
  extracting additional benefit from up-scaling beyond the naive formulation in Eq. 4. Right. For ELI5 question
  answering with Llama-2, adjusting the up-scaling factor β enables selecting different points in helpful-factual
  space when up-scaling LLama-2-7B-chat to 70B, all of which substantially improve over Llama-2-7B-chat.


  performance between the small and large fine-tuned models. However, for question-answering,
  we observe some reduction in the perceived helpfulness of the model’s responses. However, the
  helpfulness score is still higher than the original small policy that is being up-scaled.

   4.5                               C ONSERVATIVE D ECODING S TRATEGIES FOR U P -S CALED M ODELS
  All of our prior experiments simply sam-
  ple from the raw re-weighted condition-               Truncation        None    0.95     0.9    0.8
  als described in Equation 4, without in-              Errors/prompt 0.300 0.289 0.352 0.348
  troducing any new decoding strategies or              Helpfulness       66.8    67.0    67.2   67.0
  hyperparameters. In this section, we ex-
  plore whether EFT samples can be further Table 2: Evaluating conservative re-weighting in up-scaled
  improved by post-processing noisy predic- Llama-2 models by truncating up-scaling weights for low-
  tions. EFT up-scaling essentially takes probability tokens. Up-scaling sees modest improvements in
  the conditionals from a small fine-tuned GPT-4 evaluated factual errors per prompt, although the un-
  language models and reweights them (up- tuned model (no truncation) shows relatively strong results.
  scales them) using the conditionals of a
  large base model divided by the conditionals of a small base model. However, the up-scaling ra-
      pbase-large (xt |x<t )
  tio pbase-small (xt |x<t ) may become extremely large for low-probability (and possibly poorly-modeled)
  tokens, leading to problematically high probability assigned to low-quality tokens.
  To address this potential problem, we explore top-p filtering of the up-scaling weights. See Table 2
  for complete results. Top-p filtering of up-scaling weights mildly improves factuality and helpful-
  ness compared to the unfiltered conditionals. To perform top-p filtering, we first compute the ‘top-p’
  set of tokens from the conditional of only the small fine-tuned model, that is, the smallest set of to-
  kens whose probability sums to over p. Unlike conventional top-p decoding (Holtzman et al., 2020),
  we do not set the conditionals to other tokens to zero. Rather, we simply set the up-scaling weights
  to 1 for these tokens, preventing unintentional up-weighting of extremely unlikely continuations.

   5                             C ONCLUSION
  Scaling up the two-stage pipeline of pre-training and fine-tuning (or ‘alignment’) continues to be
  the dominant strategy for building more powerful language systems. In this paper, we proposed a
  methodology, emulated fine-tuning, that enables direct empirical exploration of the results of scaling
  these two stages independently. Using this methodology, we showed that most of the factuality gains
  of fine-tuning a large pre-trained language model can be acquired by up-scaling, which combines a
  large base model with a small fine-tuned model to emulate the result of fine-tuning the large base
  model when such large-scale fine-tuning is computationally prohibitive. Further, we showed that
  dynamic adjustment of behavior without additional training, such as trading off helpfulness and
  harmlessness, is possible through emulated fine-tuning. Future work may use emulated fine-tuning
  to study additional dimensions of model capabilities to those in our experiments, interpolate between
  other test-time model behaviors without requiring additional tuning, or explore alternative methods
  for sampling from EFT-structured models to improve efficiency or performance.


                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
EM gratefully acknowledges funding from a Knight-Hennessy graduate fellowship and a Stanford
Accelerator for Generative AI and Education grant. The authors thank OpenAI for providing API
credits through the Researcher Access Program. CF and CDM are CIFAR Fellows. This work was
supported in part by Juniper Networks.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In order to foster reproducibility, we provide the details of implementing emulated fine-tuning in
Section 3.2. Our experimental setup, including datasets, models, and evaluation is listed in Section 4.
The prompts we used to perform evaluation with GPT-4 are given in the Appendix. A reference
implementation of EFT decoding can be found at https://github.com/eric-mitchell/
emulated-fine-tuning.

R EFERENCES
Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra Co-
  jocaru, Merouane Debbah, Etienne Goffinet, Daniel Heslow, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic,
  Badreddine Noune, Baptiste Pannier, and Guilherme Penedo. Falcon-40B: an open large lan-
  guage model with state-of-the-art performance, 2023. 6
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernan-
  dez, Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson,
  Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Ka-
  plan. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback,
  2022. 2, 5, 7
Y. Bengio, P. Lamblin, D. Popovici, and H. Larochelle. Greedy layer-wise training of deep networks.
   In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 19, pp. 153–160. MIT Press,
   2007. 2
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece
   Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi,
   Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments
   with gpt-4, 2023. 2
Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John
  Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.01318, 2023a. 5, 7
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. 2021. 5
Yi Chen, Rui Wang, Haiyun Jiang, Shuming Shi, and Ruifeng Xu. Exploring the use of large
  language models for reference-free text quality evaluation: An empirical study, 2023b. 6
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/. 5


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
  Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu,
  Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pel-
  lat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao,
  Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin,
  Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-finetuned language
  models, 2022. 1

Haikang Deng and Colin Raffel. Reward-augmented decoding: Efficient controlled text generation
  with a unidirectional reward model, 2023. 3

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/N19-1423. 2

Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
  Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for
  methods that learn from human feedback, 2023. 6, 15

Dumitru Erhan, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, and Pascal Vincent.
  Why does unsupervised pre-training help deep learning? In Proceedings of the 13th International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), Departement d’informatique et de
  recherche opérationnelle, Universite de Montreal, 2920, chemin de la Tour, Montreal, Quebec,
  H3T 1J8, Canada, 2010. 2

Angela Fan, Yacine Jernite, Ethan Perez, David Grangier, Jason Weston, and Michael Auli. ELI5:
  Long form question answering. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3558–3567, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1346. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  P19-1346. 5

Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization, 2022.
  3

Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. Chatgpt outperforms crowd workers for text-
  annotation tasks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(30):e2305016120, 2023.
  doi: 10.1073/pnas.2305016120. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/
  pnas.2305016120. 15

Arnav Gudibande, Eric Wallace, Charlie Snell, Xinyang Geng, Hao Liu, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey
  Levine, and Dawn Song. The false promise of imitating proprietary llms, 2023. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.15717. 2

Geoffrey E Hinton, Simon Osindero, and Yee-Whye Teh. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief
  nets. Neural computation, 18(7):1527–1554, 2006. 2

Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=rygGQyrFvH. 9

W. Bradley Knox, Stephane Hatgis-Kessell, Serena Booth, Scott Niekum, Peter Stone, and Alessan-
  dro Allievi. Models of human preference for learning reward functions, 2023. 4

Tomasz Korbak, Ethan Perez, and Christopher Buckley. RL with KL penalties is better viewed
  as Bayesian inference. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2022, pp. 1083–1091, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.77. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.77. 2, 3


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative
  decoding. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 19274–19286. PMLR, 2023. 5

Xiang Lisa Li, Ari Holtzman, Daniel Fried, Percy Liang, Jason Eisner, Tatsunori Hashimoto,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Contrastive decoding: Open-ended text generation as op-
  timization. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 12286–12312, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.687. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.687. 3, 8

Alisa Liu, Maarten Sap, Ximing Lu, Swabha Swayamdipta, Chandra Bhagavatula, Noah A. Smith,
  and Yejin Choi. DExperts: Decoding-time controlled text generation with experts and anti-
  experts. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the
  59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6691–6706, On-
  line, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.
  522. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.522. 3

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean.          Dis-
  tributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality.   In C.J.
  Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 26. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2013. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2013/
  file/9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Paper.pdf. 2

Sidharth Mudgal, Jong Lee, Harish Ganapathy, YaGuang Li, Tao Wang, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng
  Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Michael Collins, Trevor Strohman, Jilin Chen, Alex Beutel, and Ahmad
  Beirami. Controlled decoding from language models, 2024. 3

Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022. 2

Jiaxin Pei, Aparna Ananthasubramaniam, Xingyao Wang, Naitian Zhou, Apostolos Dedeloudis,
   Jackson Sargent, and David Jurgens. Potato: The portable text annotation tool. In Proceedings
   of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demon-
   strations, 2022. 16

Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning, 2019. 3

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher Manning. GloVe: Global vectors for word rep-
   resentation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
   Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532–1543, Doha, Qatar, October 2014. Association for Computational
   Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/v1/D14-1162. URL https://aclanthology.org/D14-1162.
   2

Jan Peters, Katharina Mülling, and Yasemin Altün. Relative entropy policy search. In Proceedings of
  the Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI’10, pp. 1607–1612. AAAI
  Press, 2010. 3

Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee,
 and Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of the 2018
 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
 man Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 2227–2237, New Orleans, Louisiana,
 June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1202. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/N18-1202. 2

Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
  Alexander Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
  ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2463–2473, Hong Kong, China,
  November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1250. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D19-1250. 2
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and
  Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model,
  2023. 2, 3, 4, 6, 15
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-
  text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL http:
  //jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html. 1, 2
Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, and Noam Shazeer. How much knowledge can you pack into
  the parameters of a language model? In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 5418–5426, Online, November 2020.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.437. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.437. 2
Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are emergent abilities of large language
  models a mirage?, 2023. 1
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven
  Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin,
  James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten Bosma, Vin-
  cent Zhao, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Pranesh
  Srinivasan, Laichee Man, Kathleen Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi,
  Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny Soraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran,
  Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee,
  Lora Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton,
  Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Aguera-Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak,
  Ed Chi, and Quoc Le. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications, 2022. 2
Katherine Tian, Eric Mitchell, Allan Zhou, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Huaxiu Yao, Chelsea
  Finn, and Christopher D. Manning. Just ask for calibration: Strategies for eliciting calibrated
  confidence scores from language models fine-tuned with human feedback, 2023. 6
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models, 2023a. 5, 6
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023b. 2, 6
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von
  Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
  file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf. 2
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol
  Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models,
  2022. 1
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023. 6, 15


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     GPT-4 P ROMPTS
We include the prompts used for measuring factuality, helpfulness, and harmlessness here. Text
wrapped in double braces should be replaced with the query or response to evaluate.

A.1    FACTUALITY GPT-4 P ROMPT
Count the number of factual inaccuracies in the following chatbot
response to a user query. Be critical; eloquent responses may
still contain many inaccuracies. Abstain from scoring unethical
or illegal responses by giving a score of "None".
RESPONSE: {{the response to evaluate}}
USE THE ANSWER FORMAT:
Reason:       <analysis of any factual inaccuracies>
Score:      <a single number, nothing else>

A.2    H ELPFUL GPT-4 P ROMPT
For the following user query and chatbot response, please estimate
the probability (a percent from 0 to 100) that an extremely
critical user feels COMPLETELY satisfied that the response helps
them accomplish their goals. If there is ANY clear reason the
user would not be completely satisfied, your probability should
be very low. Remember that longer responses are not necessarily
better!
QUERY: {{the query}}
RESPONSE: {{the response to evaluate}}
USE THE ANSWER FORMAT:
Reason: <analysis of query and response> Probability an extremely
critical user is COMPLETELY satisfied: <just the probability, a
number 0-100>

A.3    H ARMLESS GPT-4 P ROMPT
Score the following chatbot response to the given query on a
continual scale from 0 (worst) to 100 (best), where a score of
0 means the response is likely to cause physical or emotional harm
to the user or society, and a score of 100 means the response is
completely harmless.
QUERY: {{the query}}
RESPONSE: {{the response to evaluate}}
USE THE ANSWER FORMAT:
Reason:       <analysis of query and response>
Safety score:           <a single number 0-100, nothing else>

B     C OMPARING GPT-4 FACTUALITY J UDGMENTS WITH H UMAN
      E VALUATORS
While the usage of large language models for evaluating human preferences or helpfulness has been
validated in several cases (Zheng et al., 2023; Dubois et al., 2023; Gilardi et al., 2023; Rafailov et al.,
2023), their effectiveness at performing fact-checking for everyday topics has not been extensively
studied. To confirm that our GPT-4 factuality judgments are meaningful, we compare the annotations
provided by humans and GPT-4 on a single set of data. We generate an evaluation dataset of 100


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Figure 8: The Potato labeling interface for human factuality label collection.


prompts from ELI5 and the corresponding response from Falcon-40b-instruct (chosen because its
rate of producing a factual error is close to 0.5, according to GPT-4). We acquire human and GPT-
4 labels for the number of factual errors in each of the 100 responses. We then binarize these
predictions to account for discrepancies in how humans or GPT-4 evaluate what a single fact is; that
is, we compare the binary variable corresponding to was there any factual error in this response, or
no factual error at all? In addition to computing the agreement rate, we additionally examine 30
examples where the human and GPT-4 disagree and carefully label a ‘ground truth’ value for whether
or not the response contained a factual error. We find that human and GPT-4 labels agree 61% of
the time; when humans and GPT-4 disagree, gold labels carefully collected by the authors find
GPT-4 to be correct 77% of the time, with a standard error of 7.8%. This result suggests that
GPT-4 is a significantly more accurate annotator of factual correctness than time-limited human
crowdworkers.
We collect human factuality labels using Prolific.co and the Potato annotation package (Pei et al.,
2022). Human labelers are compensated between $15-18/hr. The interface for labeling is provided
in Figure 8.


                                                    16
