Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M AXIMUM L IKELIHOOD E STIMATION IS A LL YOU
N EED FOR W ELL -S PECIFIED C OVARIATE S HIFT
 Jiawei Ge⇤†       Shange Tang ⇤†        Jianqing Fan†       Cong Ma‡         Chi Jin§



                                             A BSTRACT

          A key challenge of modern machine learning systems is to achieve Out-of-
          Distribution (OOD) generalization—generalizing to target data whose distribu-
          tion differs from that of source data. Despite its significant importance, the fun-
          damental question of “what are the most effective algorithms for OOD general-
          ization” remains open even under the standard setting of covariate shift. This
          paper addresses this fundamental question by proving that, surprisingly, classical
          Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) purely using source data (without any
          modification) achieves the minimax optimality for covariate shift under the well-
          specified setting. That is, no algorithm performs better than MLE in this setting
          (up to a constant factor), justifying MLE is all you need. Our result holds for a
          very rich class of parametric models, and does not require any boundedness con-
          dition on the density ratio. We illustrate the wide applicability of our framework
          by instantiating it to three concrete examples—linear regression, logistic regres-
          sion, and phase retrieval. This paper further complement the study by proving
          that, under the misspecified setting, MLE is no longer the optimal choice, whereas
          Maximum Weighted Likelihood Estimator (MWLE) emerges as minimax optimal
          in certain scenarios.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Distribution shift, where the distribution of test data (target data) significantly differs from the dis-
tribution of training data (source data), is commonly encountered in practical machine learning
scenarios (Zou et al., 2018; Ramponi & Plank, 2020; Guan & Liu, 2021). A central challenge of
modern machine learning is to achieve Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization, where learned
models maintain good performance in the target domain despite the presence of distribution shifts.
To address this challenge, a variety of algorithms and techniques have been proposed, including
vanilla empirical risk minimization (ERM) (Vapnik, 1999; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020), impor-
tance weighting (Shimodaira, 2000; Huang et al., 2006; Cortes et al., 2010b; Cortes & Mohri, 2014),
learning invariant representations (Ganin et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Rosen-
feld et al., 2020), distributionally robust optimization (DRO) (Sagawa et al., 2019), etc. See the
recent survey (Shen et al., 2021) for more details. These results claim the effectiveness of the corre-
sponding proposed algorithms in different regimes. This leads to a natural fundamental question:

                  What are the most effective algorithms for OOD generalization?

This paper consider a widely-studied formulation of OOD-generalization—covariate shift. Under
covariate shift, the marginal distributions of the input covariates X vary between the source and
target domains, while the conditional distribution of output given covariates Y | X remains the
same across domains. We consider learning a model from a known parametric model class under
well-specified setting, where well-specification refers to the problems where the true conditional
distribution of Y | X lies in the given parametric model class. We argue that well-specified setting
    ⇤
    equal contribution
    †
    Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University;
{jg5300,shangetang,jqfan}@princeton.edu
  ‡
    Department of Statistics, University of Chicago; congm@uchicago.edu
  §
    Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University; chij@princeton.edu


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


becomes increasingly more relevant in modern learning applications, because these applications typ-
ically use large-scale models with an enormous number of parameters, which are highly expressive
and thus make the settings “approximately” well-specified.
Unfortunately, even under the basic setup of well-specified covariate shift, the aforementioned high-
lighted problem remains elusive — while the seminar work Shimodaira (2000) provides the first
asymptotic guarantees for classical Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) algorithm under this
setup, and proves its optimality among a specific class of weighted likelihood estimators, his results
leave two critical questions open: (1) Does MLE remain effective in the practical non-asymptotic
scenario when the number of data is limited? (2) Do there exist smart algorithms beyond the class of
weighted likelihood estimators that outperform MLE? This paper precisely addresses both critical
questions and thus resolving the highlighted problem under well-specified covariate shift.
Our contributions. Concretely, this paper makes following contributions:

1. We prove that, for a large set of well-specified covariate shift problems, the classical Maximum
   Likelihood Estimation (MLE) — which is computed purely based on source data without using
   any target data — finds the optimal predictor on the target domain with prediction loss decreases
   as Õ(Tr(IT IS 1 )/n). Here Tr(·) standards for trace, IS , IT are the fisher information under
   source and target data distribution respectively, and n is the number of source data. Our result
   does not require any boundedness condition on the density ratio, and is, to our best knowledge,
   the first general, non-asymptotic, sharp result for MLE on a rich class of covariate shift problems.
2. We provide the first minimax lower bound under well-specified covariate shift for any algorithm,
   matching the error rate of MLE. This implies that MLE is minimax optimal, and no algorithm is
   better than MLE in this setting (up to a constant factor), justifying “MLE is all you need”.
3. We instantiate our generic results by considering three representative examples with distinct prob-
   lem structures: linear regression, logistic regression and phase retrieval. We verify preconditions,
   compute key quantities, and directly give covariate shift guarantees for these applications.
4. We further complement the study of this paper by considering the mis-specfied setting where
   MLE ceases to work. We establish the first general, non-asymptotic upper bound for the Maxi-
   mum Weighted Likelihood Estimator (MWLE) provided bounded likelihood ratio. We prove that
   MWLE is minimax optimal under certain worst-case mis-specification.

MLE versus MWLE. This paper shows that importance weighting should not always be the go-to
algorithm for covariate shift problems. Despite MWLE works under more general mis-specified
setting given bounded density ratio, in the well-specified regime, MLE does not require bounded
density ratio, and is provably more efficient than MWLE in terms of sample complexity. MLE is all
you need for well-specified covariate shift problem.

1.1   R ELATED WORK

Parametric covariate shift. The statistical study of covariate shift under parametric models can
be dated back to Shimodaira (2000), which established the asymptotic normality of MWLE and
pointed out that vanilla MLE is asymptotically optimal among all the weighted likelihood estimators
when the model is well-specified. However, no finite sample guarantees were provided, and the
optimality of MLE is only proved within the restricted class of weighted likelihood estimators. In
contrast, this paper establishes non-asymptotic results and proves the optimality of MLE among
all possible estimators under well-specified models. Cortes et al. (2010a) studied the importance
weighting under the statistical learning framework and gave a non-asymptotic upperpbound for the
generalization error of the weighted estimator. However, their rate scales as O(1/ n) compared
to our rate O(1/n), where n is the sample size. A recent line of work also provide non-asymptotic
analyses for covariate shift under well-specified setting, however they focus on linear regression
or a few specific models which are more restrictive than our setting: Mousavi Kalan et al. (2020)
introduces a statistical minimax framework and provides lower bounds for OOD generalization in
the context of linear and one-hidden layer neural network regression models. When applied to
covariate shift, their lower bounds are loose and no longer minimax optimal. Lei et al. (2021)
considers the minimax optimal estimator for linear regression under fixed design, the estimator they
proposed is not MLE and is much more complicated in certain regimes. Finally, Zhang et al. (2022)
considers covariate shift in linear regression where the learner can have access to a small number of


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


target labels, this is beyond the scope of this paper, where we focus on the classical covariate shift
setup in which target labels are not known.
Nonparametric covariate shift. Another line of work focuses on well-specified nonparametric
models under covariate shift. Kpotufe & Martinet (2018) presented minimax results for nonpara-
metric classification problem, which was controlled by a transfer-exponent that measures the dis-
crepancy between source and target. Hanneke & Kpotufe (2019) delves deeper into the advantages
of unlabeled target data and demonstrates that typical importance sampling methods do not offer
any improvements over the minimax rate already achieved by ERM. Inspired by the aforementioned
work, Pathak et al. (2022) studied nonparametric regression problem over the class of Hölder contin-
uous functions with a more fine-grained similarity measure. When considering reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS), Ma et al. (2023) showed kernel ridge regression (KRR) estimator with a
properly chosen penalty is minimax optimal for a large family of RKHS when the likelihood ratio
is uniformly bounded, and a reweighted KRR using truncated likelihood ratios is minimax opti-
mal when the likelihood ratio has a finite second moment. Later, Wang (2023) proposed a learning
strategy based on pseudo-labels. When the likelihood ratio is bounded, their estimator enjoyed the
optimality guarantees without prior knowledge about the amount of covariate shift. Although these
works focused on covariate shift problems, they considered nonparametric setting, and hence are
not directly comparable to our work. As an example, Ma et al. (2023) showed that MLE (empiri-
cal risk minimization in their language) is provably suboptimal for addressing covariate shift under
nonparametric RKHS assumptions. In contrast, we show that MLE is optimal for covariate shift for
a well-specified parametric model. We also highlight that our lower bound is instance dependent
in the sense that it depends on the source and target distributions. This is in contrast to prior work
(e.g. Ma et al. (2023); Kpotufe & Martinet (2018); Hanneke & Kpotufe (2019)) that consider the
worst-case scenario over certain classes of source-target pairs (e.g., bounded density ratios).
Maximum likelihood estimation. A crucial part of this work is analyzing MLE, which is a domi-
nant approach in statistical inference. There exists a variety of work studying the behavior of MLE
under the standard no-distribution-shift setting. It is well known that MLE is asymptotically normal
(Casella & Berger, 2021) with the inverse of Fisher information as the asymptotic variance. Cramér
(1946); Rao (1992) established the famous Cramer-Rao bound for unbiased estimators, which also
showed that no consistent estimator has lower asymptotic mean squared error than the MLE. White
(1982) gave the asymptotic distribution of MLE under the mis-specified setting. More recently,
non-asymptotic behaviours of MLE are studied under certain models. Bach (2010); Ostrovskii &
Bach (2021) established the non-asymptotic error bound for MLE in logistic regression using self-
concordance. This line of work does not consider covariate shift, which is an indispensable part of
this paper.
Importance reweighting algorithms. Lastly, importance reweighting (or importance sampling)
is a classical method to use independent samples from a proposal distribution to approximate ex-
pectations w.r.t. a target measure (Agapiou et al., 2017). Chatterjee & Diaconis (2018) studied the
sample size (depending on the KL divergence between two distributions) required for importance
sampling to approximate a single function. Sanz-Alonso (2018) extended analysis to the case with
general f -divergences. Zhai et al. (2022) studied overparametrized linear models and showed that
Generalized Reweighting (GRW) algorithms, upon achieving zero training error, yield the same
results as ERM, thus offering no advantage over it. In addition to correcting covariate shift, impor-
tance reweighting has been central in offline reinforcement learning. For instance, Ma et al. (2022)
showed a truncated version of importance reweighting is minimax optimal for estimation the value
of a target policy using data from a behavior policy. For learning the optimal policy from the be-
havior data, Swaminathan & Joachims (2015) presented upper bounds of an importance-reweighted
estimator. This spurs a long line of work of using importance weighting in offline RL. See the recent
work Gabbianelli et al. (2023) and the references therein.



2   BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

In this section, we provide background on the problem of learning under covariate shift. We also
review two widely adopted estimators: maximum likelihood estimator and maximum weighted like-
lihood estimator.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Notations. Throughout the paper, we use c to denote universal constants, which may vary from line
to line.

2.1   C OVARIATE SHIFT AND EXCESS RISK

Let X 2 X be the covariates and Y 2 Y be the response variable that we aim to predict. In a general
out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization problem, we have two domains of interest, namely a source
domain S and a target domain T . Each domain is associated with a data generating distribution over
(X, Y ): PS (X, Y ) for the source domain and PT (X, Y ) for the target domain. Given n i.i.d. labeled
samples {(xi , yi )}ni=1 ⇠ PS (X, Y ) from the source domain, the goal of OOD generalization is to
learn a prediction rule X ! Y that performs well in the target domain. In this paper, we focus on
the covariate shift version of the OOD generalization problem, in which the marginal distributions
PS (X) and PT (X) of the covariates could differ between the source and target domains, while the
conditional distribution Y | X is assumed to be the same on both domains.
More precisely, we adopt the notion of excess risk to measure of the performance of an estimator
under covariate shift. Let F := {f (y | x; ) |         2 Rd } be a parameterized function class to
model the conditional density function p(y | x) of Y | X. A typical loss function is defined using the
negative log-likelihood function `(x, y, ) := log f (y | x; ). The excess risk at is then defined
as
                           R( ) := ET [`(x, y, )]      inf ET [`(x, y, )] ,                         (1)
where the expectation ET is taken over PT (X, Y ). When the model is well-specified, i.e., when the
true density p(y | x) = f (y | x; ? ) for some ? , we have inf ET [`(x, y, )] = ET [`(x, y, ? )]. As
a result, we evaluate the loss at against the loss at the true parameter ? . In contrast, in the case of
mis-specification, i.e., when p(y | x) 2/ F, the loss at is compared against the loss of the best fit in
the model class.

2.2   M AXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION AND ITS WEIGHTED VERSION

In the no-covariate-shift case, maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is arguably the most popular
approach. Let
                                               Pn
                                   `n ( ) := n1 i=1 `(xi , yi , )                            (2)
be the empirical negative log-likelihood using the samples {(xi , yi )}ni=1 from the source domain.
The vanilla MLE is defined as MLE := arg min 2Rd `n ( ).
One potential “criticism” against MLE in the covariate shift setting is that the empirical nega-
tive log-likelihood is not a faithful estimate of the out-of-distribution generalization performance,
i.e., ET [`(x, y, )]. In light of this, a weighted version of MLE is proposed. Let w(x) :=
dPT (x)/dPS (x) be the density ratio function and
                                              Pn
                                 `w        1
                                  n ( ) := n    i=1 w(xi )`(xi , yi , ).                          (3)
be the weighed loss. Then the maximum weighted likelihood estimator is defined as MWLE :=
             n ( ). It is easy to see that the weighted loss is an unbiased estimate of ET [`(x, y, )].
arg min 2Rd `w
To ease presentations later, we would also recall the classical notion of Fisher information—an im-
portant quantity to measure the difficulty of parameter estimation. The Fisher information evaluated
at on source and target is defined as
                                     ⇥            ⇤                                       ⇥            ⇤
IS ( ) := Ex⇠PS (X),y | x⇠f (y | x; ) r2 `(x, y, ) , IT ( ) := Ex⇠PT (X),y | x⇠f (y | x; ) r2 `(x, y, ) .
Here, the gradient and Hessian are taken with respect to the parameter .

3     W ELL -S PECIFIED PARAMETRIC M ODEL UNDER C OVARIATE S HIFT
In this section, we focus on covariate shift with a well-specified model, that is, the true conditional
distribution falls in our parametric function class. This setting aligns with the practice, since in
modern machine learning we often deploy large models whose representation ability are so strong
that every possible true data distribution almost falls in the function class. We assume there exists


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


some ? such that p(y | x) = f (y | x; ? ), and denote the excess risk evaluated at under true model
parameter ? as R ? ( ), i.e.,
             R ? ( ) := E x⇠PT (X) [`(x, y, )] E x⇠PT (X) [`(x, y, ? )] .                       (4)
                                  y|x⇠f (y|x; ? )             y|x⇠f (y|x; ? )

While the objective of MLE is not an unbiased estimate of the risk under the target domain, we will
show in this section that MLE is in fact optimal for addressing covariate shift under well-specified
models.
More specifically, in Section 3.1, we provide the performance upper bound for MLE under generic
assumptions on the parametric model. Then in Section 3.2, we characterize the performance limit
of any estimator in the presence of covariate shift. As we will see, MLE is minimax optimal as it
matches the performance limit.

3.1    U PPER BOUND FOR MLE

In this subsection, we establish a non-asymptotic upper bound for MLE under generic assumptions
on the model class.
Assumption A. We make the following assumptions on the model class F:
A.1 There exist B1 , B2 , N ( ), and absolute constants c, such that for any fixed matrix A 2 Rd⇥d ,
    any 2 (0, 1), and any n > N ( ), with probability at least 1       :
                                               s
                                                                          ✓          ◆
                                                 V log d                    B1 kAk2 log d
       kA (r`n ( ? ) E[r`n ( ? )])k2  c                   + B1 kAk2 log       p             , (5)
                                                    n                            V        n
                                                s
                                                   log d
          r2 `n ( ? ) E[r2 `n ( ? )] 2  B2              ,                                      (6)
                                                     n
    where V = n · EkA(r`n ( ? ) E[r`n ( ? )])k22 is the variance.
A.2 There exists some constant B3 0 such that kr3 `(x, y, )k2  B3 for all x 2 XS [ XT , y 2
    Y, 2 Rd , where XS (resp. XT ) is the support of PS (X) (resp. PT (X)).
A.3 The empirical loss `n (·) defined in (2) has a unique local minimum in Rd , which is also the
    global minimum.
Several remarks on Assumption A are in order. Assumption A.1 is a general version of Bernstein
inequality (when = 0 it reduces to classical Bernstein inequality), which gives concentration
on gradient and Hessian. This assumption is naturally satisfied when the gradient and Hessian are
bounded (see Proposition D.2 for details). Assumption A.2 requires the third order derivative of log-
likelihood to be bounded, which is easy to satisfy (e.g., linear regression satisfies this assumption
with B3 = 0). Assumption A.3 ensures the MLE is unique, which is standard in the study of the
behaviour of MLE. We can see that it naturally applies to traditional convex losses. It is worth noting
that our general theorem can also be applied under a relaxed version of Assumption A.3, which will
be shown in Theorem 4.5. In Section 4, we will see that Assumption A is mild and easily satisfied
for a wide range of models.
Now we are ready to present the performance upper bound for MLE under covariate shift.
Theorem 3.1. Suppose that the model class F satisfies Assumption A. Let IT := IT ( ? ) and
IS := IS ( ? ). For any 2 (0, 1), if n      c max{N ? log(d/ ), N ( )}, then with probability at
                                       Tr(IT IS 1 ) log d
least 1 2 , we have R ? ( MLE )  c           n           for an absolute constant c. Here N ? :=
                                      1       1
Poly(d, B1 , B2 , B3 , kIS 1 k2 , kIT2 IS 1 IT2 k2 1 ).
For an exact characterization of the threshold N ? , one can refer to Theorem A.1 in the appendix.
Theorem 3.1 gives a non-asymptotic upper bound for the excess risk of MLE: when the sample size
exceeds a certain threshold of max{N ? log(d/ ), N ( )}, MLE achieves an instance dependent risk
bound Tr(IT IS 1 )/n. It is worth noting that our analysis does not require boundedness on the den-
sity ratios between the target and source distributions (as have been assumed in prior art (Ma et al.,
2023)), which yields broader applicability. In Section 4, we will instantiate our generic analysis on
three different examples: linear regression, logistric regression and phase retrieval.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   M INIMAX LOWER BOUND

In the previous section, we have established the upper bound for the vanilla MLE. Now we turn to
the complementary question regarding the fundamental limit of covariate shift under well-specified
models. To establish the lower bound, we will need the following Assumption B that is a slight vari-
ant of Assumption A. Different from the upper bound, the lower bound is algorithm independent and
involve a model class rather than a fixed ground truth. Hence, Assumption B focuses on population
properties of our model as opposed to Assumption A, which is on the sample level.
Assumption B. Let 0 2 Rd and B > 0. We make the following assumptions on the model class F:

B.1 Assumption A.2 holds.
B.2 There exist some constants LS , LT           0 such that for any     1,   2 2 B 0 (B):

           kIS ( 1 )     IS ( 2 )k2  LS k 1        2 k2 ,   kIT ( 1 )    IT ( 2 )k2  LT k 1         2 k2 .

B.3 For any   2 B 0 (B), the excess risk R ? ( ) defined in (4) is convex in
                 ?
                                                                                           2R . d

B.4 We assume IS ( ) and IT ( ) are positive definite for all 2 B 0 (B).

Assumption B.2 essentially requires the Fisher information will not vary drastically in a small neigh-
bourhood of 0 . This assumption is easy to hold when the fisher information has certain smoothness
(e.g., in linear regression, the fisher information does not change when varies). Since Assumption
B is a slight variant of Assumption A, both assumptions are often satisfied simultaneously for a wide
range of models, as we will show in Section 4.
Theorem 3.2. Suppose the model class F satisfies Assumption B. As long as n N0 , we have
                                                     1
                                                                            h          i  1
               inf sup Tr IT ( ? )IS 1 ( ? )           E xi ⇠PS (X)           R ? ( ˆ)       ,
                ˆ ? 2B (B)
                         0                              yi |xi ⇠f (y|x; ? )              50n
where N0 := Poly(d, B 1 , B3 , LS , LT , kIS ( 0 )k2 , kIT ( 0 )k2 , kIS ( 0 ) 1 k2 , kIT ( 0 ) 1 k2 ).

For an exact characterization of the threshold N0 , one can refer to Theorem A.4 in the appendix.
Comparing Theorem 3.1 and 3.2, we can see that, under1 Assumptions A and B, then for large
enough sample size n, Tr IT ( ? )IS 1 ( ? ) /n exactly characterizes the fundamental hardness of
covariate shift under well-specified parametric models. It also reveals that vanilla MLE is minimax
optimal under this scenario. To gain some intuitions, IS 1 captures the variance of the parameter
estimation, and IT measures how the excess risk on the target depends on the estimation accuracy of
the parameter. Therefore what really affects the excess risk (on target) is the accuracy of estimating
the parameter, and vanilla MLE is naturally the most efficient choice.

4     A PPLICATIONS
In this section, we illustrate the broad applicability of our framework by delving into three distinct
statistical models, namely linear regression, logistic regression and phase retrieval. For each model,
we will demonstrate the validity of the assumptions, and give the explicit non-asymptotic upper
bound on the vanilla MLE obtained by our framework as well as the threshold of sample size needed
to obtain the upper bound.

4.1   L INEAR REGRESSION

In linear regression, we have Y = X T ? + ", where " ⇠ N (0, 1) and " ?? X. The corresponding
negative log-likelihood function (i.e. the loss function) is given by `(x, y, ) := 12 (y xT )2 . We
assume X ⇠ N (0, Id ) on the source domain and X ⇠ N (↵, 2 Id ) on the target domain.
Proposition 4.1. The aforementioned p linear regression
                                                  p         model satisfies Assumption A and B with
  = 1, N ( ) = d log(1/ ), B1 = c d, B2 = c d, B3 = 0 and LS = LT = 0. Moreover, we have
Tr(IT IS 1 ) = k↵k22 + 2 d.
   1
     It is worthy to point out that, it is not hard for Assumptions A and B to be satisfied simultaneously. These
assumptions will hold naturally when the domain is bounded and the log-likelihood is of certain convexity and
smoothness, as we will show in the next section by several concrete examples.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2, since Assumption A and B are satisfied, we immediately demon-
strate the optimality of MLE under linear regression. The following theorem gives the explicit form
of excess risk bound by applying Theorem 3.1:
Theorem 4.2. For any 2 (0, 1), if n O(N log d ), then with probability at least 1 2 , we have
                                                    ⇣                  ⌘2
                 (k↵k22 + 2 d) log d                      k↵k22 d+ 2 d
R ? ( MLE )  c          n           , where N := d   1 +      2
                                                           k↵k + d 2      .
                                                              2

Remark (Excess risk). Regarding the upper bound of the excess risk, we categorize it into two
scenarios: large shift and small shift. In the small shift scenarios (i.e., k↵k22  2 d), the result is the
same as that in scenarios without any mean shift, with a rate of 2 d/n. On the other hand, in the
large shift scenarios (i.e., k↵k22    2
                                        d), the upper bound of the excess risk increases with the mean
shift at a rate of k↵k22 /n.
Remark (Threshold N ). For a minor mean shift, specifically when k↵k2 = c for a given constant
c, the threshold is N = d. This aligns with the results from linear regression without any covariate
shift. On the other hand, as the mean shift increases (i.e., |↵|2 = dk for some 0 < k < 1/2), the
threshold becomes N = d4k+1 , increasing with the growth      pof k. In scenarios where the mean      shift
significantly surpasses the scaling shift, denoted as ↵         d, the threshold reaches N = d3 .

4.2   L OGISTIC REGRESSION

In the logistic regression, the response variable Y 2 {0, 1} obeys P(Y = 1 | X = x) =
          T ?                                        T ?
1/(1 + ex     ), P(Y = 0 | X = x) = 1/(1 + e x           ). The corresponding negative log-likelihood
                                                                          T
function (i.e. the losspfunction) is given by `(x, y, ) := log(1 + ex ) p y(xT ). We assume
X ⇠ Uniform(S d 1 ( pd)) on the source domain and     p X ⇠ Uniform(S
                                                                          d 1
                                                                              ( d)) + v on the target
domain, where S   d 1
                      ( d) := {x 2 R | kxk2 = d}. In the following, we will give the upper
                                         d

bound of the excess risk for MLE when v = r ?    ?
                                                   , where ? ?
                                                               represents a vector perpendicular to ?
(i.e., ?
       ?T ?
             =0). Without loss of generality, we assume k k2 = k ?
                                                             ?        ?
                                                                        k2 = 1.
Proposition 4.3. The aforementioned
                             p          logistic regression
                                                      p model satisfies Assumption A and   p B with
   = 0, N ( ) = 0, B1 = c d, B2 = cd, B3 = ( d + r)3 , LS = d1.5 and LT = ( d + r)3 .
Moreover, we have Tr(IT IS 1 ) ⇣ d + r2 .

By Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2, since Assumption A and B are satisfied, we immediately demon-
strate the optimality of MLE under logistic regression. The following theorem gives the explicit
form of excess risk bound by applying Theorem 3.1:
Theorem 4.4. For any 2 (0, 1), if n O(N log d ), then with probability at least 1 2 , we have
                  (d+r 2 ) log d
R ? ( MLE )  c         n        , where N := d4 (1 + r6 ).
Remark (Excess risk). The bound on the excess risk incorporates a r2 term, which is a measurement
of the mean shift. This is due to the fact that the MLE does not utilize the information that v T ? = 0.
Therefore, v T MLE is not necessarily zero, which will lead to an additional bias. Similar to linear
regression,
      p     we can categorize p  the upper bound of the excess risk into two scenarios: large shift
(r      d) and small shift (r  d).
Remark (Threshold N ). We admit that the N here may not be tight, as we lean on a general frame-
work designed for a variety of models rather than a specific one.

4.3   P HASE RETRIEVAL

As we have mentioned, our generic framework can also be applied to the scenarios where some of
the assumptions are relaxed. In this subsection, we will further illustrate this point by delving into
the phase retrieval model. In the phase retrieval, the response variable Y = (X T ? )2 + ", where
" ⇠ N (0, 1) and " ?? X. We assume PS (X) and PT (X) follow the same distribution as that in
the logistic regression model (i.e., Section 4.2). Note that both the phase retrieval model and the
logistic regression model belong to generalized linear model (GLM), thus they are expected to have
                                                                                       2
similar properties. However, given the loss function `(x, y, ) := 12 y (xT )2 , it is obvious
that Assumption A.3 is not satisfied, since if is a global minimum of `n ,            is also a global
minimum. The following theorem shows that we can still obtain results similar to logistic regression
though Assumption A.3 fails to hold.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 4.5. For any 2 (0, 1), if n            O(N log d ), then with probability at least 1      2 , we have
                     2        d
                 (d+r ) log
R ?(   MLE )  c      n           , where N := d8 (1 + r8 ).

5     M IS -S PECIFIED PARAMETRIC M ODEL UNDER C OVARIATE S HIFT
In the case of model mis-specification, we still employ a parameterized function class F :=
{f (y | x; ) | 2 Rd } to model the conditional density function of Y | X. However, the true density
p(y | x) might not be in F. As we previously showed, under a well-specified parametric model, the
vanilla MLE is minimax optimal up to constants. However, when the model is mis-specified, the
classical MLE may not necessarily provide a good estimator.
Proposition 5.1. There exist certain mis-specified scenarios such that classical MLE is not consis-
tent, whereas MWLE is.
Proposition 5.1 illustrates the necessity of adaptation under model mis-specification since the clas-
sical MLE asymptotically gives the wrong estimator. In this section, we study the non-asymptotic
property of MWLE. Let M be the model class of the ground truth Y | X, and M 2 M be the ground
truth model for Y | X.
We denote the optimal fit on target as         ?
                                                   (M ) := arg min Ex⇠PT (X) [`(x, y, )]. The excess risk
                                                                        y|x⇠M
evaluated at   is then given by RM ( ) = Ex⇠PT (X) [`(x, y, )]             Ex⇠PT (X) [`(x, y,    ?
                                                                                                     (M ))] .
                                                     y|x⇠M                     y|x⇠M


5.1    U PPER BOUND FOR MWLE

In this subsection, we establish the non-asymptotic upper bound for MWLE, as an analog to Theo-
rem 3.1. We make the following assumption which is a modification of Assumption A.
Assumption C. We assume the function class F satisfies the follows:
C.1 There exists some constant W > 1 such that the density ratio w(x)  W for all x 2 XS [ XT .
C.2 There exist B1 , B2 and N ( ), and absolute constants c, such that for any fixed matrix A 2
    Rd⇥d , any 2 (0, 1), and any n > N ( ), with probability at least 1           :
                                                      s
                                                                                      ✓          ◆
                                                        V log d                         W B1 kAk2 log d
    kA (r`w n ( ?
                  (M ))   E[r` w
                               n  (  ?
                                       (M ))])k 2  c             +   W B 1 kAk 2 log     p             ,
                                                            n                               V       n
                                                           s
                                                              log d
      r2 ` w
           n  ( ?
                  (M ))  E[r 2 w
                               ` n (  ?
                                        (M ))]  2
                                                   W  B 2          ,
                                                                n
    where V = n · EkA(r`w     n(
                                  ?
                                    (M )) E[r`w    n(
                                                       ?
                                                         (M ))])k22 is the variance.
C.3 Assumption A.2 holds.
C.4 There exists N 0 ( ) such that for any 2 (0, 1) and any n N 0 ( ), with probability at least
    1     , the empirical loss `w
                                n (·) defined in (3) has a unique local minimum in R , which is also
                                                                                     d

    the global minimum.
Assumption C.1 is a density ratio upper bound (not required for analyzing MLE), which is essential
for the analysis of MWLE. Assumption C.2 is an analog of Assumption A.1, in the sense that
the empirical loss `n is replaced by its weighted version `wn . Assumption C.4 is a weaker version
of Assumption A.3 in the sense that it only requires `w  n has a unique local minimum with high
probability. This is due to the nature of reweighting: when applying MWLE, w(xi ) can sometimes
be zero, which lead to the degeneration of `wn (with a small probability). Therefore we only require
the uniqueness of local minimum holds with high probability.
To state our non-asymptotic upper bound for MWLE, we define the following “weighted version”
of Fisher information:
                             ⇥                                       ⇤
        Gw (M ) := Ex⇠PS (X) w(x)2 r`(x, y, ? (M ))r`(x, y, ? (M ))T ,
                         y|x⇠M
                            ⇥                                    ⇤           ⇥                      ⇤
        Hw (M ) := Ex⇠PS (X) w(x)r2 `(x, y,             ?
                                                            (M )) = Ex⇠PT (X) r2 `(x, y,   ?
                                                                                               (M )) .
                         y|x⇠M                                         y|x⇠M


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 5.2. Suppose the function class F satisfies Assumption C. Let Gw := Gw (M ) and Hw :=
Hw (M ). For any 2 (0, 1), if n         c max{N ? log(d/ ), N ( ), N 0 ( )}, then with probability at
                                           Tr(Gw Hw 1 ) log d
least 1 3 , we have RM ( MWLE )  c                n          for an absolute constant c. Here N ? :=
Poly(W, B1 , B2 , B3 , kHw 1 k2 , Tr(Gw Hw 2 ), Tr(Gw Hw 2 ) 1 ).

For an exact characterization of the threshold N ? , one can refer to Theorem C.1 in the appendix.
Compared with Theorem 3.1, Theorem 5.2 does not require well-specification of the model, demon-
strating the wide applicability of MWLE. The excess risk upper bound can be explained as fol-
lows: note that Tr(G
                 p w Hw ) can ?be expanded as Tr(Hw Hw Gw Hw ). As shown by Shimodaira
                           1                                1        1

(2000), the term n( MWLE           ) converges asymptotically to a normal distribution, denoted as
N (0, Hw 1 Gw Hw 1 ). Thus, the component Hw 1 Gw Hw 1 characterizes the variance of the estimator,
corresponding to the IS 1 term in Theorem 3.1. Additionally, the excess risk’s dependence on the
parameter estimation is captured by Hw as a counterpart of IT in Theorem 3.1.
However, to establish Theorem 5.2, it is necessary to assume the bounded density ratio, which
does not appear in Theorem 3.1. Moreover, when the model is well-specified, by Cauchy-Schwarz
ineqaulity, we have Tr(Gw Hw 1 ) Tr(IT IS 1 ), which implies the upper bound for MWLE is larger
than the vanilla MLE. This observation aligns with the results presented in Shimodaira (2000), which
point out that when the model is well specified, MLE is more efficient than MWLE in terms of the
asymptotic variance.

5.2   O PTIMALITY OF MWLE

To understand the optimality of MWLE, it is necessary to establish a matching lower bound. How-
ever, deriving a lower bound similar to Theorem 3.2, which holds for any model classes that satisfies
certain mild conditions, is challenging due to hardness of capturing the difference between M and
F. As a solution, we present a lower bound tailored for certain model classes and data distributions
in the following.
Theorem 5.3. There exist PS (X) 6= PT (X), a model class M and a prediction class F satisfying
Assumption C such that when n is sufficiently large, we have
                                                                    h       i
                                                       1
              inf ˆ supM 2M Tr Gw (M )Hw 1 (M )          Exi ⇠PS (X) RM ( ˆ) & n1 .        (7)
                                                             yi |xi ⇠M


By Theorem 5.2, the excess risk of MWLE is upper bounded by Tr(Gw Hw 1 )/n. Therefore, Theo-
rem 5.3 shows that there exists a non-trivial scenario where MWLE is minimax optimal.
Notice that Theorem 5.3 presents a weaker lower bound compared to Theorem 3.2. The lower
bound presented in Theorem 5.3 holds only for certain meticulously chosen PS (X), PT (X), model
class M and prediction class F. In contrast, the lower bound in Theorem 3.2 applies to any
PS (X), PT (X), and class F that meet the required assumptions.

6     C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
To conclude, we prove that MLE achieves the minimax optimality for covariate shift under a well-
specified parametric model. Along the way, we demonstrate that the term Tr(IT IS 1 ) characterizes
the foundamental hardness of covariate shift, where IS and IT are the Fisher information on the
source domain and the target domain, respectively. To complement the study, we also consider the
misspecified setting and show that Maximum Weighted Likelihood Estimator (MWLE) emerges as
minimax optimal in specific scenarios, outperforming MLE.
Our work opens up several interesting avenues for future study. First, it is of great interest to extend
our analysis to other types of OOD generalization problems, e.g., imbalanced data, posterior shift,
etc. Second, our analyses relies on standard regularity assumptions, such as the positive definiteness
of the Fisher information (which implies certain identifiability of the parameter) and the uniqueness
of the minimum of the loss function. Addressing covariate shift without these assumptions is also
important future directions.



                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Cong Ma is partially supported by the National Science Foundation via grant DMS-2311127.

R EFERENCES
S. Agapiou, O. Papaspiliopoulos, D. Sanz-Alonso, and A. M. Stuart. Importance sampling: intrinsic
   dimension and computational cost. Statist. Sci., 32(3):405–431, 2017. ISSN 0883-4237. doi:
   10.1214/17-STS611. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/17-STS611.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Francis Bach. Self-concordant analysis for logistic regression. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 4
  (none):384 – 414, 2010. doi: 10.1214/09-EJS521. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/
  09-EJS521.
Liyuan Cao. Some useful expected values with multivariate normal distribution and uniform dis-
  tribution on sphere. https://coral.ise.lehigh.edu/lic314/files/2020/02/
  MVNuseful.pdf, February 2020.
George Casella and Roger L Berger. Statistical inference. Cengage Learning, 2021.
Sourav Chatterjee and Persi Diaconis. The sample size required in importance sampling. The Annals
  of Applied Probability, 28(2):1099–1135, 2018.
Yuxin Chen, Yuejie Chi, Jianqing Fan, Cong Ma, et al. Spectral methods for data science: A
  statistical perspective. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 14(5):566–806, 2021.
Corinna Cortes and Mehryar Mohri. Domain adaptation and sample bias correction theory and
  algorithm for regression. Theoretical Computer Science, 519:103–126, 2014.
Corinna Cortes, Yishay Mansour, and Mehryar Mohri.         Learning bounds for importance
  weighting. In J. Lafferty, C. Williams, J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, and A. Culotta (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 23. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2010a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2010/
  file/59c33016884a62116be975a9bb8257e3-Paper.pdf.
Corinna Cortes, Yishay Mansour, and Mehryar Mohri. Learning bounds for importance weighting.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 23, 2010b.
Harald Cramér. Mathematical methods of statistics.             1946.     URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:122802041.
Germano Gabbianelli, Gergely Neu, and Matteo Papini. Importance-weighted offline learning done
  right. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15771, 2023.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
  works. The journal of machine learning research, 17(1):2096–2030, 2016.
Rong Ge, Chi Jin, and Yi Zheng. No spurious local minima in nonconvex low rank problems: A
  unified geometric analysis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1233–1242.
  PMLR, 2017.
Richard D Gill and Boris Y Levit. Applications of the van trees inequality: a bayesian cramér-rao
  bound. Bernoulli, pp. 59–79, 1995.
Hao Guan and Mingxia Liu. Domain adaptation for medical image analysis: a survey. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Biomedical Engineering, 69(3):1173–1185, 2021.
Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2007.01434, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Steve Hanneke and Samory Kpotufe. On the value of target data in transfer learning. In
  H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/
  file/b91f4f4d36fa98a94ac5584af95594a0-Paper.pdf.
Jiayuan Huang, Arthur Gretton, Karsten Borgwardt, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alex Smola. Correct-
   ing sample selection bias by unlabeled data. Advances in neural information processing systems,
   19, 2006.
Vladimir Koltchinskii, Karim Lounici, and Alexandre B Tsybakov. Nuclear-norm penalization and
  optimal rates for noisy low-rank matrix completion. 2011.
Samory Kpotufe and Guillaume Martinet. Marginal singularity, and the benefits of labels in
  covariate-shift. In Conference On Learning Theory, pp. 1882–1886. PMLR, 2018.
Qi Lei, Wei Hu, and Jason D Lee. Near-optimal linear regression under distribution shift. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.12108, 2021.
Cong Ma, Banghua Zhu, Jiantao Jiao, and Martin J Wainwright. Minimax off-policy evaluation for
  multi-armed bandits. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 68(8):5314–5339, 2022.
Cong Ma, Reese Pathak, and Martin J Wainwright. Optimally tackling covariate shift in rkhs-based
  nonparametric regression. The Annals of Statistics, 51(2):738–761, 2023.
Mohammadreza Mousavi Kalan, Zalan Fabian, Salman Avestimehr, and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. Min-
 imax lower bounds for transfer learning with linear and one-hidden layer neural networks. Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1959–1969, 2020.
Dmitrii M Ostrovskii and Francis Bach.        Finite-sample analysis of m-estimators using self-
 concordance. 2021.
Reese Pathak, Cong Ma, and Martin Wainwright. A new similarity measure for covariate shift with
  applications to nonparametric regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  17517–17530. PMLR, 2022.
Alan Ramponi and Barbara Plank. Neural unsupervised domain adaptation in nlp—a survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2006.00632, 2020.
C. Radhakrishna Rao. Information and the accuracy attainable in the estimation of statistical param-
  eters. 1992. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:117034671.
Alessandro Rinaldo. Advanced statistical theory lecture 13: February 26, February 2018.
Elan Rosenfeld, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Andrej Risteski. The risks of invariant risk minimization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.05761, 2020.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generaliza-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731, 2019.
Daniel Sanz-Alonso. Importance sampling and necessary sample size: an information theory ap-
  proach. SIAM/ASA Journal on Uncertainty Quantification, 6(2):867–879, 2018.
Zheyan Shen, Jiashuo Liu, Yue He, Xingxuan Zhang, Renzhe Xu, Han Yu, and Peng Cui. Towards
  out-of-distribution generalization: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.13624, 2021.
Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the
  log-likelihood function. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 90(2):227–244, 2000.
  ISSN 0378-3758. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-3758(00)00115-4. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378375800001154.
Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. Batch learning from logged bandit feedback through
  counterfactual risk minimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):1731–1755,
  2015.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vladimir N Vapnik. An overview of statistical learning theory. IEEE transactions on neural net-
  works, 10(5):988–999, 1999.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Kaizheng Wang. Pseudo-labeling for kernel ridge regression under covariate shift. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.10160, 2023.
Halbert White. Maximum likelihood estimation of misspecified models. Econometrica: Journal of
  the econometric society, pp. 1–25, 1982.
Yifan Wu, Ezra Winston, Divyansh Kaushik, and Zachary Lipton. Domain adaptation with
  asymmetrically-relaxed distribution alignment. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 6872–6881. PMLR, 2019.
Runtian Zhai, Chen Dan, Zico Kolter, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Understanding why generalized
  reweighting does not improve over erm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12293, 2022.
Xuhui Zhang, Jose Blanchet, Soumyadip Ghosh, and Mark S Squillante. A class of geometric
  structures in transfer learning: Minimax bounds and optimality. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3794–3820. PMLR, 2022.
Yang Zou, Zhiding Yu, BVK Kumar, and Jinsong Wang. Unsupervised domain adaptation for se-
  mantic segmentation via class-balanced self-training. In Proceedings of the European conference
  on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 289–305, 2018.


                                               12
