Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L AYER D IFF : E XPLORING T EXT- GUIDED M ULTI -
LAYERED C OMPOSABLE I MAGE S YNTHESIS VIA
L AYER -C OLLABORATIVE D IFFUSION M ODEL
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Despite the success of generating high-quality images given any text prompts by
         diffusion-based generative models, prior works directly generate the entire im-
         ages, but cannot provide object-wise manipulation capability. To support wider
         real applications like professional graphic design and digital artistry, images are
         frequently created and manipulated in multiple layers to offer greater flexibility
         and control. Therefore in this paper, we propose a Layer-collaborative diffusion
         model, named LayerDiff, specifically designed for text-guided, multi-layered,
         composable image synthesis. The composable image consists of a background
         layer, a set of foreground layers, and associated mask layers for each foreground
         element. To enable this, LayerDiff introduces a layer-based generation paradigm
         incorporating multiple layer-collaborative attention modules to capture inter-layer
         patterns. Specifically, an inter-layer attention module is designed to encourage
         information exchange and learning between layers, while a text-guided intra-layer
         attention module incorporates layer-specific prompts to direct the generation of
         specific content for each layer. Additionally, we introduce a layer-specific prompt-
         enhanced module to better capture detailed textual cues from the global prompt.
         We also present a pipeline that integrates existing perceptual and generative mod-
         els to produce a large dataset of high-quality, text-prompted, multi-layered im-
         ages. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our LayerDiff model can generate
         high-quality multi-layered images with performance comparable to conventional
         whole-image generation methods. Moreover, by supporting both global and layer-
         specific prompts, LayerDiff enables a broader range of controllable generative ap-
         plications, including layer-specific image editing and style transfer.

1   I NTRODUCTION
The image generation task from textual descriptions has emerged as a critical research area in the
field of computer vision and machine learning, with broad applications spanning graphic design, ad-
vertising, and scientific visualization. Among various paradigms, diffusion-based generative models
have demonstrated superior efficacy in synthesizing high-qulaity images from text prompts, thereby
serving as an invaluable asset for both creative endeavors and practical applications. Nonetheless,
a salient limitation of current methodologies (Goodfellow et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021;
Rombach et al., 2022) is their inherent design to generate only single-layer, monolithic images.
Such a limitation substantially restricts their applicability and versatility in scenarios that require
a greater degree of control and adaptability, particularly in professional graphic design and digital
artistry where layered compositions are frequently indispensable. In these applications, images are
rarely created as a single piece; instead, they are composed and manipulated in multiple layers that
allow for iterative refinement, fine-grained adjustment, and object-specific manipulations. There-
fore, in this paper, we concentrate on building a layer-collaborative diffusion-based framework and
achieving the multi-layered, composable image synthesis task.
Several approaches to layered-image synthesis exist, such as the Text2Layer (Zhang et al., 2023),
which employs an autoencoder architecture and a latent diffusion mechanism for dual-layer im-
age synthesis. However, Text2Layer confines its capabilities to only two-layered compositions,
thus not fully capitalizing on the expressive power of multi-layered synthesis. Another potential
approach can be a post-processing pipeline involving word tokenization (Honnibal et al., 2020),


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


perceptual segmentation (Kirillov et al., 2023), and inpainting techniques (Rombach et al., 2022).
Although functional, this post-processing strategy introduces considerable computational overhead
and is prone to error accumulation through multiple processing stages, potentially leading to content
or stylistic inconsistencies. Hence, the central aim of this study is to utilize a unified diffusion model
framework for accomplishing end-to-end multi-layer image synthesis.
In this paper, we introduce a novel layer-collaborative diffusion model, termed LayerDiff, which is
meticulously engineered to facilitate text-guided, multi-layered, and composable image synthesis.
In contrast to conventional whole-image generative models, LayerDiff pioneers a new paradigm in
layer-based image generation, offering the ability to synthesize images comprising multiple con-
stituent layers. The resulting composite image is structured into a background layer, an ensemble of
foreground layers, and individual mask layers that define the spatial arrangement of each foreground
element. To achieve fine-grained control over the number of layers and the content within each layer,
we introduce layer-specific prompts in addition to the global prompt that governs the overall image
content. We present the layer-specific prompt enhancer designed to extract intricate textual features
and object relationships from the global prompt. Furthermore, we introduce the layer-collaborative
attention block that facilitates inter-layer interaction and layer-specific content modulation through
the employment of an inter-layer attention module and a text-guided intra-layer attention module.
To construct a dataset suitable for training LayerDiff, we introduce a carefully designed data ac-
quisition pipeline aimed at generating high-quality, multi-layered composable images. Fisrtly, we
utilize open-source tools for image captioning to obtain a broad overview and specific details of
the images. The layer-specific prompts are parsed using natural language processing techniques,
and then we employ state-of-the-art open-vocabulary perception algorithms for object localization
of each prompt. Finally, we extract the elements corresponding to each prompt to form multiple
layers, and employ inpainting models to fill in the missing portions at the respective locations after
extraction. Comprehensive experiments confirm that our LayerDiff architecture excels in producing
high-fidelity multi-layered images, exhibiting performance metrics on par with traditional full-image
generative techniques. Additionally, LayerDiff’s support for both global and layer-specific prompts
expands its utility across a diverse set of controllable generative tasks, such as layer-wise compos-
able image manipulation and style transfer.
To summarize the contribution:
       • We introduce LayerDiff, a layer-collaborative diffusion model which employs layer-
         collaborative attention blocks for inter- and intra-layer information exchange. A layer-
         specific prompt-enhanced module further refines content generation by leveraging global
         textual cues.
       • We introduce a streamlined data acquisition pipeline that generates multi-layered com-
         posable images for LayerDiff, integrating state-of-the-art techniques in image captioning,
         object localization, segmentation and inpainting.
       • Our LayerDiff architecture not only generates high-fidelity multi-layered images with per-
         formance comparable to traditional whole-image generation methods but also offers versa-
         tile control for various generative applications.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Text-to-Image Synthesis. The image generation models can be broadly categorized into several
architectures, including VAE (Huang et al., 2018), flow-based (Ho et al., 2019), GAN (Brock et al.,
2018; Kang et al., 2023), autoregressive model (Yu et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022) and diffusion
models (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021). Leveraging the advantages of diffusion models in the field
of image generation, many recent works Saharia et al. (2022); Gu et al. (2022); Rombach et al.
(2022) have started using large-scale text-image pairs for training models, achieving remarkable
performance in the text-to-image generation domain. One of the most representative works is Stable
Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), which applies diffusion to the latent image encoded by an autoen-
coder, and employs a UNet-like architecture to learn the denoising task. It utilizes a text encoder,
pretrained with visually aligned text from CLIP Radford et al. (2021), to encode textual descriptions
and injects textual guidance into the network in the form of cross-attention. Text2Layer (Zhang
et al., 2023) proposes a layered image generation model, dividing an image into a foreground im-
age, a foreground mask and a background image and encoding layer information into a latent space


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                                    Composited Image 𝒙𝒙
                                                   Global Prompt 𝒚𝒚
                         ‘A painting of a cartoon character sitting on a rock looking at a flower.’                       Parsing
                                                                                                                          Phrases
          Layer Prompt 𝒑𝒑𝟏𝟏                         Layer Prompt 𝒑𝒑𝟐𝟐                          Layer Prompt 𝒑𝒑𝟑𝟑
          ‘The background’                         ‘A cartoon character’                          ‘A flower’

                     Paired                                    Paired                                    Paired                                Stack


    Layer Image 𝐵𝐵   Layer Mask 𝑚𝑚𝑏𝑏        Layer Image 𝐹𝐹1    Layer Mask 𝑚𝑚1          Layer Image 𝐹𝐹2   Layer Mask 𝑚𝑚2
          Background Layer                        Foreground Layer 1                         Foreground Layer 2

Figure 1: Examples of a Multi-layered Composable Image generated by our data construction
pipeline.Based on the global prompt associated with the image, we employ a phrase parsing ap-
proach to extract the specific content phrase for each individual layer. Subsequently, we generate
the corresponding layer images and layer masks based on their respective layer prompts. By as-
sembling these layers according to the positional information provided by the masks, we are able to
construct the final composite image.

using an autoencoder, with layer generation accomplished through a latent diffusion model. Distin-
guishing from the aforementioned models, we firstly introduce the task of multi-layered composable
image synthesis. LayerDiff can generate two or more layers and introduces layer-specific prompts
to finely control the content generation for each layer.
Controllable Image Synthesis. Various approaches have explored to utilize many control signals
to guide image generation. Building upon Stable Diffusion, through fine-tuning text embedding,
Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022) and DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) enables the generation of
personalized objects in novel scenarios. P2P (Hertz et al., 2022) and PnP (Tumanyan et al., 2023) in-
troduce attention mechanisms with cross-attention to achieves for text-guided content editing. The
layout-to-image generation methods (Xue et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023) aims to incorporates
complex scene information in the form of layouts to achieve more precise scene control. Control-
Net (Zhang et al.) injects multiple modal control conditions into the model as images, enabling
precise control over object structure in image generation. The control modalities in ControlNet
encompass Canny edge maps, semantic maps, scribble maps, human poses, and depth maps. In con-
trast to the aforementioned models, LayerDiff does not employ complex control signal but rather
relies on simple text-based control. Moreover, it introduces layer-specific prompts to achieve pre-
cise control over layer content generation. After pre-training, our LayerDiff can directly facilitate
multi-level control applications without any fine-tuning.

3       M ETHOD
In this section, we first define the data format of the multi-layered composable image and the task
formulation to achieve multi-layered composable image synthesis. Then, we introduce the network
architecture of LayerDiff. The layer-collaborative attention block is proposed to learn inter-layer
relationships and generate the intra-layer content guided by layer-specific prompts and the layer-
specific prompt enhancer is employed to further enhance the controllability of layer-specific ele-
ments. Lastly, we outline the pipeline for constructing the training dataset.

3.1       TASK F ORMULATION

3.1.1        D EFINITION OF MULTI - LAYERED COMPOSABLE IMAGE
Compared to one entire image, a composable image x is composed of multiple layers L = {Li }k0 a
background layer L0 and k number of foreground layers {Li }k1 . A foreground layer Li is a pair of
foreground image Fi and foreground mask mi . There is no overlap between the foreground images
and foreground masks, respectively. The foreground mask indicates the area of the foreground
object and the foreground image depicts the specific foreground object in this area. The background
layer L0 also includes a background image B and a background mask mb . The background mask
is actually obtained by taking the complement of the foreground masks. Those foreground pairs are


                                                                              3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



      Layer Images                                                              Layer-Collaborative
                                                                                                                           Image Noise Mask Noise
                                                                                 Diffusion Model

                                   Image
                                  Encoder
                                                …         +Noise


                                                                                                                                          …
                                                                         𝑼𝑼𝟏𝟏                                𝑼𝑼𝟓𝟓
      Layer Mask                                                                  𝑼𝑼𝟐𝟐           𝑼𝑼𝟒𝟒
                                                                                          𝑼𝑼𝟑𝟑
‘A painting of a cartoon                    Latent Layers 𝒛𝒛
 character sitting on a
rock looking at a flower.’                           𝒛𝒛
     Global Prompt                               Global
                                   Text
                                              Text Condition
                                  Encoder
   ‘The background’                                                 Layer-Specific
           …                                                                                            Image Latent          Latent Forward Stream
                                                                   Prompt Enhancer
       ‘A flowers’                                Layer                                                                Global Condition   Layer Condition
                                                                                                        Mask Latent        Stream             Stream
     Layer Prompts                           Text Conditions

Figure 2: Overall architecture of the proposed LayerDiff. LayerDiff employs an image encoder
to extract visual latent for both the layer images and layer masks, as well as a text encoder ded-
icated to extracting textual features for the global prompt and layer prompts. Subsequently, these
layer-specific prompt features are augmented via a Layer-Specific Prompt Enhancer using the global
prompt features. Finally, the enhanced layer prompt features and global prompt features are fed into
a layer-collaborative diffusion model to predict image noise and mask noise.

arranged along the depth information so that they can be stacked from top to bottom and overlaid
onto the background image to compose an entire image. Therefore, a multi-layered composable
image x can be defined as:
                                                                       k
                                                                       X
                                              x = mb ∗ B +                   (mi ∗ Fi )                                                                     (1)
                                                                       i=1
                             Pk
where mb = 1 −                i=1 mi .
3.1.2      T EXT- GUIDED M ULTI - LAYERED C OMPOSABLE I MAGE S YNTHESIS .

Unlike previous text-to-image generation tasks, which required models to generate images guided
by a single comprehensive image description, multi-layered composable image synthesis not only
demands a global text description to depict the overall image content but also introduces layer-
specific prompts to guide the generation of specific foreground elements in each layer. Furthermore,
the layer-specific prompts can provide more detailed descriptions of the foreground objects. We use
the layer-specific prompt of “the background” for the background layer and the object phrases as the
layer-specific prompts for the foreground layers.
We follow the standard diffusion models to formulate the text-guided multi-layered composable
image synthesis. We perform the diffusion process on the composition of multiple layers to add T
steps random Guassian noies ϵ to gradually convert the original multi-layered image x into a random
Gauassian distribution xT . LayerDiff is trained to predict the different level of noise on all layers
in the opposite direction of the diffusion process. Following the LDM (Rombach et al., 2022), we
can apply the diffusion process on the latent space of the layer images {zi }k0 and layer masks {zi′ }k0
by utilize its latent encoders respectively. In our LayerDiff, we also handle the layer masks in the
RGB space by simply repeating one channel to three channel so that the layer mask encoder V and
decoder D are the same as those for the layer images. Therefore, for a composable image x the
diffusion-based multi-layerd composable image generation loss L under the guidance of the global
prompt y and layer-specific prompts p = {p0 , ..., pk } can be formulated as:

                 L = EV(x),ϵ∼N (0,I),t ∥ϵz − Φu ({zi }k0 , {zi′ }k0 , t, T (y), {T (p)}k0 )∥2

                                                                                                   (2)

where T is the text encoder for the global prompt and layer-specific prompts.
In the sampling stage, LayerDiff generates all layer image latents and layer mask latents by gradually
removing the noise from a random Gaussian noise signal over a finite number of steps. We can apply
the latent decoder D to decode back the layer images and layer masks into the original data space.


                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Global                                                  FFN
  Text Condition
                                                                                                              Global
                                                    Text-guided Intra-Layer                               Text Condition
                                                      Attention Module


                               Cross-Attn
                   Self-Attn


                                                                                 Cross-Attn



                                                                                              Self-Attn
                                                  Inter-Layer Attention Module

                                                                    …

                                            FFN
                                                                                                               Layer
                                                                                                          Text Conditions
 Latent Layers


            (a) UNet Attention Block              (b) Layer-Collaborative        (c) Layer-Specific Prompt
                                                      Attention Block                    Enhancer
Figure 3: Detailed structure of the proposed layer-collaborative attention block. (a) The UNet at-
tention block is commonly used in the traditional UNet Block for condition-based whole-image
generation. (b) To better capture layer-wise features, we introduce the Layer-Collaborative Atten-
tion Block, which incorporates a Text-guided Intra-Layer Attention Module to guide layer content
generation and an Inter-Layer Attention Module to enable cross-layer interaction. (c) The Layer-
Specific Prompt Enhancer is designed to more effectively allow layer-specific prompts to assimilate
information from the global prompt.

3.2     LAYER-COLLABORATIVE DIFFUSION MODEL

3.2.1      A RCHITECTURE OVERVIEW

As shown in Fig. 2, Our LayerDiff is designed to include the image encoder, text encoder, layer-
specific prompt enhancer and a layer-collaborative diffusion model. The image encoder V is em-
ployed to convert the layer images and layer masks from the RGB space into the latent space. Note
that we treat the layer mask as the RGB image by repeating one channel into three channel. A text
encoder T is applied for the global prompt c and layer-specific prompts p to obtain the global text
condition T (y) and layer text conditions {T (pi )}, respectively. The layer-specific prompt enhancer
is proposed to ensure the information completion and controllability of each layer prompt. Both the
global text condition and the enhanced layer text conditions are utilized to guide the generation of
multi-layered composable images in the layer-collaborative diffusion model, controlling the overall
content generation as well as the content generation for individual layers. The layer-collaborative
diffusion model draws inspiration from the network design in Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.,
2022). Following the original attention block performing the guidance of the global prompt, our
LayerDiff introduces the layer-collaborative attention block, details in Sec. 3.2.2, to learn inter-layer
connections and guide the generation of content for individual layers. For the input of the layer-
collaborative diffusion model, we concatenate the latent image and latent mask along the channel
dimension and stack all layer latents in the layer dimension.

3.2.2      L AYER -C OLLABORATIVE ATTENTION B LOCK

Layer-collaborative attention block serves as a pivotal component in the multi-layered composable
image synthesis, orchestrating the intricate interplay between different layers and guiding the gen-
eration of layer-specific content. As shown in Fig. 3, the layer-collaborative attention block is struc-
turally composed of the inter-layer attention module, text-guided intra-layer attention module and
a feed-forward network (FFN). The inter-layer attention module is dedicated to learning across dif-
ferent layers. It processes each pixel value of the layer hidden states, capturing the relationships
and dependencies between layers, ensuring that the synthesized image maintains coherence and har-
mony across its depth. The text-guided intra-layer attention module takes the helm when it comes to
layer-specific content generation. Guided by the layer text conditions, it ensures that each layer of
the image is generated in alignment with the specific textual descriptions, allowing for precise and
contextually relevant layered image synthesis. The FFN further process and refine the outputs from
the attention modules.


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              InstructBLIP                             DetCLIP
                                                                                                          Extract
      A short image description:                                                                        Background
                                                                              S
                                                                              A
                                                                              M
                                                                                                                Stable Diffusion
                                                                                                              Background
      A painting of a cartoon character
      sitting on a rock looking at a flower.                                         Foreground Masks          Inpainting


                                               Object Phrase Candidates
                    spaCy                      ‘a flower’
                                                             ‘A cartoon
                                                             character’

                                                                                  Paired           Paired            Paired
                                                                                                                     ‘The background’


Figure 4: Pipeline of the Multi-Layered Composable Image Construction. We use the InstructBLIP
for image captioning and extract noun phrases with spaCy as layer prompts. These prompts guide
open-set segmentation via DetCLIP+SAM to produce image layers and masks and the background
image is refined by using the Stable Diffusion inpainting model.
3.2.3      L AYER -S PECIFIC P ROMPT E NHANCER

Layer-specific prompt enhancer is a module designed to refine and augment layer-specific prompts
by extracting and integrating relevant information from the global prompt. It potentially ensure more
accurate and detailed guidance for individual layer generation in a multi-layered synthesis process.
As shown in Fig. 3, a self-attention layer is firstly applied to layer-specific prompts to enhance
their distinctiveness from each other, further ensuring the independence of content between layers.
Additionally, a cross-attention layer simultaneously takes layer-specific prompts as queries, global
prompts as keys and values, aiming to enable layer-specific prompts to capture richer contextual
information from the global prompt and inter-layer object relationships.


3.3     DATASET C ONSTRUCTION

In Figure 4, we propose a data construction pipeline to construct our Multi-Layered Composable
Image Dataset, named MLCID. Initially, we employ InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2023) to generate a
caption as the global prompt that can provide a precise and contextually-rich description of the image
content for each image. Then, in order to extract a set of foreground images, we apply spaCy (Honni-
bal et al., 2020) to parse object phrases from the global prompt. With the object phrases candidates,
DetCLIP (Yao et al., 2022) or others open-vocabulary detector (Liu et al., 2023) can locate the fore-
ground object in the image and generate its bounding boxes and extract the boxes’s label name as
the layer prompts, which can be further provided to SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) to obtain a set of
foreground masks corresponding to the layer prompts. Simultaneously, the background masks can
be derived through the complementary calculation. Furthermore, the layered images contain one
background image and a set of foreground images can be extracted from the image by element-wise
multiplication between the image and masks. The decomposition of the image into multiple layers
introduces the hollow regions in the background image, which could potentially impact the quality
of image generation during training. To mitigate this challenge, we employ Stable Diffusion in-
painting model (Rombach et al., 2022) to inpaint the background image. Finally, for each image, we
construct a training sample consisting of global prompt, layer images with their corresponding layer
prompts and masks. Details of the pipeline can be found in Appendix.
By using the proposed data construction pipeline, we obtain the high-quality, multi-layered, com-
posable image dataset, named MLCID. We collect the training set including 0.8M data from the
LAION400M dataset (Schuhmann et al., 2021) and an additional 0.3M data from the private dataset.
Furthermore, from the LAION dataset, we extracted 500 dual-layer samples, 500 tri-layer samples,
and 200 quad-layer samples to evaluate the model’s performance in two-layer, three-layer, and four-
layer multi-layer composable image generation, respectively. To ensure a more accurate evaluation,
we manually revised the prompts within the LAION test dataset. Additionally, we randomly selected
1,000 samples from a private dataset to include in the test set, resulting a 2.2k testing set in total.


                                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Two Layers              Three Layers               Four Layers             All-2.2k
                        FID CLIP-Score           FID CLIP-Score            FID CLIP-Score      FID     CLIP-Score
    Stable Diffusion   105.1          31.8       110.6           31.5      166.0     31.2      42.4       31.3
    LayerDiff          102.2          31.0       121.6           29.0      187.6     27.5      58.3       30.3

Table 1: Main result on text-to-image synthesis on MLCID. Ours LayerDiff can perform multi-
layered composable image synthesis. LayerDiff can achieve the text-to-image synthesis by compos-
ing the multi layers into one composite image.
    Layer-Specific     Layer Prompt    Mask Dilate      Two Layers              Three Layers       Four Layers
    Prompt Enhancer                                  FID CLIP-Score           FID CLIP-Score    FID CLIP-Score
    None                    ✗                5       200.9          22.6     236.7    20.4     289.2       19.4
    None                    ✓                0       113.2          29.9     135.9    28.3     195.8       27.3
    None                    ✓                5       105.3          30.3     127.8    28.8     192.1       27.1
    S                       ✓                5       107.7          30.5     125.6    28.8     190.4       27.4
    S+C+F                   ✓                5       106.8          30.8     145.5    28.0     213.0       26.5
    S+C                     ✓                5       103.7          30.6     123.1    29.2     182.8       28.1

Table 2: Ablation study on the components. S means the self-attention layer. C is the cross-attention
layer. F is the Feed-Forward Nerual Network.

4      E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we first describe the implementation details of our LayerDiff (Sec. 4.1) and exper-
imental details (Sec. 4.2). In our quantitative results (Sec. 4.3), we compare the Stable Diffusion
about the text-to-image synthesis on private benchmark and public benchmark and conduct abla-
tion study of proposed components. In the quantitative results 4.4, we visualize the quality of the
multi-layered composable image synthesis and explore the application of LayerDiff, including layer
inpainting and layer style transfer.

4.1     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
To expedite the convergence of our model, we initialized our autoencoder and 3D U-Net using the
weights from Stable Diffusion v1.5 (Rombach et al., 2022). The detailed parameters initialization
rule can be found in Appendix. During the training process, we have a 50% probability of applying
the same timestep t to all layers, and a 50% probability of applying different timesteps t to each layer.
To prevent a decline in generation performance due to the overly tight segmentation of foreground
objects by the masks, we employ a dilation operation on the masks when obtaining foreground
images. The dilation kernel of size is 5 × 5. However, during training, the input masks are used
without the dilation operation.

4.2     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
We pre-train models on the MLCID with about 1.1M multi-layered image-text pairs. The resolution
of the image is 256 × 256. Following Stable Diffusion, the pixel values of the layer images and layer
masks are all normalized to [-1, 1] and the autoencoder and text encoder are frozen. We apply the
AdamW optimizer with a weight decay of 1e-4. The learning rate is set as 1e-5 with 500 steps linear
warmup and kept unchanged until the training is finished. The batch size is set as 32 and we apply
8 steps gradient accumulation to stabilize the training and obtain better generalization performance.
We randomly drop 10% global text condition and layer text condition in our pre-training.
In our sampling stage, we apply DDIM Scheduler () with 100 iterations and classifier-free guid-
ance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) scale of 3. Specifically, instead of using the empty text as the un-
conditional text, we use the concatenation of the foreground layer texts as the negative global text
condition and negative layer text condition for the background layer. Similarly, we use the back-
ground prompt, i.e., ’the background’ as the negative text condition for the foreground layer.
Evaluation: We evaluate our LayerDiff on the MLCID’s testing dataset with 2.2 k samples. We
use the open-source tool, torch-fidelity (Obukhov et al., 2020), to evaluate the metrics of FID. We
also apply the CLIP-score to evaluate the alignment between generated composable images and the
given prompts by using the RN50 backbone of CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). We compare to Stable
Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) by directing generating images of a resolution of 512 and then
resizing them to 256.


                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Layer Image       Layer Mask        Composite Image      Stable Diffusion Image

                                 The background                              a large yellow sunflower


      Layer Images
          Set 1

                                  Background Layer                                Foreground Layer

                                                     man in black suits and         man in black suits and
                           The background
                                                           gold helmet                    gold helmet

      Layer Images
          Set 2

                           Background Layer              Foreground Layer               Foreground Layer


                        The background          blue barrel           blue barrel             a metal rack


      Layer Images
          Set 3

                       Background Layer        Foreground Layer      Foreground Layer        Foreground Layer

                      a large yellow sunflower       two men in black suits         two blue barrels sitting
                         in front of a house            and gold helmets             on top of a metal rack

        Ours
          vs.
   Stable Diffusion



                           Composite Image 1             Composite Image 2              Composite Image 3
Figure 5: Visualization of the synthesized multi-layered composable images. We present the results
of two-layer, three-layer, and four-layer generation, including layer images and layer masks. We
compare our composited image with the samples generated by Stable Diffusion using the whole-
image generation approach. The quality of our multi-layer generation is found to be comparable to
the samples produced by Stable Diffusion.
4.3     Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

Main Results. Table 1 demonstrate our main results on the MLCID. Our LayerDiff’s performance
on two-layered image synthesis is comparable to Stable Diffusion’s whole-image synthesis perfor-
mance. In tests involving a greater number of layers and the full-test set of MLCID, we observed a
performance disparity in LayerDiff. We speculate that this gap stems from the insufficient training
of our model on three and four layers. Within our MLCID, the representation of three-layer images
and four-layered images are merely around 20% and 5%, respectively. This inadequacy in the data
volume for three-layer and four-layer images hinders the model’s performance in generating images
with these specific layer counts. In the future, we aim to further enhance the generalization ability
of our model by enlarging the scale of the pre-training dataset.
Ablation Study. We conduct the ablation study on a subset with 0.2M data of the MLCID and
all models are pre-trained about 50k iterations. From the result of ablation study on Table 2, it is
discerned that the layer-specific prompt plays a crucial role in multi-layer generation. The layer-
specific prompts assists in guiding the model to generate content for each layer and establish inter-
layer relationships. Furthermore, the layer-specific prompt enhancer, utilizing only self-attention
and cross-attention layers, can sufficiently augment the information within the layer-specific prompt
and improve generation performance, especially in the synthesis of images with more than two-
layer. Additionally, employing dilated layer masks to obtain layer images proves to be beneficial for
multi-layer generation.
4.4     Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
Figure 5 displays the layer generation in our model and visualizes the produced individual layer
images, layer masks, along with the final results in comparison with those obtained via Stable Dif-
fusion. Through visualization, it is evident that our LayerDiff demonstrates the capability to gen-
erate multi-layered composable images. By overlaying and composing the layer images and image


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Original Image                    Background Layer     Foreground Layer         Original Image                     Background Layer      Foreground Layer


 Image
                                   Decompose                                                                       Decompose
 Sample

             A dog laying down                                                                    An old
                                                                                                                                                         An old stone
               in a field of                   The background             A dog                 stone house                      The background
                                                                                                                                                             house
                  flowers                                                                      on a hillside
                                                                               Inpaint                                                    Inpaint

             A cat laying down
               in a field of                                                                   An old stone                        Garden: The           An old stone
                                               The background             A cat
                  flowers                                                                     house in garden                      background               house


   New                             Compose                                                                         Compose
Inpainted
  Image
                 New Image                     Background Layer     New Foreground Layer         New Image                     New Background Layer     Foreground Layer

                                (a) Foreground Layer Inpainting                                                 (a) Background Layer Inpainting
Figure 6: Visualization of layer inpainting. We demonstrate the foreground layer inpainting in (a)
and background layer inpainting in (b).Our LayerDiff supports the layer inpainting without any fine-
tuning. Layer inpainting can strictly control foreground generation and background layer generation
within the mask area.
                  Original Image                   Background Layer      Foreground Layer         Original Image                    Background Layer       Foreground Layer


    Image
                                      Decompose                                                                       Decompose
    Sample

                 A painting of a
                                                                                                 A large house
                pink flamingo on a                 The background       A pink flamingo                                             The background         a large house
                 beige background
                                                                                               with two garages
                                                                                   Transfer                                                  Transfer

                  A real, natural                                       real, natural:         The Starry Night:                  The Starry Night:
                pink flamingo on a                 The background                              A large house with                                          a large house
                                                                        A pink flamingo                                             The background
                 beige background                                                                  two garages

    New                                Compose                                                                         Compose
 Transferred
   Image
                    New Image                      Background Layer   New Foreground Layer         New Image                      New Background Layer     Foreground Layer

                                (a) Foreground Layer Style Transfer                                             (a) Background Layer Style Transfer
Figure 7: Visualization of layer style transfer. We demonstrate the foreground layer style transfer
in (a) and background layer style transfer in (b). Our LayerDiff supports the layer style transfer
without any fine-tuning. LayerDiff can easily translate the specific layers into the wanted style.
masks, the composite images generated by LayerDiff achieves competitive results when compared
to the whole-image generation method, namely, Stable Diffusion.

4.5    A PPLICATION
After pre-training, our model naturally supports various applications without any fine-tuning.
Layer Inpainting. By fixing certain layers and modifying the layer prompt of a specific layer, we
can facilitate the regeneration of that layer from noise. Figure 6 illustrates the effects of our back-
ground layer inpainting and foreground layer inpainting. Concurrently, LayerDiff’s layer inpainting
strictly confines the generation of objects within the target layer area.
Layer Style Transfer. We can achieve layer-level style transfer. By introducing a certain degree
of noise to a specific layer and appending stylized text to the original layer prompt, we instruct the
model to perform denoising sampling for the specified layer, thereby accomplishing style transfer
for that layer. For instance, as depicted in Fig. 7, we can induce a Van Gogh style transformation
for the background by specifying the style through the layer prompt.

5     C ONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we introduce LayerDiff, a model designed for text-guided, multi-layered image syn-
thesis. Unlike traditional whole-image generative models, LayerDiff enables object-wise manipu-
lation by leveraging layer-collaborative attention modules. Empirical results show that LayerDiff
achieves comparable image quality while offering greater flexibility and control. This work not only
extends the capability of text-driven generative models but also paves the way for future advance-
ments in controllable generative applications, including layer-specific editing and style transfer.
Limitation. Existing multi-layer training data generation pipelines are inefficient, hindering the
capability to produce large-scale training data effectively. This inefficiency compromises the per-
formance of the resulting models, preventing them from achieving impressive results. Therefore,


                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


optimizing the design of efficient multi-layer training data pipeline represent promising future re-
search directions.

R EFERENCES
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural
  image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.

Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language
 models with instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06500, 2023.

Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.

Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Jianmin Bao, Fang Wen, Bo Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and
  Baining Guo. Vector quantized diffusion model for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10696–10706, 2022.

Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.             Classifier-free diffusion guidance.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.

Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Aravind Srinivas, Yan Duan, and Pieter Abbeel. Flow++: Improving flow-
  based generative models with variational dequantization and architecture design. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2722–2730. PMLR, 2019.

Matthew Honnibal, Ines Montani, Sofie Van Landeghem, and Adriane Boyd. spaCy: Industrial-
 strength Natural Language Processing in Python. 2020. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.1212303.

Huaibo Huang, Ran He, Zhenan Sun, Tieniu Tan, et al. Introvae: Introspective variational autoen-
  coders for photographic image synthesis. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
  2018.

Minguk Kang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Richard Zhang, Jaesik Park, Eli Shechtman, Sylvain Paris, and Taesung
 Park. Scaling up gans for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10124–10134, 2023.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything, 2023.

Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023.

Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In ICML, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.

Anton Obukhov, Maximilian Seitzer, Po-Wei Wu, Semen Zhydenko, Jonathan Kyl, and Elvis Yu-
  Jing Lin. High-fidelity performance metrics for generative models in pytorch, 2020. URL
  https://github.com/toshas/torch-fidelity. Version: 0.3.0, DOI: 10.5281/zen-
  odo.4957738.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

René Ranftl, Katrin Lasinger, David Hafner, Konrad Schindler, and Vladlen Koltun. Towards robust
  monocular depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset transfer. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(3), 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.

Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.

Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1921–1930, 2023.

Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Xiaowei Hu, Zhe Gan, Jianfeng Wang, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng Liu, Yuejian
  Fang, and Nan Duan. Nuwa-infinity: Autoregressive over autoregressive generation for infinite
  visual synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.09814, 2022.

Han Xue, Zhiwu Huang, Qianru Sun, Li Song, and Wenjun Zhang. Freestyle layout-to-image syn-
  thesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 14256–14266, June 2023.

Lewei Yao, Jianhua Han, Youpeng Wen, Xiaodan Liang, Dan Xu, Wei Zhang, Zhenguo Li, Chunjing
  Xu, and Hang Xu. Detclip: Dictionary-enriched visual-concept paralleled pre-training for open-
  world detection. In NeurIPS, 2022.

Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2(3):5, 2022.

Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models.

Xinyang Zhang, Wentian Zhao, Xin Lu, and Jeff Chien. Text2layer: Layered image generation using
  latent diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09781, 2023.

Guangcong Zheng, Xianpan Zhou, Xuewei Li, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xi Li. Layoutdiffusion:
  Controllable diffusion model for layout-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22490–22499, 2023.

Mingchen Zhuge, Deng-Ping Fan, Nian Liu, Dingwen Zhang, Dong Xu, and Ling Shao. Salient
 object detection via integrity learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
 telligence, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We initialize our model parameters by utilizing the Stable Diffusion. We random initialize the inter-
layer attention module and the layer-specific prompt enhancer. The text-guided intra-layer attention
module is initialized by the original cross-attention layer in Stable Diffusion. To make sure the
effectiveness of the parameters initialized from Stable Diffusion, we zero-initialize the weight of the
last linear layer of each module in the layer-collaborative attention block and layer-specific prompt
enhancer. Additionally, We initialize the input convolutional layer and output convolutional layer
for the layer mask using the weights from the stable diffusion for images. We employ a learnable
zero-initialized scalar parameter to control the mask information injection in to the layer image after
the input convolutional layer.

A.2   DATA C ONSTRUCTION D ETAILS

We use spaCy (Honnibal et al., 2020) to parse the phrases from a sentence for DeCLIP Yao et al.
(2022). However, it is note that these phrases may include a series of unnecessary background
descriptions such as ‘the lighting’ and ‘white background’. To address this problem, we first im-
plement a manual filtering process to preclude such superfluous elements, resulting in a refined
collection of noun phrases, which we designate as layer prompts. Furhtermove, Manual filtering
may not be enough to guarantee a perfect elimination of all background words, which may lead to
subsequent detectors and SAM possibly introducing some mask attention to background areas such
as the floor, which we desire to have in the background layer rather than the foreground layer. To
alleviate this issue, we compare the masks obtained from SAM with those obtained from saliency
detector, ICON (Zhuge et al., 2022), retaining the masks with an overlap rate greater than 10%.
Simultaneously, to ensure the order of layers, we employ a depth estimation model, Midas (Ranftl
et al., 2022)), to estimate the depth of the image, and obtain layer depth values by averaging the
estimated depth values over the mask area. The layers are then arranged from deeper to shallower
based on these depth values. During the Stable Diffusion inpainting process, an empty text descrip-
tion is used as the prompt, while the terms pertaining to foreground objects are utilized as negative
prompts. However, as Stable Diffusion tends to inpaint a foreground object inadvertently, a saliency
detection model (Zhuge et al., 2022) is employed to ascertain the presence of any foreground objects
within the inpainted area, thereby enhancing the quality of the background layer.

A.3   DATASET D ETAILS

Our MLCID is a long-tailed dataset comprising 0.85M two-layer images, 0.2M three-layer images,
and 0.07M four-layer images. The lack of a sufficiently extensive data results in the model lacking
generalization capability in generating three-layer and four-layer images. In the future, we aim to
further enhance our dataset construction efficiency and the quality of data construction, expand the
scale, and improve the generative capability of our model.

A.4   A PPLICATION D ETAILS

For layer inpainting, the timesteps for non-target layers are set directly to 1, and the information of
non-target layers is not altered during the inference process. For the target layer, the layer latent is
sampled directly from the Gaussian distribution. Similarly, we employ a 100-step DDIM scheduler.
For layer style transfer, akin to the image2image approach, we introduce 25 steps noise to the target
layer and perform denoising for 25 steps, while the timesteps for other layers remain at 1.

A.5   M ORE V ISUALIZATION

In Figures 8 and 9, we provide more examples of generated multi-layered composable images, and
compare them with the samples generated by Stable Diffusion, a whole-image generation method.
This comparison aims to showcase the distinct capabilities and potential advantages of our layered
generation approach over traditional whole-image generation techniques.



                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Layer Image      Layer Mask        Composite Image   Stable Diffusion Image

                              The background                                     a man


 Layer Images
     Set 1

                               Background Layer                             Foreground Layer


                              The background                                  a dinosaur


 Layer Images
     Set 2

                               Background Layer                             Foreground Layer


                              The background                                 a black cat


 Layer Images
     Set 3

                               Background Layer                             Foreground Layer

                   a man in a racing suit      a dinosaur painted on the a black cat wearing a tie
                         and helmet              wall of a child's room    and saying leave your

     Ours
       vs.
Stable Diffusion



                        Composite Image 1            Composite Image 2            Composite Image 3


                   Figure 8: More visualization of the synthesized two-layered images.


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Layer Image       Layer Mask         Composite Image        Stable Diffusion Image

                                                       blue druzy stud
                         The background                                                        rock
                                                           earrings

 Layer Images
     Set 1

                        Background Layer               Foreground Layer                  Foreground Layer


                     The background              one man                  one man              a basketball


 Layer Images
     Set 2

                     Background Layer        Foreground Layer       Foreground Layer          Foreground Layer


                     The background              cheese             a piece of bread               tomato


 Layer Images
     Set 3

                     Background Layer        Foreground Layer       Foreground Layer          Foreground Layer

                   a pair of blue druzy stud           two men playing                a piece of bread with
                      earrings on a rock            basketball on a court           tomatoes and cheese on it

     Ours
       vs.
Stable Diffusion



                         Composite Image 1             Composite Image 2                 Composite Image 3


  Figure 9: More visualization of the synthesized three-layered images and four-layered images.


                                                        14
