Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NLOCKING THE T RANSFERABILITY OF T OKENS IN
D EEP M ODELS FOR TABULAR DATA
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Fine-tuning a pre-trained deep neural network has become a successful paradigm
         in various machine learning tasks. However, such a paradigm becomes particularly
         challenging with tabular data when there are discrepancies between the feature sets
         of pre-trained models and the target tasks. In this paper, we propose TAB T OKEN, a
         method aims at enhancing the quality of feature tokens (i.e., embeddings of tabular
         features). TAB T OKEN allows for the utilization of pre-trained models when the
         upstream and downstream tasks share overlapping features, facilitating model fine-
         tuning even with limited training examples. Specifically, we introduce a contrastive
         objective that regularizes the tokens, capturing the semantics within and across
         features. During the pre-training stage, the tokens are learned jointly with top-layer
         deep models such as transformer. In the downstream task, tokens of the shared
         features are kept fixed while TAB T OKEN efficiently fine-tunes the remaining parts
         of the model. TAB T OKEN not only enables knowledge transfer from a pre-trained
         model to tasks with heterogeneous features, but also enhances the discriminative
         ability of deep tabular models in standard classification and regression tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various domains, including computer vi-
sion (Voulodimos et al., 2018), and natural language processing (Otter et al., 2020). While these
fields have benefited greatly from deep learning, the application of deep models to tabular data is
difficult (Gorishniy et al., 2021; Grinsztajn et al., 2022). Highly structured, tabular data is organized
with rows representing individual examples and columns corresponding to specific features. Within
domains such as finance (Addo et al., 2018), healthcare (Hassan et al., 2020), and e-commerce (Ned-
erstigt et al., 2014), tabular data emerges as a common format where classical machine learning
methods like XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016) have showcased strong performance. In recent years,
deep models have been extended to tabular data, leveraging the ability of deep neural networks to
capture complex feature interactions and achieve competitive results compared to boosting methods in
certain tasks (Cheng et al., 2016; Guo et al., 2017; Popov et al., 2020; Arik & Pfister, 2021; Gorishniy
et al., 2021; Katzir et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Hollmann et al., 2023).
The “pre-training then fine-tuning” paradigm is widely adopted in deep learning. By reusing the
pre-trained feature extractor, the entire model is subsequently fine-tuned on target datasets (Gando
et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2017; Tan et al., 2018; Too et al., 2019; Subramanian et al., 2022). However,
when it comes to tabular data, the transferability of pre-trained deep models faces unique challenges.
The tabular features often possess semantic meanings and the model attempts to comprehend the
relationships between features and targets. Each tabular feature has strong correspondence with model
parameters, making it hard to directly transfer pre-trained deep learning models when encountering
unseen features (Wang & Sun, 2022; Dinh et al., 2022; Hegselmann et al., 2023; Onishi et al., 2023;
Zhu et al., 2023). For instance, different branches of financial institutions may share certain features
when predicting credit card fraud, but each branch may also possess unique features associated with
their transaction histories. Besides, the scarcity of available samples for fine-tuning on new datasets
further complicates the knowledge transfer process.
In this paper, we focus on a crucial component of tabular deep models — the feature tokenizer, which
is an embedding layer that transforms numerical or categorical features into high-dimensional vectors
(tokens). The original features correspond specifically with these tokens, which are leveraged by


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the top-layer models like transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) and Multi-Layer Perceptrons to extract
relationships between features (Gorishniy et al., 2021; 2022). Through the feature tokenizer, all
features are transformed in the same manner, the tokens seem to be a tool to bridge two heterogeneous
feature sets by reusing tokens of shared features in a pre-trained model. By transferring the feature
tokens, the model achieves a reduction in the size of learnable parameters. The model may leverage
knowledge acquired from pre-training data and enhance its generalization ability on the target dataset.
However, our observation reveals that the                random distribution        feature         label
learned tokens exhibit random behavior and lack                                    skin color   ripeness
discriminative properties. Since learning the                                         Deep          Ripe
feature relationships is crucial as it enables the
model to gain a deeper understanding of the un-
derlying patterns within the data, the top-layer         semantic distribution            predict
models encounter more difficulties in effectively
learning from the semantically deficient tokens.
As illustrated in Figure 1, if the feature tokens
corresponding to the six possible values of “skin                                     Pale      Unripe
color” are randomly distributed, the decision
boundary becomes complex. The correlation                                        tokens of “skin color”
between skin color and ripeness needs to be                                       decision boundary
learned by a more complex top-layer model.
However, with a discriminative semantic distri-      Figure 1: The toy example involves predicting ripeness
bution, a simple classifier can achieve accurate     based on the color of the watermelon, where ripe ones
predictions. At this point, the tokens will con-     have a deep color and unripe ones are pale. Semantic
tain potentially transferable knowledge, which       distributions are more discriminative and possess the
                                                     potential for transferability.
may unlock the transferability of feature tokens.
To address this issue, we propose TAB T OKEN to introduce semantics to feature tokens, improving
the transferability of feature tokenizers. Specifically, TAB T OKEN aims to leverage the semantic
information provided by the instance labels to understand feature relationships. Firstly, we represent
an instance by averaging the tokens associated with all features. Based on the instance tokens, we
introduce a contrastive token regularization objective that minimizes the distance between instances
and their respective class centers. By incorporating this regularization into the pre-training stages,
TAB T OKEN enables the previously randomly distributed feature tokens to reflect actual semantic
information, bolstering the model’s transferability. Furthermore, the fine-tuning stage benefits from
the enhanced pre-trained feature tokens, learning new modules under the constraint of regularization.
Our experiments demonstrate the efficacy of TAB T OKEN in achieving model transfer across datasets
with heterogeneous feature sets. TAB T OKEN also improves the performance of deep models in
standard tabular tasks involving classification and regression. The contributions of our paper are:
• We emphasize the significance of token quality in facilitating the transferability of tabular deep
  models when there is a change in the feature set between pre-training and downstream datasets. To
  the best of our knowledge, we are the first to focus on feature tokens in tabular transfer learning.
• We introduce TAB T OKEN to enhance the transferability of deep tabular models by incorporating
  feature semantics into the tokens and enabling their utilization in downstream tasks.
• Through experiments on real-world datasets, we demonstrate the ability of TAB T OKEN to re-
  veal explainable feature semantics. Furthermore, our method showcases strong performance in
  heterogeneous transfer tasks as well as standard tabular tasks.
In the rest of this paper, we first describe the transfer problem and introduce our method. Subsequently,
we present experiments and conclusions. The related work is reviewed in the Appendix.


2    R ELATED W ORK

We briefly review related approaches in deep tabular data learning and those transferring tabular
models across feature spaces. More discussions are in Appendix A. Recently, a large number of deep
learning models for tabular data have been developed (Cheng et al., 2016; Guo et al., 2017; Popov
et al., 2020; Arik & Pfister, 2021; Katzir et al., 2021; Gorishniy et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2022; Hollmann et al., 2023), however, they do not possess the ability to transfer knowledge


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        𝑑                                                  𝑑
               𝑑                                                            𝑑𝑡
                                                                                                                  𝑠
                                                                                                                          𝑑𝑡

          ℎ0       feature tokenizer                    transfer pre-training
                                                               model                           𝑘
                           feature     𝑁
 𝑘                                                                                        pre-training stage
                           tokens
         𝑔0        top-layer model                                                        𝑔0
          prediction                                                                      fine-tuning stage
                                       𝑁𝑡


               𝑓0 = 𝑔0      ℎ0
                                                                𝑠
                                                                        unseen features
                                                                                                   𝑔
       the instance with 𝑑 features    pre-training data            downstream data                      freeze       learnable
     (a) Token-based deep model             (b) Transfer deep tabular model                            (c) Transfer feature tokens

Figure 2: Illustrations of the token-based model, transfer task, and the procedure of TAB TOKEN. (a) The
token-based models f0 for tabular data can be decomposed into a feature tokenizer h0 and a top-layer model
g0 . (b) In the transfer task, the downstream dataset consists of s overlapping features with the pre-training
dataset while also introducing dt − s unseen features. When the feature space changes, we expect to transfer
the pre-trained model for downstream tasks. (c) In the pre-training stage, by employing token combination and
regularization, TAB T OKEN incorporates the semantics of labels into tokens. In the fine-tuning stage, TAB T OKEN
freezes the overlapping feature tokens of the pre-trained tokenizer, efficiently fine-tuning other modules.

from pre-trained tabular models across feature spaces. Instead of using feature descriptions as well as
the language models (Wang & Sun, 2022; Dinh et al., 2022; Hegselmann et al., 2023), pseudo-Feature
method (Levin et al., 2023), TabRet (Onishi et al., 2023), XTab (Zhu et al., 2023), and ORCA (Shen
et al., 2023) improve the transferability of the model from via pseudo-feature or learned transformers.
In this paper, we discover the untapped potential in improving the feature tokens and aim to develop
a tokenizer with stronger transferability. In contrast to prior work, our emphasis lies in enhancing the
quality of feature tokens and unlocking their transferability.

3       P RELIMINARY AND BACKGROUND
In this section, we introduce the task learning with tabular data, as well as the vanilla deep tabular
models based on feature tokens. We also describe the scenario of transferring a pre-trained model to
downstream tasks with heterogeneous feature sets.

3.1       L EARNING WITH TABULAR DATA

Given a labeled tabular dataset D = {(xi,: , yi )}Ni=1 with N examples (rows in the table). An instance
xi,: is associated with a label yi . We consider three types of tasks: binary classification yi ∈ {0, 1},
multiclass classification yi ∈ [C] = {1, . . . , C}, and regression yi ∈ R. There are d features
(columns) for an instance xi,: , we denote the j-th feature in tabular dataset as x:,j . The tabular
features include numerical (continuous) type xnum                                         cat
                                                    :,j and categorical (discrete) type x:,j . Denote the
                                                    num
j-th feature value of xi,: as xi,j . We assume xi,j ∈ R when it is numerical (e.g., the salary of a
person). While for a categorical feature (e.g., the occupation of a person) with Kj discrete choices, we
                        Kj
present xcat
           i,j ∈ {0, 1}    in a one-hot form, where a single element is assigned a value of 1 to indicate
the categorical value. We learn a model f0 on D that maps xi,: to its label yi , and a generalizable
model could extend its ability to unseen instances sampled from the same distribution as D.

3.2       T OKEN - BASED M ETHODS FOR TABULAR DATA

There are several classical methods when learning on tabular data, such as logistic regression (LR)
and XGBoost. Similar to the basic feature extractor when applying deep models over images and
texts, one direct way to apply deep learning models on the tabular data is to implement model f0 with
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) or Residual Network (ResNet). While for token-based deep learning
models, the model f0 is implemented by the combination of feature tokenizer h0 and top-layer deep
models g0 . The prediction for instance xi,: is denoted as f0 (xi,: ) = g0 ◦ h0 (xi,: ) = g0 (h0 (xi,: )).
We minimize the following objective to obtain the feature tokenizer h0 and top-layer model g0 :
                                                        N
                                                        X
                                             min              [ℓ (g0 ◦ h0 (xi,: ), yi )] ,                                           (1)
                                           f0 =g0 ◦h0
                                                        i=1


                                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the loss function ℓ(·, ·) measures the discrepancy between the prediction and the label. Feature
tokenizer h0 performs a similar role to the feature extractor in traditional image models Goodfellow
et al. (2016); Gorishniy et al. (2021). It maps the features to high-dimensional tokens in a hidden space,
facilitating the learning process of top-layer g0 . The top-layer model g0 infers feature relationships
based on the feature tokenizer h0 and then performs subsequent classification or regression tasks.
Feature Tokenizer h0 transforms the input xi into a d × k matrix {x̂i,j }dj=1 . In detail, for a
numerical feature value xnum                                     num    num
                          i,j ∈ R, it is transformed as x̂i,j = xi,j · Ej , where Ej
                                                                                     num
                                                                                         is a learnable
k-dimensional vector (token) for the j-th feature. For a categorical feature xi,j ∈ {0, 1}Kj , where
                                                                                cat

there are Kj discrete choices, the tokenizer is implemented as a lookup table. Given Ejcat ∈ RKj ×k as
                                                                     ⊤
the set of Kj tokens, the tokenizer transform xcat               cat  cat
                                                 i,j as x̂i,j = xi,j Ej . Overall, the feature tokenizer
maps different types of features to a unified form — xi,: is transformed into a d × k matrix {x̂i,j }dj=1
with a set of k-dimensional tokens. The model learns feature tokens E num or E cat during the training
process. The feature tokenizer h0 is a weighted or selective representation of feature tokens.
Deep Top-layer Models. After the tokenizer, the transformed tokens h0 (xi,: ) = {x̂i,j }dj=1 for
instance xi,: are feed into top-layer models. There can be various top-layer models, such as MLP,
ResNet, and transformer. When the top-layer model is MLP or ResNet, it cannot directly process the
set of tokens h0 (xi,: ). The common approach is to concatenate d tokens into a long dk-dimensional
vector Ticon ∈ Rdk . Then, Ticon feeds into the top-layer model g0 :

                           f0 (xi,: ) = g0 (Ticon ), Ticon = concat(h0 (xi,: )) .                     (2)

For the transformer, the token set of xi,: directly feeds into the transformer layer without the
need for concatenating. The input h0 (xi,: ) and output Fi of transformer are both a set of k-
dimension tokens Fi = TransformerLayer (. . . (TransformerLayer (h0 (xi,: )))) ∈ Rd×k , where
the module TransformerLayer(·) is described in Appendix C. Based on the transformed to-
              Pcould be obtained based on a prediction head over the averaged token f0 (xi,: ) =
kens, the results
                  d
Prediction d1 j=1 Fi,j , where Fi,j is the j-th token in the output token set Fi of transformer.
The head Prediction(·) consists of an activation function ReLU and a fully connected layer.


3.3   T RANSFER L EARNING WITH OVERLAPPING AND U NSEEN F EATURES
                                                                    t
Given another related downstream dataset Dt = {(xti,: , yit )}N              t               t
                                                                  i=1 with N examples (N ≪ N ) and
                                                           t
dt features, we aim to construct a new model f for D borrowing the knowledge of well-trained f0 .
We assume there exists heterogeneity between D and Dt , in their feature or label sets. We mainly
consider the scenario that D and Dt have the same label space but different feature spaces. We
explore more complex scenarios in subsection E.3, such as transfer between non-overlapping label
spaces. We denote the features ranging from the j-th to the m-th as {x:,j:m }. The last s features
{x:,d−s+1:d } in the pre-trained dataset are shared features (overlapping features), corresponding
to the first s features {xt:,1:s } in the fine-tuning dataset. The unseen feature set in the downstream
dataset is {xt:,s+1:dt }. We pre-train h0 and g0 together on D, then we fine-tune f = g ◦ h on Dt . Our
goal (illustrated in Figure 2) is to train f with strong generalization ability in downstream tasks.
Inspired by the idea of “pre-training then fine-tuning” in traditional deep learning, since feature
tokenizer h0 is pre-trained on sufficient examples, we expect to reuse its weights {Ejnum }dj=1 or
{Ejcat }dj=1 to construct a better fine-tuning feature tokenizer h. As each token from the tokenizer
is correspond to a specific feature and there are overlapping features {x:,d−s+1:d }, it should be
possible to reuse the token directly when the feature space changes. The knowledge acquired from
the upstream task appears to be present in the pre-trained feature tokens.
However, our observation experiments (in subsection 5.1) show that the tokens generated during the
vanilla pre-training process display stochastic patterns. These feature tokens lack sufficient semantic
information, hindering their ability to reflect discriminative feature relationships, thereby limiting
their effectiveness in aiding top-layer models and transferability in transfer learning.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     I MPROVE F EATURE T OKENS FOR T RANSFERABLE D EEP TABULAR M ODELS

To address the issue that the feature tokens obtained through vanilla training are distributed in
an almost random manner, we analyze the significance of semantics in unlocking feature tokens’
transferability, and propose a pre-training then fine-tuning procedure for transfer tasks.

4.1   T OKEN S EMANTICS P LAY A ROLE IN T RANSFERABILITY

Although feature tokenizer replaces a sparse feature (e.g., the one-hot coding of a categorical feature)
with a dense high-dimensional vector, we provide an explanation in Appendix B that feature tokenizer
does not increase the model capacity. Since the feature tokens are in correspondence with features,
tokens should reflect the nature of features, implying that tokens may carry semantics. However,
based on our analysis in Appendix A, it is evident that the feature tokenizer does not increase the
model capacity. During vanilla training, different tokens are concatenated and then predicted by
different parts of the classifier. Considering an extreme scenario, the model could accurately predict
an instance even when feature tokens are generated randomly, by only optimizing the classifier. The
feature token itself is not directly used for prediction. Consequently, as long as the top-layer model is
sufficiently strong for the current task, the trained tokens do not retain enough knowledge for transfer.
Tokens that lack semantics or even resemble randomness lack discriminative power and hold little
value for reuse. Unlike in the image or text domains, where the feature extractors capture the
semantic meaning with their strong capacity and enable model transferability across tasks (Simonyan
& Zisserman, 2015; Devlin et al., 2018), unlocking the transferability of feature tokenizer in the
tabular model is challenging. Without additional information, it is not possible to directly learn
semantically meaningful tokens. The downstream task also fails to transfer the learned knowledge in
overall model due to the changes of feature space. The correspondence between tokens and features
may enable token-based deep models to be transferable for new tasks involving shared features and
unseen features, so it is crucial to imbue feature tokens with semantics.

4.2   S EMANTIC E NRICHED P RE -T RAINING

The label assigned to an instance could be additional information that help feature tokens understand
semantics. For example, for the feature “occupation” with values like “entrepreneur”, “manager”, and
“unemployed", if the label indicates whether the individual will invest in financial products, typically,
the labels for “entrepreneur” and “unemployed” would be “yes”, while “unemployed” might be
associated with low probability. By grouping instances with the same label together, semantically
similar tokens corresponding to “entrepreneur” and “manager” would cluster. Therefore, to achieve
the goal of imbuing tokens with semantics, we utilize instance labels as additional supervision.
To facilitate direct distance computation for grouping in-                 𝑑
stances, we need to represent each instance by one token                                             𝑑𝑘
instead of a token set. Token combination transforms the set
of tokens h0 (xi,: ) = {x̂i,j }dj=1 into an instance token Ti of         ℎ0                  concatenating
xi,: . As in Equation 2, the usual combination operation is
concatenating, which makes Ticon a high-dimensional vec-             𝑘                        alignment
tor. However, when the order of input features is permuted,
applying concatenating to the same xi,: after the feature tok-           feature         𝑘
enizer will result in different Ticon . Besides, the vector values
at the same position in different feature tokens will corre-
                                                                         tokens               averaging
spond to different weights in the subsequent predictor. This                      token obtained by averaging
implies that, for different features x:,m and x:,n (m ̸= n),                   different predictors based on tokens
the meanings of x̂i,m ∈ Rk and x̂i,n ∈ Rk are not the same           Figure 3: Token averaging outperforms
in the corresponding dimension. Therefore, concatenating             combination as it aligns distinct feature
fails to consider the alignment between features.                    tokens, which enhances the semantics.
Instead, we propose utilizing averaging for token combination, which averages the vector values at the
same position in different feature tokens. Averaging also makes instance tokens remain unchanged
regardless of the order of input features. We obtain the representation Tiavg ∈ Rk for instance xi in the
                             Pd
following form: Tiavg = d1 j=1 x̂i,j . For notational clarity, we drop the superscript avg of Tiavg . We


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


calculate thePthe class center Syi ∈ Rk for xi,: by averaging instance tokens belong to the same class:
          1
Syi = N yi yp =yi Tp , where {Tp }yp =yi are the N yi instance tokens with the same class to xi,: .
Syi is the class center belongs to the label yi of xi,: . We anticipate that instance tokens belonging
to the same class will exhibit proximity. As instance tokens are derived from averaging the feature
tokens, the tokens that share similar semantic relevance to the class should cluster together. Therefore,
we pull instance tokens toward their class center via a contrastive regularization Ω : RN ×k → R:
                                                     N
                                                  1 X              2
                                   Ω {Ti }N

                                          i=1   =       ∥Ti − Syi ∥2 .
                                                  N i=1

We name this contrastive regularization as “Contrastive Token Regularization (CTR)”. For token
regularization, we calculate the regularization term on instance tokens and add the term to training
loss ℓ. The objective is to minimize the following loss:
                                       N
                                       X
                                             [ℓ(g0 ◦ h0 (xi,: ), yi )] + βΩ {Ti }N

                             min                                                 i=1 ,                   (3)
                          f0 =g0 ◦h0
                                       i=1


where β is a hyperparameter that controls the regularization term. In the pre-training stage, we learn
the feature tokenizer h0 and the top-layer model g0 simultaneously. Different from the objective
in Equation 1, the feature tokens {Ejnum }dj=1 or {Ejcat }dj=1 are subject to two constraints. Firstly,
they need to be adjusted in a way that enhances the predictions of the top-layer model. Secondly, a
regularization is employed to ensure that the tokens retain their semantic.
In practice, only the samples within each batch are used to compute the center. For regression tasks,
the regularization term is computed by dividing the target values into two pseudo-classes using the
median as a threshold. For instance, if the median of the target values in the dataset is 0.5, samples
with values greater than 0.5 are labeled as class 1, while less than 0.5 are labeled as class 2. These
pseudo-labels are only utilized for computing the CTR. In Appendix E, we compare the effect of
CTR with other contrastive losses, verifying that our simple regularization has obvious advantages.

4.3   T OKEN R EUSED F INE - TUNING

Through the utilization of the CTR, we can enhance the feature tokenizer during the pre-training stage.
In this subsection, we elucidate the reuse process based on high-quality tokens. We pre-train g0 ◦ h0
with CTR, which is essential for the transferability of feature tokens. For the ease of expression, we
use {Ejpre }dj=1 to represent {Ejnum }dj=1 or {Ejcat }dj=1 , which are the feature tokens of the pre-training
feature tokenizer h0 . In the transfer task, we expect to reuse {Ejpre }dj=1 to construct fine-tuning
feature tokenizer h, then we fine-tuning g ◦ h on downstream dataset Dt .
There are d pre-training features {x:,1:d } and dt downstream features {xt:,1:dt }. As illustrated
in Figure 2(b), in the downstream task, there are two feature sets: s overlapping features
{xt:,1:s }({x:,d−s+1:d }) and dt − s unseen features {xt:,s+1:dt }. To construct the fine-tuning tok-
enizer h, for overlapping features, h fix the pre-trained feature tokens {Ejpre }dj=d−s+1 of h0 and
transfer. For unseen features, h firstly initializes the remaining feature tokens based on the averaging
                                      Pd
of all pre-trained feature tokens: d1 j=1 Ejpre ∈ Rk . Then h fine-tunes these learnable tokens.
After building h, we freeze the overlapping feature tokens. The learnable modules are top-layer model
g (transformer) and unseen feature tokens in h. To regularize feature tokens for unseen features, we
utilize averaging and CTR to perform fine-tuning, too. Continuing with the notations from Equation 3,
we optimize model f = g ◦ h via minimizing the following objective on downstream dataset Dt :
                            t                                       t
                           N                                    N                 2
                          X                                  1 X
                                ℓ(g ◦ h(xti,: ), yit ) + β · t

                 min                                                    Ti − Syit
                f =g◦h
                          i=1
                                                            N i=1                 2

                                                               h0 (xti,j ), 1 ≤ j ≤ s,

                   s.t.   h(xti,: ) = H(xti,: ), H(xti,j ) =
                                                               x̂ti,j ,      s + 1 ≤ j ≤ dt ,
where h0 remains fixed and β is a pre-defined coefficient for adjusting the regularization term.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    same shape indicates similar semantics    same color signifies belonging to the same feature     random features


                  (a) Feature tokens with vanilla training.                       (b) Feature tokens with our CTR.
Figure 4: Feature tokens on synthetic dataset. Colors indicate which feature the tokens belong to, and the
same shapes indicate semantically similar tokens. Colorless circles represent tokens of random features. (a):
Categories with similar semantics across different features are not captured in the tokens. Tokens from random
features may come close to other tokens that are relevant to the target, thereby influencing the prediction. (b):
Tokens with similar semantics exhibit a clear clustering phenomenon, while tokens representing random features
are tightly clustered together in the center.
Summary of TAB T OKEN. When there is a change in the feature space, we aim to transfer the tokens
corresponding to shared features. In the pre-training stage, we enhance the quality of tokens by
introducing semantics, making them transferable. In the fine-tuning stage, we continue to constrain
new feature tokens using both the frozen pre-trained feature tokens and CTR. TAB T OKEN unlocks the
tokens’ transferability through a well-designed combination of pre-training and fine-tuning processes.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we demonstrate the performance of the feature tokens obtained by TAB T OKEN in
transfer tasks using real-world tabular data. The implementation details are introduced in Appendix F.

5.1   V ISUALIZATION ON T OKEN S EMANTICS

Different from visualizations on the penultimate layer’s embeddings (Huang et al., 2020), the feature
tokens are feature-specific embeddings near the input of the tabular model, which better reveals the
quality of the feature tokenizer.
Semantical Relationships between Different Features. We construct a synthetic four-class classifi-
cation dataset consisting of 6 features, each feature has 4 categorical values. Thus, we get 6 × 4 = 24
feature tokens in TAB T OKEN. We first construct highly correlated features as follows: when we
generate an instance, a pair of features have a one-to-one correspondence on the categorical choices.
The relationship between the features and labels is closely tied to the feature values. As a result, these
semantically similar tokens come from different features. We expect these tokens to be close to each
other. Besides, we construct noise features with random values. We expect random feature tokens to
be far from those that contribute to predictions. Otherwise, random feature tokens will exert similar
influences on the subsequent top-layer model’s prediction process.
We train a one-layer Linear model upon a 2-dimensional feature tokenizer. The results are in Figure 4.
We find feature tokens generated by vanilla training exhibit a random distribution without discernible
patterns. When training with CTR, all groups of tokens are separately clustered together. TAB T OKEN
enables the trained feature tokens to capture the semantic correlation between different features.
Besides, some random tokens (the colorless circles) are closely located to those of semantically
meaningful features with vanilla training. However, they occupy the same region in the latent space,
staying away from other feature tokens, once with CTR. The phenomenon validates that CTR reduces
the distance between instance tokens of the same class, which helps identify noise features.
Category Relationships within Single Feature. We selected three categorical features, “job”,
“education”, and “marital”, from the real-world dataset “bank-marketing”, whose target is to predict
the success rate of a customer purchasing financial products. We aim for TAB T OKEN to facilitate
the learning of semantics and help feature tokens capture the category relationships within a single
feature. We train a three-layer transformer on a 64-dimensional feature tokenizer.
 Figure 5 shows the learned feature tokens, which are consistent with the arrangements within the
features, such as “tertiary” → “secondary” → “primary” in feature “education”. Besides, the tokens


                                                               7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Feature tokens trained with CTR on bank-marketing dataset. The tokens of feature “job” depict
a distribution based on job types. The hierarchical pattern is in relation to the probability associated with
purchasing financial products. The distribution of tokens for the feature “education” and feature “marital” aligns
perfectly with their respective semantic order. Tokens with vanilla training are shown in Figure 9.
Table 1: Results for 5-shot downstream tasks. TAB T OKEN outperforms other baselines in the transfer setting,
reflecting the transferable nature of the tokens obtained by CTR. †: TabPFN does not support regression tasks.
(↑ ~ accuracy, ↓ ~ RMSE). The whole results with the standard deviation are listed in Table 7.
                 Eye↑ Colon↑ Clave↑ Cardio↑ Jannis↑ Htru↑ Breast↑ Elevators↓ Super↓ Volume↓
   SVM          0.3621 0.5921 0.3482       0.6036   0.3512 0.8376 0.8211        0.0088    33.9036 124.2391
   XGBoost      0.3699 0.5676 0.3506       0.5703   0.3222 0.8369 0.8453        0.0090    34.6605 123.9724
   FT-trans     0.3916 0.5792 0.3584       0.6064   0.3064 0.8252 0.8275        0.0081    31.3274 122.8319
   TabPFN†      0.3918 0.5809 0.3733       0.5965   0.3601 0.8371 0.7438           -         -        -
   SCARF        0.3371 0.6048 0.2144       0.5547   0.3523 0.8131 0.7063        0.0097    39.9343 124.5373
   TabRet       0.3477 0.4688 0.2393       0.4329   0.3545 0.8231 0.7252        0.0094    41.2537 126.4713
   XTab         0.3851 0.5964 0.3627       0.5856   0.2868 0.8363 0.8145        0.0077    38.5030 119.6656
   ORCA         0.3823 0.5876 0.3689       0.6042   0.3413 0.8421 0.8242        0.0082    37.9436 121.4952
   TAB T OKEN 0.3982 0.6074 0.3741 0.6229 0.3687 0.8459 0.8284                  0.0074    30.9636 118.7280

associated with the feature “job” exhibit a hierarchical pattern, where certain jobs like “retired”,
“student”, and “unknown” form one layer, while jobs such as “housemaid” and “service” form another
layer. Since individuals with these high-paying jobs are highly likely to successfully purchase
financial products, those tokens align with their semantics when predicting the target of the dataset.

5.2   T OKEN M ATTERS IN T RANSFER

We first evaluate TAB T OKEN in transfer tasks on classification and regression. Further investigations
are based on different shot numbers, overlapping ratios, and pre-training top-layer models.
Datasets. We conduct experiments on 10 open-source tabular datasets from various fields, including
medical, physical and traffic domains. The datasets we utilized encompass both classification and
regression tasks, as well as numerical and categorical features (details in Table 3).
Experimental setups. To explore transfer challenges in the presence of feature overlaping, we follow
the data split process in (Nguyen et al., 2012; Hou & Zhou, 2018; Beyazit et al., 2019; Ye et al.,
2021). We split the tabular dataset into pre-training dataset and fine-tuning dataset. The detailed split
property and evaluation process for each datasets are shown in Table 4 and subsection D.3. From the
downstream dataset, we randomly sample subsets as few-shot tasks. For instance, the dataset Eye
has 3 classes, we split 5 samples from each class, obtaining a 5-shot downstream dataset with 3 × 5
samples. For regression tasks, each 5-shot downstream dataset consists of 5 samples. We report the
average of 300 (30 subsets × 10 random seeds) results. In the fine-tuning stage, we are not allowed
to utilize the validation set and pre-training set due to the constraints of limited data.
Baselines. We use four types of baselines: (1) The methods that train models from scratch on down-
stream datasets. We choose Support Vector Machine (SVM), XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016), and
FT-trans (Gorishniy et al., 2021) which have strong performance on tabular data. TabPFN (Hollmann
et al., 2023) specifically designed for small classification datasets is also compared. (2) The methods
that use contrastive learning for pre-training: SCARF (Bahri et al., 2022). (3) Pre-training and
fine-tuning methods designed specifically for tabular data with overlapping features: TabRet (Onishi


                                                        8
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                43
                                                                    40
                                                                                                                 40                                                             36
                41
                                                                    37


                                                                                                 Acccuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                Acccuracy (%)
Acccuracy (%)


                                                    Acccuracy (%)
                                                                                                                 39                                                             34
                39
                                                                    34                                           38
                                         XGBoost                                                                                                                                32
                37                       TabPFN                                                                  37
                                         TabRet                     31                                                                                                          30
                                         XTab
                35                       TabToken                                                                36                                                             28
                                                                    28
                     3      5      10          20                        3    5      10     20                           low              medium         high                        low        medium         high
                           Shot Number                                       Shot Number                                             Overlapping Level                                     Overlapping Level

                     (a) Eye (medium).                               (b) Jannis (medium).                                 (c) Eye (5shot).                                           (d) Jannis (5shot).
  Figure 6: Results for different shots and overlapping ratios. TAB T OKEN outperforms other baselines with
  different degrees of data limitations. When the overlapping feature ratio improves, TAB T OKEN can leverage a
  larger proportion of pre-trained feature tokens, leading to improved performance.
 et al., 2023). (4) The methods that transfer large-scale pre-trained transformers for tabular data:
 XTab (Zhu et al., 2023) and ORCA (Shen et al., 2023). We compare more baselines in Appendix E.
  Results. Table 1 shows the results of different methods in the downstream tasks. For non-transfer
  methods, our advantage lies in the reuse of high-quality tokens. Self-supervised transfer method
  SCARF struggles to adapt well to changes in the feature space. Although TabRet aims at transfer
  setting with overlapping features, it does not perform well on limited data. Both XTab, which
  leverages a significant amount of pre-trained data, and ORCA, which utilizes large-scale pre-trained
  models, are unable to surpass TAB T OKEN. We present more results of “pretraining then finetuning”
  real-world applications with overlapping features in Table 2.
 Different Shots and Overlapping Ratios. In order to fully verify the robustness of TAB T OKEN,
 we conduct experiments on {3, 5, 10, 20}-shot and adjust the overlapping ratio to three levels {low,
 medium, high}. Figure 6 shows that TAB T OKEN can maintain the transfer effect in different shots
 and overlapping ratios. The specific number of features for different overlapping ratios is in Table 5.
Different Top-layer Model Types. In the pre-             38.0
                                                                   Vanilla
                                                         37.5
                                                                                                                      Accuracy (%)


training process, we combine the tokenizer with dif-               CTR w/o Averaging
                                                         37.0      CTR                                             36.87
                                                                                                 36.77
ferent top-layer models, and transfer the pre-trained    36.5         36.37
                                                                            36.51                            36.41
                                                                                           36.19
feature tokens to a new transformer for the down-        36.0
                                                               35.61
stream task. We report the results of different          35.5                        35.48
                                                                                                       35.24
pre-training strategies and pre-trained model types:     35.0
{MLP, ResNet, Transformer}. Figure 7 shows that          34.5
                                                         34.0
even when the pre-training and downstream model                      MLP                ResNet         Transformer
types are different , the feature tokens trained with Figure 7: The results of 5-shot downstream tasks
CTR gain transferability. Averaging also plays a role in Jannis. “Vanilla” means transferring feature
in TAB T OKEN. Therefore, token matters in transfer. tokens obtained by vanilla pre-training.
  Real-world medical applications with overlapping Table 2: The results of 5-shot classification for
  features. We collect the Behavioral Risk Factor real-world cross-domain transfer.
  Surveillance System dataset in year 2015 for pre-       Dataset      Diabetes     Stroke
  training, which has 340057 samples. Two binary
                                                          XGBoost       0.6252      0.5382
  classification datasets, Diabetes and Stroke, are used  FT-trans      0.6126      0.5725
  for fine-tuning, which have 21 and 10 features, re-     SCARF         0.6014      0.5697
  spectively. These two datasets have a feature overlap-  TabRet        0.6259      0.5834
  ping ratio of approximately 50% with the pre-training
  dataset. Experimental results are listed in Table 2.    TabToken      0.6343      0.5845
  TAB T OKEN achieves the best results among others.

  6                  C ONCLUSION
 Transferring a pre-trained tabular model effectively can enhance the learning of a downstream tabular
 model and improve its efficiency. We propose TAB T OKEN to improve the transferability of deep
 tabular models by improving the quality of their crucial components — feature tokens. We introduce
 a contrastive objective that regularizes the tokens and incorporates feature semantics into tokens.
 Experimental results on diverse tabular datasets validate the effectiveness of our approach.


                                                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Peter Martey Addo, Dominique Guegan, and Bertrand Hassani. Credit risk analysis using machine
  and deep learning models. Risks, 6(2):38, 2018.
Nesreen K Ahmed, Amir F Atiya, Neamat El Gayar, and Hisham El-Shishiny. An empirical
  comparison of machine learning models for time series forecasting. Econometric reviews, 29(5-6):
  594–621, 2010.
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna:
  A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
  SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining (KDD), 2019.
Chen Almagor and Yedid Hoshen. You say factorization machine, I say neural network - it’s all in the
  activation. In Proceddings of the 16th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys), 2022.
Sercan Ö. Arik and Tomas Pfister. Tabnet: Attentive interpretable tabular learning. In Proceddings of
  the 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2021.
John O Awoyemi, Adebayo O Adetunmbi, and Samuel A Oluwadare. Credit card fraud detection
  using machine learning techniques: A comparative analysis. In 2017 international conference on
  computing networking and informatics (ICCNI), 2017.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Dara Bahri, Heinrich Jiang, Yi Tay, and Donald Metzler. Scarf: Self-supervised contrastive learning
  using random feature corruption. In Proceddings of the 10th International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Ege Beyazit, Jeevithan Alagurajah, and Xindong Wu. Online learning from data streams with varying
  feature spaces. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2019.
Chun-Hao Chang, Rich Caruana, and Anna Goldenberg. NODE-GAM: neural generalized additive
  model for interpretable deep learning. In Proceddings of the 10th International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Jintai Chen, Kuanlun Liao, Yao Wan, Danny Z. Chen, and Jian Wu. Danets: Deep abstract networks
   for tabular data classification and regression. In Proceddings of the 36th AAAI Conference on
   Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2022.
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of
  the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining (KDD),
  2016.
Heng-Tze Cheng, Levent Koc, Jeremiah Harmsen, Tal Shaked, Tushar Chandra, Hrishi Aradhye,
  Glen Anderson, Greg Corrado, Wei Chai, Mustafa Ispir, Rohan Anil, Zakaria Haque, Lichan Hong,
  Vihan Jain, Xiaobing Liu, and Hemal Shah. Wide & deep learning for recommender systems. In
  Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Deep Learning for Recommender Systems (DLRS), 2016.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Tuan Dinh, Yuchen Zeng, Ruisu Zhang, Ziqian Lin, Michael Gira, Shashank Rajput, Jy yong Sohn,
  Dimitris S. Papailiopoulos, and Kangwook Lee. LIFT: language-interfaced fine-tuning for non-
  language machine learning tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35
  (NeurIPS), 2022.
Gota Gando, Taiga Yamada, Haruhiko Sato, Satoshi Oyama, and Masahito Kurihara. Fine-tuning
  deep convolutional neural networks for distinguishing illustrations from photographs. Expert
 Systems with Applications, 66:295–301, 2016.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Revisiting deep learning
  models for tabular data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (NeurIPS),
  2021.

Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, and Artem Babenko. On embeddings for numerical features in
  tabular deep learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (NeurIPS), 2022.

Léo Grinsztajn, Edouard Oyallon, and Gaël Varoquaux. Why do tree-based models still outperform
  deep learning on typical tabular data? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35
  (NeurIPS), 2022.

Huifeng Guo, Ruiming Tang, Yunming Ye, Zhenguo Li, and Xiuqiang He. Deepfm: A factorization-
  machine based neural network for CTR prediction. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International
 Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2017.

Md. Rafiul Hassan, Sadiq Al-Insaif, Muhammad Imtiaz Hossain, and Joarder Kamruzzaman. A
 machine learning approach for prediction of pregnancy outcome following IVF treatment. Neural
 Computing and Applications, 32(7):2283–2297, 2020.

Stefan Hegselmann, Alejandro Buendia, Hunter Lang, Monica Agrawal, Xiaoyi Jiang, and David
  Sontag. Tabllm: few-shot classification of tabular data with large language models. In International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2023.

Alexander Hermans, Lucas Beyer, and Bastian Leibe. In defense of the triplet loss for person
  re-identification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07737, 2017.

Noah Hollmann, Samuel Müller, Katharina Eggensperger, and Frank Hutter. Tabpfn: A transformer
  that solves small tabular classification problems in a second. In The Eleventh International
 Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.

Bo-Jian Hou, Yu-Hu Yan, Peng Zhao, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Storage fit learning with feature evolvable
  streams. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2021.

Bo-Jian Hou, Lijun Zhang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Prediction with unpredictable feature evolution. IEEE
  Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 33(10):5706–5715, 2022.

Chenping Hou and Zhi-Hua Zhou. One-pass learning with incremental and decremental features.
  IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 40(11):2776–2792, 2018.

Xin Huang, Ashish Khetan, Milan Cvitkovic, and Zohar Karnin. Tabtransformer: Tabular data
  modeling using contextual embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.06678, 2020.

Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning (ICML), 2015.

Liran Katzir, Gal Elidan, and Ran El-Yaniv. Net-dnf: Effective deep modeling of tabular data. In
  Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.

Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and Tie-
 Yan Liu. Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. In Advances in neural
  information processing systems 30 (NIPS), 2017.

Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron
  Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. Supervised contrastive learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 33 (NeurIPS), 2020.

Roman Levin, Valeriia Cherepanova, Avi Schwarzschild, Arpit Bansal, C. Bayan Bruss, Tom Gold-
  stein, Andrew Gordon Wilson, and Micah Goldblum. Transfer learning with deep tabular models.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.

Bryan Lim and Stefan Zohren. Time-series forecasting with deep learning: a survey. Philosophical
  Transactions of the Royal Society A, 379(2194):20200209, 2021.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Siyi Liu, Chen Gao, Yihong Chen, Depeng Jin, and Yong Li. Learnable embedding sizes for recom-
  mender systems. In Proceddings of the 9th International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2021.

Lennart J Nederstigt, Steven S Aanen, Damir Vandic, and Flavius Frasincar. Floppies: a framework
  for large-scale ontology population of product information from tabular data in e-commerce stores.
  Decision Support Systems, 59:296–311, 2014.

Hai-Long Nguyen, Yew-Kwong Woon, Wee-Keong Ng, and Li Wan. Heterogeneous ensemble
  for feature drifts in data streams. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: 16th
  Pacific-Asia Conference (PAKDD), 2012.

Soma Onishi, Kenta Oono, and Kohei Hayashi. Tabret: Pre-training transformer-based tabular models
  for unseen columns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15747, 2023.

Daniel W Otter, Julian R Medina, and Jugal K Kalita. A survey of the usages of deep learning for
  natural language processing. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 32(2):
  604–624, 2020.

Sergei Popov, Stanislav Morozov, and Artem Babenko. Neural oblivious decision ensembles for
  deep learning on tabular data. In Proceddings of the 8th International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2020.

Liudmila Ostroumova Prokhorenkova, Gleb Gusev, Aleksandr Vorobev, Anna Veronika Dorogush,
  and Andrey Gulin. Catboost: unbiased boosting with categorical features. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 31 (NeurIPS), 2018.

Matthew Richardson, Ewa Dominowska, and Robert Ragno. Predicting clicks: estimating the click-
 through rate for new ads. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World Wide Web
 (WWW), 2007.

Noam Shazeer. Glu variants improve transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202, 2020.

Junhong Shen, Liam Li, Lucio M Dery, Corey Staten, Mikhail Khodak, Graham Neubig, and Ameet
  Talwalkar. Cross-modal fine-tuning: Align then refine. In International conference on machine
  learning (ICML), 2023.

Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.

Malliga Subramanian, Kogilavani Shanmugavadivel, and PS Nandhini. On fine-tuning deep learning
 models using transfer learning and hyper-parameters optimization for disease identification in
 maize leaves. Neural Computing and Applications, 34(16):13951–13968, 2022.

Chuanqi Tan, Fuchun Sun, Tao Kong, Wenchang Zhang, Chao Yang, and Chunfang Liu. A survey on
  deep transfer learning. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Artificial Neural
  Networks (ICANN), 2018.

Edna Chebet Too, Li Yujian, Sam Njuki, and Liu Yingchun. A comparative study of fine-tuning deep
  learning models for plant disease identification. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 161:
  272–279, 2019.

Joaquin Vanschoren, Jan N Van Rijn, Bernd Bischl, and Luis Torgo. Openml: networked science in
  machine learning. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 15(2):49–60, 2014.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems (NIPS), 2017.

Athanasios Voulodimos, Nikolaos Doulamis, Anastasios Doulamis, Eftychios Protopapadakis, et al.
  Deep learning for computer vision: A brief review. Computational intelligence and neuroscience,
  2018, 2018.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zifeng Wang and Jimeng Sun. Transtab: Learning transferable tabular transformers across tables. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (NeurIPS), 2022.
Yang Yang, De-Chuan Zhan, Ying Fan, Yuan Jiang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Deep learning for fixed
  model reuse. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2017.
Han-Jia Ye, De-Chuan Zhan, Yuan Jiang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Heterogeneous few-shot model rectifi-
  cation with semantic mapping. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
  43(11):3878–3891, 2021.
Weinan Zhang, Tianming Du, and Jun Wang. Deep learning over multi-field categorical data - - A
 case study on user response prediction. In Proceddings of the 38th European Conference on IR
 Research (ECIR), 2016.
Weinan Zhang, Jiarui Qin, Wei Guo, Ruiming Tang, and Xiuqiang He. Deep learning for click-through
 rate estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10584, 2021.
Zhenyu Zhang, Peng Zhao, Yuan Jiang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Learning with feature and distribution
  evolvable streams. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2020.
Xiangyu Zhao, Haochen Liu, Wenqi Fan, Hui Liu, Jiliang Tang, Chong Wang, Ming Chen, Xudong
  Zheng, Xiaobing Liu, and Xiwang Yang. Autoemb: Automated embedding dimensionality search
  in streaming recommendations. In IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), 2021.
Bingzhao Zhu, Xingjian Shi, Nick Erickson, Mu Li, George Karypis, and Mahsa Shoaran. Xtab:
  Cross-table pretraining for tabular transformers. In International conference on machine learning
  (ICML), 2023.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We highlight the significance of feature tokens when reusing a pre-trained deep tabular model from a
task with an overlapping feature set. Our proposed method, TAB T OKEN, focuses on improving the
quality of feature tokens and demonstrates strong performance in both cross-feature-set and standard
tabular data experiments. The Appendix consists of six sections:
   • Appendix A: We introduce the related work of TAB T OKEN.
   • Appendix B: We demonstrate that the feature tokenizer does not increase the model capacity,
     which emphasizes the importance of enhancing the quality of tokens.
   • Appendix C: We describe the architectures of several top-layer models in tabular deep learning,
     including MLP, ResNet, and Transformer.
   • Appendix D: We provide details on generating synthetic datasets and real-world datasets. We
     specify how to split the dataset for evaluation.
   • Appendix E: Additional experiments are presented, including comparisons with more variants
     and baselines. We extend our approach to more complex scenarios with different label spaces
     and non-overlapping features.
   • Appendix F: Implementation details of baseline methods and TAB T OKEN are provided.


A PPENDIX A         D ETAILED D ISCUSSIONS ON R ELATED M ETHODS

Standard Tabular Data Learning. Tabular data is a prevalent data format in numerous real-world ap-
plications, spanning click-through rate prediction (Richardson et al., 2007), fraud detection (Awoyemi
et al., 2017), and time-series forecasting (Ahmed et al., 2010). Traditional machine learning methods
for tabular data mainly focus on feature engineering and hand-crafted feature selection. Popular
algorithms encompass decision trees, random forests, and gradient boosting machines. Among them,
XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016), LightGBM (Ke et al., 2017), and CatBoost (Prokhorenkova et al.,
2018) are widely employed tree-based models that exhibit comparable performance for tabular data.
Deep learning models have shown promise in automatically learning feature representations from
raw data and have achieved competitive performance across diverse tabular data applications, such as
click-through rate prediction (Zhang et al., 2021) and time-series forecasting (Lim & Zohren, 2021).
Deep Tabular Data Learning. Recently, a large number of deep learning models for tabular data
have been developed (Cheng et al., 2016; Guo et al., 2017; Popov et al., 2020; Arik & Pfister,
2021; Katzir et al., 2021; Gorishniy et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Hollmann
et al., 2023). These models either imitate the tree structure or incorporate popular deep learning
components. They have demonstrated superior performance compared to traditional machine learning
methods, especially in sparse and high-dimensional feature spaces. However, deep learning models
for tabular data struggle to learn high-order feature interactions (Grinsztajn et al., 2022), which are
crucial in many tabular data applications, and require substantial amounts of training data. Boosting
methods (Chen & Guestrin, 2016; Ke et al., 2017; Prokhorenkova et al., 2018) can effectively capture
these interactions and are more robust to data limitations. While deep models may not surpass
tree-based models entirely on tabular data, they offer greater flexibility and can be customized for
complex and specific tasks, especially when faced with changing factors such as features and labels.
Transferring Tabular Models across Feature Spaces. Transferring knowledge from pre-trained
models across feature spaces can be challenging but also beneficial, as it reduces the need for extensive
data labeling and enables efficient knowledge reuse (Hou & Zhou, 2018; Zhang et al., 2020; Ye et al.,
2021; Hou et al., 2021; 2022). In real-world applications such as healthcare, there are numerous
medical diagnostic tables. These tables usually have some features in common such as blood type
and blood pressure. For rare diseases with limited data, knowledge transfer from other diagnostic
tables with overlapping features becomes beneficial. When feature space changes, language-based
methods assume there are semantic relationships between the descriptions of features (Wang & Sun,
2022; Dinh et al., 2022; Hegselmann et al., 2023), and rely on large-scale language models.
However, sufficient textual descriptions are not always the case in tabular data. Without the re-
quirement for language, Pseudo-Feature method (Levin et al., 2023) utilize pseudo-feature models
individually for each new feature, which is computationally expensive in our broader feature space
adaptation scenario. TabRet (Onishi et al., 2023) utilizes masked autoencoding to make transformer
work in downstream tasks. XTab (Zhu et al., 2023) is dedicated to enhancing the transferability of the
transformer (one type of the top-layer models), while we discover the untapped potential in improving
the feature tokens and aim to develop a tokenizer with stronger transferability. To transfer pre-trained


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


large language models to tabular tasks, ORCA (Shen et al., 2023) trains an embedder to align the
source and target distributions. Our approach, on the other hand, centers on how to directly transfer
the embedder (tokenizer). In contrast to prior work, our emphasis lies in enhancing the quality of
feature tokens and unlocking their transferability.


A PPENDIX B           T HE T OKENIZER D OES N OT I NCREASE T HE M ODEL C APACITY

Unlike directly handling input data with a deep neural network, the token-based deep models add
another embedding layer, which transforms the raw feature into a set of high-dimensional embeddings.
In particular, given a labeled tabular dataset D = {(xi , yi )}N
                                                               i=1 with N instances (rows in the table),
the feature tokenizer maps both categorical and numerical feature value xi,j to a k-dimensional
vector. One of the main motivations of the feature tokenizer is to replace a sparse feature (e.g., the
one-hot coding of a categorical feature) with a dense high-dimensional vector with rich semantic
meanings (Zhang et al., 2016; Guo et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021;
Almagor & Hoshen, 2022). However, in this section, we analyze the feature tokenizer and show that
they cannot increase the capacity of deep tabular models.
Following the same notation in the main text, we denote the j-th feature of the data as x:,j . Then we
take the classification task as an example and analyze both numerical and categorical features.
Numerical Features. If the j-th feature is numerical, then the j-th element of an instance xi is
xi,j ∈ R. When we classify the label of xi directly, we learn a classifier w0 ∈ R for xi,j , which
predicts xi,j with w0⊤ · xi,j . While based on the feature tokenizer, we allocate a learnable embedding
Ej ∈ R1×k for the feature x:,j , and transform xi,j with x̂i,j = xi,j · Ej ∈ R1×k . Based on the
tokenized numerical feature x̂i,j , the classifier becomes a vector w ∈ Rk , and the prediction works
as follows:
                                                                            ⊤
                       f (xi,j ) = w⊤ (xi,j · Ej )⊤ = (w⊤ Ej⊤ ) · xi,j = w′ · xi,j ,

           ⊤
where w′       = w⊤ Ej⊤ ∈ R. Therefore, it has the same effect as the original learning approach w0 .
Categorical Features. If the j-th feature is categorical with Kj choices, we rewrite xi,j in the
one-hot coding form, i.e., xi,j ∈ {0, 1}Kj ∈ RKj . Assume the classifier for the one-hot feature
is η0 ∈ RKj , which predicts xi,j with η0⊤ xi,j . The tokenizer for a categorical feature works as a
                                 Kj
lookup table. Given Ej = {ep }p=1     ∈ RKj ×k is the set of candidate tokens for the j-th feature, then
we have x̂i,j = x⊤ i,j Ej ∈ R
                              1×k
                                  , which selects the corresponding token based on the index of the
categorical feature value set. The classifier for the tokenized feature is η ∈ Rk and the prediction is:

                                                                                   ′⊤
      f (xi,j ) = η ⊤ (x⊤       ⊤   ⊤ ⊤
                                                ⊤      ⊤              ⊤

                        i,j Ej ) = η Ej xi,j = η e1 , η e2 , . . . , η eKj xi,j = η xi,j ,

         ⊤
where η ′ = η ⊤ e1 , η ⊤ e2 , . . . , η ⊤ eKj ∈ R1×Kj . Therefore, the representation ability of the

token-based model is the same as the original one η0 .
Summary. The feature tokenizer does not increase the model capacity. Training with feature tokens
cannot automatically associate the feature semantics with the tokens. Therefore, we incorporate the
feature semantics into the tokens with a contrastive regularization in TAB T OKEN, which makes the
learned tokens facilitate the reuse of tabular deep models across feature sets.


A PPENDIX C           T OP - LAYER M ODELS

Based on the transformed tokens, deep tabular models implement the classifier with various top-layer
models, e.g., MLP, ResNet, and Transformer. In this section, we formally describe the details of these
models, whose architectures mainly follow the designs in (Gorishniy et al., 2021). However, instead
of applying MLP and ResNet on raw features, we treat MLP and ResNet as the top-layer model upon
the feature tokenizer. It is notable that the output of the feature tokenizer is a set of vectors. The main
procedure is illustrated in Figure 8.


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Prediction                              Prediction
                                                                                                Linear
           Linear                            Dropout                                         Mean   ReLU
                                                        Add             The output is
         ReLU Dropout                   Linear                       a set of new vectors
           Linear                     ReLU   Dropout
                                        Linear
         ReLU Dropout                                                                        Layer Norm
           Linear                     Batch Norm                                                     Add
                                                                                    Linear
          (a) MLP                                (b) ResNet                     ReGLU Dropout
                                                                                    Linear
                                                                               Dropout               Add

       Instance token                                                            Multi-head
                                                                                 Attention
  Concatenating
                        Combination              Feature tokenizer
   or Averaging
                                      Instance 𝑥𝑖                                   (c) Transformer layer

Figure 8: The feature tokenizer and top-layer models. (a) The Multi-Layer Perceptron needs the
feature combination to process the input set of vectors. (b) The same to MLP, the Residual Network
needs the feature combination to utilize a feature tokenizer. (c) A set of vectors can feed into the
Transformer layer directly. The output is also a set of vectors, different from using a class token, we
take the average of these vectors to obtain the vector used for the final prediction.


C.1     MLP

Given a set of tokens, we transform them into a vector via token averaging or concatenating as
described in the main text. With a bit of abuse of notation, we denote the processed token as x, whose
dimension is k or dk when we average or concatenate the tokens, respectively. The MLP architecture
is designed as follows based on x:
                           MLP(x) = Linear(MLPBlock(. . . (MLPBlock(x))),
                        MLPBlock(x) = Dropout(ReLU(Linear(x))),
where Linear(·) is a fully connected layer, which performs a linear transformation on the input
data by applying a matrix multiplication followed by an optional bias addition. Dropout(·) is a
regularization technique, which works by randomly deactivating a certain percentage of neurons
during each training step. ReLU(·) is a simple and computationally efficient non-linear function that
introduces non-linearity into the networks.

C.2     R ES N ET

The same as MLP, we employ ResNet on the feature tokens, and the architecture is:
           ResNet(x) = Prediction (ResNetBlock (. . . (ResNetBlock (Linear(x))))) ,
      ResNetBlock(x) = x + Dropout(Linear(Dropout(ReLU(Linear(BatchNorm(x)))))),
        Prediction(x) = Linear (ReLU (BatchNorm (x))) ,
where BatchNorm(·) is a technique used in neural networks during training (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015).
BatchNorm(·) normalizes the activations of a specific layer by adjusting and scaling them based on
the statistics of the mini-batch.

C.3     T RANSFORMER

Different from MLP or ResNet, Transformer processes the set of tokens simultaneously, and the
output of Transformer is a set of tokens with the same form as the input one. Assume the input matrix
X is the set of k-dimensional vectors X ∈ Rd×k , the general prediction flow of Transformer-based
deep tabular model is:
        Transformer(X) = Prediction(TransformerLayer(. . . (TransformerLayer(X)))),
         Prediction(X) = Linear(ReLU(mean(X))),


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the Transformer layer is implemented as

 TransformerLayer(X) = LayerNorm(Residual(FFN, Residual(MultiheadAttention, X))),
 Residual(Module, X) = X + Dropout(Module(X)),
             FFN(X) = Linear(Dropout(ReGLU(Linear(X)))),

where LayerNorm(·) is a normalization layer that performs layer normalization on the input (Ba
et al., 2016). It computes the mean and standard deviation along specified axes and normalizes
the tensor using these statistics. It is an alternative to BatchNorm(·) and is commonly used in
Transformer where batch statistics are inappropriate. MultiheadAttention(·) is a key component of
Transformer-based architectures, allowing the model to attend to multiple parts of the input sequence
simultaneously and capture diverse patterns and relationships. ReGLU(·) is a GLU variant designed
for Transformer (Shazeer, 2020).


A PPENDIX D         DATA

In this section, we introduce the detailed properties of source datasets and describe how to construct
the synthetic datasets. We also introduce how to split real-world datasets into heterogeneous pre-
training and fine-tuning datasets.


D.1    DATA P REPROCESSING

For the sake of fair comparison, almost identical preprocessing steps are applied to all methods. In the
case of categorical datasets, missing values are treated as a new discrete choice within each feature.
As for numerical datasets, missing values are filled with the mean value of each respective feature.
Standardization, involving mean subtraction and scaling, is applied to normalize each numerical
dataset. To handle categorical features, encoding methods are employed to assist baselines that lack
direct support. In the case of TabPFN (Hollmann et al., 2023), an ordinal encoder is utilized to ensure
a limited quantity of encoded features for the method to work well on gpu. For other baselines,
one-hot encoding is employed when necessary.


D.2    S YNTHETIC DATASETS

We aim to construct a synthetic four-class classification dataset with semantically similar features and
random features. As described in the main text, the dataset consists of six features {x:,i }6i=1 , each
feature with four categorical choices. When constructing each sample in the dataset, the feature value
is as follows (p is the probability) :
   • x:,1 ∈ {A, B, C, D}, p = 0.25 is assigned to each choice.
   • x:,2 ∈ {E, F, G, H}, p = 0.25 is assigned to each choice.
   • x:,3 ∈ {A′ , B ′ , C ′ , D′ }, x:,3 = x:,1 with p = 0.8; random choices otherwise.
   • x:,4 ∈ {E ′ , F ′ , G′ , H ′ }, x:,4 = x:,2 with p = 0.8; random choices otherwise.
   • x:,5 and x:,6 are comletely random choices.
The label y ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} of a sample is assigned following the rules:
   • when x:,1 ∈ {C, D} and x:,2 ∈ {E, F }, y = 1 with p = 0.8; random choices otherwise.
   • when x:,1 ∈ {A, B} and x:,2 ∈ {G, H}, y = 2 with p = 0.8; random choices otherwise.
   • when x:,1 ∈ {A, B} and x:,2 ∈ {E, F }, y = 3 with p = 0.8; random choices otherwise.
   • when x:,1 ∈ {C, D} and x:,2 ∈ {G, H}, y = 4 with p = 0.8; random choices otherwise.
It is clearly shown in the rules of construction that, within 80% probability, x:,1 and x:,3 , x:,2 and
x:,4 have a one-to-one correspondence with the categorical choices, they are semantically similar
features, while x:,5 and x:,6 are random noise features. We expect the feature tokens of A′ to be close
to A, B ′ close to B, etc. Besides, we aim at identifying the random features x:,5 and x:,6 from the
feature tokens. As demonstrated in the main text, TAB T OKEN incorporates these semantics into the
feature tokens, fulfilling our aforementioned objectives.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Descriptions of full datasets. There are different feature types and task types. These full
datasets will be divided into pre-training datasets and fine-tuning datasets.

Properties     Eye      Colon      Clave    Cardio       Jannis        Htru       Breast   Elevators   Super   Volume
Feature type    num        cat     cat      num     num       num     cat     num        num        num
Feature num      26        18      16        11      54        8      29       18         81         53
Task type     multiclass binary multiclass binary multiclass binary binary regression regression regression
Size of full   10.9K      3.0K   10.8K 70.0K 83.7K 17.9K             3.9K    16.6K      21.3K      50.9K
Size of train   7.0K      1.8K    6.9K     44.8K 53.6K 11.5K         2.3K    10.6K      13.6K      32.8K
Size of val     1.8K      0.6K    1.7K     11.2K 13.4K 2.9K          0.8K     2.7K       3.4K       8.1K
Size of test    2.2K      0.6K    2.2K     14.0K 16.7K 3.6K          0.8K     3.3K       4.3K      10.0K
Source        OpenML Datasphere   UCI      Kaggle AutoML UCI Datasphere OpenML           UCI        UCI



Table 4: Descriptions of transferring datasets and fine-tuning datasets. We maintain an overlap of
approximately 50% between the overlapping features and the fine-tuning features, which corresponds
to the “medium” level among different overlapping ratios. “# Pre-training feature” denotes the
number of pre-training features.

Properties                Eye Colon Clave Cardio Jannis Htru Breast Elevators Super Volume
# Pre-training feature 17        13        11        7            36          6      20        12        54     35
# Fine-tuning feature 17         12        10        7            36          5      19        12        54     35
# Overlapping feature 8           7        5         3            38          3      10         6        27     17



D.3    R EAL - WORLD DATASETS AND EVALUATION SETUPS

To get datasets in different domains, the real-world datasets are from OpenML (Vanschoren et al.,
2014), UCI, AutoML, Kaggle, and Projectdatasphere. The descriptions are shown in Table 3.
We randomly sample 20% instances to construct the test set. The remaining 80% instances are used
for training. In the training set, we randomly hold out 20% of instances as the validation set. We split
the whole training set into two parts. The first part consists of 80% of instances, which are utilized as
pre-training dataset. The remaining instances are used for sampling few-shot downstream datasets.
Expect for standard tabular tasks, the validation set is only used in the pre-training stage for saving
the best checkpoint as the pre-training model.
To obtain a clearer explanation, consider a tabular dataset with nine features: f1 to f9. The upstream
dataset comprises features f1 to f6, while the downstream dataset includes features f4 to f9.
The details of transferring dataset are shown in Table 4.
(1) The number of shots is the sample size for each class. For instance, a 5-shot dataset for binary
classification consists of 5 × 2 samples. (2) The overlapping ratio is defined as the ratio between
the number of overlapping features and the total number of features used for fine-tuning. The
low, medium, and high overlapping ratios are shown in Table 5. In the main text, we investigate the
cases with different number of shots or different overlapping ratios.



A PPENDIX E          A DDITIONAL A NALYSES AND E XPERIMENTS

We analyze TAB T OKEN from various aspects. First, we investigate several possible implementations
of “Contrastive Token Regularization (CTR)”, and demonstrate that the simple contrastive form in
the main text works the best. Then in subsection E.3, we test the ability of TAB T OKEN when the
target data share the same feature space but different distributions with the pre-trained model. We
also explore the variant of TAB T OKEN when the target data have entirely different feature and label
spaces with the pre-trained model.


                                                         18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Different overlapping ratios of transferring datasets. (l: low, m: medium, h: high). The
overlapping ratios are calculated by dividing “# Overlapping feature” by “# Fine-tuning feature”.


    Properties                  Jannis (l)    Jannis (m)       Jannis (h)   Eye (l)    Eye (m)      Eye (h)
    # Pre-training feature           34            36              38          16          17          19
    # Fine-tuning feature            34            36              38          15          17          18
    # Overlapping feature            14            18              22           5           8          11
    Overlapping ratio (%)            41            50              69          33          47          61

Table 6: We investigate the ability of TAB TOKEN in standard tasks. We train deep models on the full pre-training
data. TAB T OKEN improves different deep models with either numerical or categorical features. (↑ ~ accuracy).

           Eye↑ Colon↑ Clave↑ Cardio↑ Jannis↑ Htru↑ Breast↑ Elevators↓ Super↓ Volume↓
  MLP 0.4633 0.6299 0.7345 0.7317 0.5210 0.9801 0.8855                        0.00191 13.4827 106.2745
 + CTR 0.4849 0.6222 0.7412 0.7333 0.5373 0.9823 0.8772                       0.00193 13.1038 105.2636
 ResNet 0.4670 0.6206 0.7310 0.7318 0.5124 0.9779 0.8771                      0.00192 13.8263 106.1255
 + CTR 0.4725 0.6222 0.7326 0.7340 0.5195 0.9803 0.8783                       0.00192 13.9194 105.8477
 Trans. 0.4638 0.6414 0.7375 0.7325 0.5052 0.9807 0.8686                      0.00191 13.4189 104.9273
 + CTR 0.4698 0.6448 0.7467 0.7366 0.5215 0.9813 0.8804                       0.00190 13.3295 104.0182


E.1    T OKEN M ATTERS IN I MPROVING D EEP M ODELS

We investigate whether the token-based deep model can be improved through CTR. We directly
evaluate the deep models in the full pre-training dataset. We use Optuna (Akiba et al., 2019) library
and search hyperparameters for 30 iterations on the validation set. Table 6 shows the mean results
over 10 random seeds. Different deep model architectures can achieve better prediction performance
by coupling with TAB T OKEN. TAB T OKEN enhances the discriminative ability of deep models in
standard tabular tasks. The results validate the potential of TAB T OKEN beyond transfer tasks.

E.2    A DDITIONAL A NALYSES AND C OMPARISONS

Visualization of feature tokens with vanilla training on bank-marketing dataset. As shown
in Figure 9, withour our CTR, the distribution of feature tokens is random.
Different Forms of Contrastive Token Regularization. In CTR, we aim to incorporate the semantics
of features into tokens. One main intuition is that the tokens with similar feature semantics should be
close while those tokens corresponding to different features may be far away from each other. Given
                                      t
a target dataset Dt = {(xti , yit )}N           t
                                    i=1 with N examples and dt features, the feature tokenizer h and
feature combination (averaging or concatenating) process instance xti to instance token Ti . Assume
there are C classes in total, we denote the class center belonging to the target label yi of instance xti
as Syi , while the class centers of different labels as Sj̸=yi . Recall that h is the feature tokenizer and
g is the top-layer model. The CTR is usually optimized with the following objective:
                                      t
                                  N
                                  X
                                     ℓ(g ◦ h(xti ), yit ) + βΩ {Ti }N

                              min                                   i=1 .
                               h,g
                                     i=1

Here are possible implementations of the token regularization Ω:
   • Vanilla CTR: the implementation that we used in TAB T OKEN, which minimizes the distance
     between an instance token with its target class center:

                                                                   Nt
                                                               1 X             2
                                ΩTabToken {Ti }N

                                               i=1           = t    ∥Ti − Syi ∥2 .
                                                              N i=1


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: The whole results in Table 1. †: TabPFN does not support regression tasks. ( ↑ ~ accuracy,
↓ ~ RMSE).
             Eye↑       Colon↑     Clave↑ Cardio↑ Jannis↑           Htru↑       Breast↑ Elevators↓ Super↓ Volume↓
SVM         0.3621      0.5921     0.3482     0.6036     0.3512     0.8376       0.8211      0.0088     33.9036 124.2391
             ± 0.0044   ± 0.0028   ± 0.0094   ± 0.0027   ± 0.0048   ± 0.0029      ± 0.0049   ± 0.0003    ± 1.0362   ± 1.3914
XGBoost     0.3699      0.5676     0.3506     0.5703     0.3222     0.8369       0.8453      0.0090     34.6605 123.9724
             ± 0.0035   ± 0.0074   ± 0.0027   ± 0.0047   ± 0.0063   ± 0.0028      ± 0.0092   ± 0.0002    ± 1.7548   ± 1.6470
FT-trans    0.3916      0.5792     0.3584     0.6064     0.3064     0.8252       0.8275      0.0081     31.3274 122.8319
             ± 0.0075   ± 0.0028   ± 0.0083   ± 0.0013   ± 0.0047   ± 0.0028      ± 0.0018   ± 0.0003    ± 0.9462   ± 1.0277
TabPFN†     0.3918      0.5809     0.3733     0.5965     0.3601     0.8371       0.7438        -           -          -
             ± 0.0064   ± 0.0082   ± 0.0016   ± 0.0037   ± 0.0045   ± 0.0027      ± 0.0029

SCARF       0.3371      0.6048     0.2144     0.5547     0.3523     0.8131       0.7063      0.0097     39.9343 124.5373
             ± 0.0125   ± 0.0152   ± 0.0127   ± 0.0094   ± 0.0081   ± 0.0058      ± 0.0083   ± 0.0004    ± 1.4749   ± 2.1749
TabRet      0.3477      0.4688     0.2393     0.4329     0.3545     0.8231       0.7252      0.0094     41.2537 126.4713
             ± 0.0017   ± 0.0048   ± 0.0082   ± 0.0038   ± 0.0037   ± 0.0037      ± 0.0085   ± 0.0002    ± 1.4772   ± 1,2734
XTab        0.3851      0.5964     0.3627     0.5856     0.2868     0.8363       0.8145      0.0077     38.5030 119.6656
             ± 0.0085   ± 0.0045   ± 0.0074   ± 0.0047   ± 0.0092   ± 0.0037      ± 0.0019   ± 0.0002    ± 1.7463   ± 0.8743
ORCA        0.3823      0.5876     0.3689     0.6042     0.3413     0.8421       0.8242      0.0082     37.9436 121.4952
             ± 0.0037   ± 0.0074   ± 0.0018   ± 0.0041   ± 0.0082   ± 0.0048      ± 0.0054   ± 0.0003    ± 2.1852   ± 1.2876

TAB T OKEN 0.3982       0.6074     0.3741     0.6229     0.3687     0.8459       0.8284      0.0074     30.9636 118.7280
             ± 0.0054   ± 0.0061   ± 0.0023   ± 0.0024   ± 0.0015   ± 0.0034      ± 0.0013   ± 0.0002    ± 1.5274   ± 1.0285


           Figure 9: Feature tokens with vanilla training on bank-marketing dataset.


   • Hardest: the objective is to push Ti away from the nearest center of the different classes, which
     aims at moving instances away from the centers of the most easily misclassified labels.
                                                               Nt
                                                       1 X                 2
                          Ωhardest {Ti }N

                                        i=1          = t    min({∥Ti − Sj ∥2 }j̸=yi ).
                                                      N i=1

   • All-hard: the objective is to push Ti away from all the centers of the different classes, which
     minimize the average distance between the instance and the centers of all other labels. (while in
     the binary classification task, “All-hard” and “Hardest” are the same).
                                                                            t
                                                                 N X
                                                          1      X              2
                        Ωall−hard {Ti }N

                                       i=1          = t              (∥Ti − Sj ∥2 ).
                                                     N · (C − 1) i=1
                                                                                j̸=yi


                                                          20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Test accuracy on fine-tuning datasets for different forms of contrastive token regularization.
We use TAB T OKEN with different token regularization techniques on the pre-training dataset. We
reuse the pre-trained feature tokenizer and apply token regularization during fine-tuning on the 5-shot
downstream dataset. TAB T OKEN is considered better overall, but in certain cases such as Jannis and
Htru, further improvement can be achieved by incorporating another token regularization that focuses
on pushing apart the centers of different classes. (↑ ~ accuracy, ↓ ~ RMSE).


                  Eye↑ Colon↑ Clave↑ Cardio↑ Jannis↑ Htru↑ Breast↑ Elevators↓ Super↓ Volume↓
Ωhardest         0.3803 0.5895    0.3577   0.6155   0.3462   0.8422   0.8121   0.0083   35.8297 121.2847
Ωall−hard        0.3792 0.5895    0.3596   0.6155   0.3483   0.8422   0.8121   0.0083   35.8297 121.2847
Ωsupcon          0.3904 0.5976    0.3701   0.6041   0.3204   0.8293   0.8233   0.0077   34.8366 119.9927
Ωtriplet         0.3993 0.5983    0.3675   0.6055   0.3049   0.8431   0.8178   0.0082   33.1726 120.8255
ΩTabToken      0.3982 0.6074 0.3741 0.6229 0.3687 0.8459 0.8284                0.0074   30.9636 118.7280
ΩTabToken+hard 0.3911 0.6032 0.3678 0.6204 0.3936 0.8625 0.8253                0.0076   32.1836 118.7364


Table 9: Test accuracy of different methods on the 5-shot fine-tuning datasets with the help of pre-
training. The construction of transferring datasets is shown in Table 4. Token loss allows tokens to
gain potential for prediction, but the transferability of feature tokens is not as strong as in TAB T OKEN.
OPID, by utilizing model ensemble, has achieved better performance on Jannis and Htru. TAB T OKEN
shows superior performance on most datasets. (↑ ~ accuracy, ↓ ~ RMSE).


                     Eye↑        Colon↑      Clave↑      Cardio↑        Jannis↑     Htru↑      Breast↑
 Token head         0.3863       0.6058      0.3683      0.6225         0.3675     0.8497      0.8059
 LR transfer        0.3661       0.6001      0.3561      0.5947         0.3552     0.6834      0.7817
 OPID               0.3903       0.5942      0.3689      0.6091         0.3754     0.8784      0.8143
 TAB T OKEN         0.3982       0.6074      0.3741      0.6229         0.3687     0.8459      0.8284


   • Supcon: the supervised contrastive loss (Khosla et al., 2020). The objective remains the same,
     which is to bring instances of the same label closer together while keeping instances of different
     labels far apart. However, this approach requires more calculations based on the distances of
     instance tokens. We use the default configuration of official implementation.
   • Triplet: the triplet contrastive loss with margin (Hermans et al., 2017). The objective is to ensure
     that the positive examples are closer to the anchor than the negative examples by at least the
     specified margin. We use the default configuration of official implementation.
   • TAB T OKEN + hard: the objective is the combination of CTR and All-hard:
                                                                                         
                                            Nt
                                        1  X
                                                ∥Ti − Syi ∥2 − 1
                                                                         X              2
                 ΩTabToken+hard = t                         2                 ∥Ti − Sj ∥2  .
                                       N i=1                    C −1
                                                                           j̸=yi


We use TAB T OKEN with different token regularization techniques. We reuse the pre-trained feature
tokenizer and apply token regularization during fine-tuning on the 5-shot downstream dataset. The
results in the Table 8 shows the test accuracy for downstream tasks with 5-shot. The same to
the evaluation in the main text, for each method and dataset, we train on 30 randomly sampled
few-shot subsets, reporting the performance averaged over 30 subsets and 10 random seeds. The
only difference in training is the type of token regularization. Although ΩTabToken is the simplest
objective, it allows the feature tokens of the pre-trained model to obtain better transferability.
Different Methods for Feature Overlapping. We compare baselines suitable for overlapping
features, the descriptions are as follows:
   • “Token loss” simultaneously train a linear classifier on the instance tokens during the training
     process of TAB T OKEN and incorporating its loss into the final loss instead of CTR, the quality
     of feature tokens is expected to be improved by direct predicting based on the tokens.


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 10: Test accuracy on the 5-shot fine-tuning datasets when the instance distributions are changed.
(SD: same distribution, DD: different distributions). We add Gaussian noise to pre-training datasets
to change the instance distributions. ∆ is the average absolute change in prediction accuracy for the
three methods when there is a distribution shift across five datasets. TAB T OKEN can maintain its
transferability and significantly outperform the other two transfer methods.


                                          Eye      Cardio      Jannis      Htru        ∆
                 SCARF (SD)              0.3371    0.5547     0.3523     0.5938
                                                                                    0.0288
                 SCARF (DD)              0.3561    0.5320     0.3547     0.4958
                 TabRet(SD)              0.3477    0.4329     0.3545     0.6305
                                                                                    0.0484
                 TabRet (DD)             0.3661    0.5063     0.3189     0.5175
                 TAB T OKEN (SD)         0.3982    0.6229     0.3678     0.8459
                                                                                    0.0037
                 TAB T OKEN (DD)         0.3989    0.6189     0.3629     0.8479


   • In “LR transfer”, the logistic regression classifier obtained from the pre-training set is directly
     used to initialize the fine-tuning classifier with the overlapping part. For features that are unseen
     in the fine-tuning phase, their corresponding weights are initialized to zero.
   • In “OPID” (Hou & Zhou, 2018), during the pre-training phase, a sub-classifier is jointly trained
     on overlapping features, and the output of this sub-classifier is treated as knowledge from
     the pre-training set. This knowledge, in the form of new features, is concatenated with the
     fine-tuning dataset. During the fine-tuning phase, the sub-classifier and the new classifier are
     jointly trained, and the final prediction is the weighted sum of their predictions.
The results for these three baselines are in Table 9. Although OPID shows advantages in two datasets,
when pre-training, it need the information about which features will be overlapping features in
downstream task. While all features are treated equally during pre-training in TAB T OKEN. Besides,
OPID benefits from the ensemble of classifiers.

E.3    E XTENSION TO M ORE C OMPLEX S CENARIOS

Different Instance Distributions. To explore the scenario where the feature space is the same, but
the pre-training instance distribution differs from the fine-tuning distribution, we first split the full
training set into two halves. In the first part, we construct the pre-training dataset by adding Gaussian
noise. The standard deviation of noise is 10% of the feature’s standard deviation. In the second part,
we extract 30 5-shot sub-datasets as downstream tasks. To facilitate the addition of Gaussian noise,
we conduct experiments on numerical datasets. The results are in Table 10. TAB T OKEN is robust to
the deviation of instance distributions, achieving the least changes in prediction performance.
Different Feature and Label Space. We explored transferring scenarios where the pre-training
dataset and fine-tuning dataset are completely different. We use CTR to pre-train Transformer on
Jannis, which owns a large number of features. We expect the downstream task to select feature tokens
from these completely non-overlapping but semantically meaningful tokens using a re-weighting
mechanism. By incorporating n learnable new feature tokens {Ejnew }nj=1 and a matching layer
W ∈ Rdt ×(d+n) , we adapt TAB T OKEN for scenarios with non-overlapping features.
We concatenate the new  tokens with d pre-trained feature tokens, constructing a “token library”
 {Ejpre }dj=1 ∪ {Ejnew }nj=1 ∈ R(d+n)×k . The expression for re-weighting based TAB T OKEN is as
follows:
                        {Ejfine }dj=1 = W {Ejpre }dj=1 ∪ {Ejnew }nj=1 ∈ Rdt ×k .
                                   t


where {Ejfine }dj=1
                 t
                    is the feature tokens for fine-tuning feature tokenizer h, {Ejpre }dj=1 is the pre-trained
feature tokens of h0 . W is the re-weighting matrix for selecting feature tokens.
Overlapping feature transfer methods like TabRet may not be suitable for scenarios where there are
non-overlapping features. TAB T OKEN constructs a feature tokenizer by re-weighting the feature
tokens in the pre-training set. We expect to obtain more useful feature tokens by training fewer
parameters. Table 11 reports the performance with different number of fine-tuning features. Despite


                                                     22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 11: Test accuracy for different feature and label space. We conduct experiments on 5-shot
Eye datasets with different feature numbers (shown in Table 5). We pre-train feature tokenizer with
Transformer on full Jannis, fine-tuning on 20 randomly sampled few-shot subsets. re-weighting based
TAB T OKEN can benefit from pre-trained feature tokens, especially when the number of fine-tuning
features is not large.


                                            Eye (l)     Eye (m)   Eye (h)
                             XGBoost        0.3719       0.3699    0.3909
                             CatBoost       0.3759       0.3791    0.3974
                             FT-trans       0.3857       0.3916    0.3922
                             TabPFN         0.3885       0.3918    0.4081
                             TAB T OKEN     0.3923       0.3977    0.3974

Table 12: Test accuracy for different tuning modules. We pre-train Transformer on pre-training
datasets in Table 4. When we fix certain part of the pre-trained Transformer and fine-tune, the
pre-training model have lower transferring effect than TAB T OKEN. The frozen pre-trained top-layer
model is not suitable for overlapping transfer scenarios. Feature tokens with semantics should be
used for transfer. The best choice is to directly fine-tune the entire top-layer model as TAB T OKEN.

                                                        Eye    Cardio
                                 Tune last layer      0.3907   0.6155
                                 Tune attention       0.3894   0.6217
                                 Tune linear          0.3886   0.6153
                                 Fix top-layer        0.3770   0.5983
                                 TAB T OKEN           0.3982   0.6229


the disparity between the pre-training and the fine-tuning dataset, re-weighting is a token search-like
mechanism to enable the target task to benefit from the heterogeneous pre-trained feature tokens.
Summary. Among various contrastive token regularizations, simple CTR has demonstrated superior
performance in transferring tasks. Compared to other methods, TAB T OKEN is capable of obtaining
easily transferable feature tokens during the pre-training phase. TAB T OKEN maintains its transfer-
ability even when there are differences in instance distributions. Re-weighting based TAB T OKEN
proves to be effective when there is a non-overlapping feature set.

E.4   A BLATION STUDY

We first adjust the modules tuned during the transfer process. Then, we conduct an ablation study
based on different pre-training data sizes, model size, and token dimensions. Besides, We explore the
combination of TAB T OKEN and self-supervised loss.
Tuning Modules. In TAB T OKEN, we do not fix the top-layer model when fine-tuning, while tuning
all the Transformer, which indicates that feature tokens matter. We compare various tuning choices.
When we train the fine-tuning tokenizer using TAB T OKEN, we tune the last TransformerLayer(·),
tune the MultiheadAttention(·), and tune the Linear(·) in Transformer layer while keeping other
modules in Transformer frozen (the final prediction linear head is trainable). Besides, we conduct
experiments on tuning the entire fine-tuning tokenizer with fixed top-layer model. The results in
Table 12 show that token matters in transferring, we need to tune the entire top-layer model.
Different Model Size. We conducted an ablation study with different model sizes on four datasets,
altering the number of layers in the transformer during pre-training. We keep the fine-tuning model’s
number of layers fixed at 3. We use the same setting as the experiments in Table 1. The experimental
results in Table 13 indicate that when the pre-trained model size is relatively small (the number of
layers is less than 3), the effectiveness of transfer is impacted. When the number of layers is three or
more, the transfer capability of the tokenizer is challenging to further enhance. The impact of model


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 13: Test accuracy for different model size. We use different number of layers for pre-training
Transformer.

                                                   Eye     Jannis     Cardio      Htru
                             layer num = 1    38.66         36.20      62.26     84.45
                             layer num = 2    38.56         36.45      62.06     84.55
                             layer num = 3    39.28         36.87      62.29     84.59
                             layer num = 4    39.11         36.70      63.23     84.80
                             layer num = 5    39.59         36.49      63.08     84.33

Table 14: Test accuracy for self-supervised token regularization. We pre-train feature tokenizer with
self-supervised loss instead of CTR.

                                             Eye     Jannis      Cardio        Htru
                               cr = 0.1   38.10          31.46      62.40   82.35
                               cr = 0.2   38.35          34.11      62.07   83.30
                               cr = 0.3   38.22          35.59      61.84   83.55
                               CTR        39.28          36.87      62.29   84.59


size may be dependent on the difficulty of the task. More complex tasks require larger model sizes to
achieve sufficient transferability.
Self-supervised Pre-training without Annotations. For each mini-batch of examples from the
unlabeled training data, we generate a corrupted version for each example. We uniformly sample
some fraction (corrupted ratio) of the features and replace each of those features with a random draw
from that feature’s empirical marginal distribution. We use normal distribution for numerical features.
We then pass both example and corrupted example through the tokenizer and average their respective
outputs. Finally, we L2-normalize the outputs and compute the InfoNCE loss instead of our CTR.
We set the corruption ratio (cr) to 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3. Experimental results in Table 14 indicate that
TAB T OKEN with this self-supervised loss struggles to confer transferability to the model on the
majority of datasets. We use the same setting as the experiments in Table 1.
Tuning Token Dimension and Pre-training Size. In our other experiments, we use a default token
dimension of 64. Now, we will conduct experiments with token dimensions of 16, 32, 64, 128, and
256. Conventional transfer methods typically require a large amount of pre-training data. In our study,
we randomly sample 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 100% of the pre-training dataset to investigate the
impact of data volume on the transfer performance of TAB T OKEN. The results in Table 15 show that
the larger dimension of tokens is not always better. TAB T OKEN exhibits stable transfer performance
even when the data volume decreases. TAB T OKEN does not need a large amount of pre-training data
to achieve the transfer effect.
Complex Datasets. We conducted experiments on two larger and more complex datasets. We collect
scene recognition dataset (300 features, binary classification) and sylva agnostic dataset (217 features,
binary classification) from OpenML. We use the same setting as the experiments in Table 1. The
experimental results in Table 16 indicate that TAB T OKEN continues to be an advantageous solution
among deep models on complex datasets. XGBoost remains competitive on complex datasets.


A PPENDIX F             I MPLEMENTATION

In this section, we present the experimental configurations employed for the baselines and TAB T O -
KEN . Given the absence of a validation dataset in the downstream few-shot task, we adopt default
configurations to ensure a fair comparison. For standard tabular task, we follow the hyper-parameter
space in (Gorishniy et al., 2021). All hyper-parameters are selected by Optuna library1 with Bayesian

   1
       https://optuna.org/


                                                          24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 15: Test accuracy for different token dimension and pre-training size. The transferring task
is the same to Table 12. Left: The influence of token dimension. We change the dimension of
feature tokens in tokenizer. We find that increasing the dimension of tokens does not lead to better
transfer effect. Right: The transferring results with different size of pre-training dataset. We sample
subsets from the pre-training dataset based on different proportions. TAB T OKEN does not need a
large amount of pre-training data to achieve the transfer effect.


                      Eye      Cardio                                      Eye      Cardio
             16     0.3909     0.5859                           20%       0.3836    0.6205
             32     0.3999     0.6258                           40%       0.3878    0.6207
             64     0.3982     0.6229                           60%       0.3992    0.6179
             128    0.3977     0.6182                           80%       0.3962    0.6185
             256    0.3949     0.6060                           100%      0.3982    0.6229

Table 16: Test accuracy for complex datasets with more than 200 features. Due to GPU memory
constraints, we set token dimension to 16 and configure the batch size as 256.

                                        XGBoost        XTab   TabToken
                              Scene       56.24      42.97      53.87
                              Sylva       68.15      24.59      72.92


optimization over 30 trials. The best hyper-parameters are used and the average accuracy over 10
different random seeds is calculated.
MLP and ResNet. We use three-layer MLP and set dropout to 0.2. The feature token size is set to 64
for MLP, ResNet, and Transformer. The default configuration of ResNet is in the left of Table 17.
Transformer. The right tabular of Table 17 describes the configuration of FT-trans (Gorishniy et al.,
2021) and Transformer layer in TAB T OKEN.
TabPFN. We use the official implementation: https://github.com/automl/TabPFN and use the default
configuration.
SCARF and TabRet. We use the default configutation in https://github.com/pfnet-research/tabret,
which is also the official implementation of TabRet (Onishi et al., 2023). To ensure a fair comparison,
we set the number of pre-training epochs to 200, patience to 20, fine-tuning epochs to 20. We
modified the implementations to prevent the use of the validation set during the fine-tuning process.
XTab. We reuse the checkpoint with the highest number of training epochs from the official
implementation of XTab (Zhu et al., 2023): https://github.com/BingzhaoZhu/XTab. We perform
evaluations on the target datasets using XTab’s light fine-tuning approach.
ORCA. We follow the configurations of ORCA (Shen et al., 2023) for OpenML11 datasets: text for
embedder_dataset and roberta for pre-training model. (https://github.com/sjunhongshen/ORCA).
TAB T OKEN. The configuration of feature tokenizer and top-layer models are described in Table 17.
During pre-training, the learning rate is set to 1e-3, the batch size is set to 1024. During fine-tuning,
the learning rate is set to 5e-4. We fine-tuning models in 10 epochs. We set β = 1.0 for both
pre-training and fine-tuning.


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 17: The parameters of ResNet and Transformer for top-layer models. Left: Default con-
figuration used for ResNet. Right: Default configuration used for Tranformer which is also the
configuration for implementing FT-trans.


                                                           Layer count               3
      Layer count               3
                                                       Feature token size           64
   Feature token size           64
                                                           Token bias              False
      Token bias              False
                                                           Head count                8
       Layer size              168
                                                  Activation & FFN size factor   ReGLU, 4/3
     Hidden factor             2.9
                                                       Attention dropout           0.08
    Hidden dropout             0.5
                                                          FFN dropout               0.3
   Residual dropout            0.0
                                                        Residual dropout            0.1
       Activation             ReLU
                                                          Initialization         Kaiming
    Normalization          BatchNorm
                                                            Optimizer             AdamW
        Optimizer           AdamW
                                                     Pre-train Learning rate       1e-3
 Pre-train Learning rate     1e-3
                                                    Fine-Tune Learning rate        5e-4
      Weight decay           2e-4
                                                          Weight decay             2e-4


                                             26
