Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EVERAGING L OW-R ANK AND S PARSE
R ECURRENT C ONNECTIVITY FOR ROBUST
C LOSED -L OOP C ONTROL
    Neehal Tumma1 Mathias Lechner2 Noel Loo2 Ramin Hasani2 Daniela Rus2
 1
    Harvard University 2 MIT CSAIL



                                            A BSTRACT

         Developing autonomous agents that can interact with changing environments is an
         open challenge in machine learning. Robustness is particularly important in these
         settings as agents are often fit offline on expert demonstrations but deployed online
         where they must generalize to the closed feedback loop within the environment.
         In this work, we explore the application of recurrent neural networks to tasks of
         this nature and understand how a parameterization of their recurrent connectivity
         influences robustness in closed-loop settings. Specifically, we represent the recur-
         rent connectivity as a function of rank and sparsity and show both theoretically and
         empirically that modulating these two variables has desirable effects on network
         dynamics. The proposed low-rank, sparse connectivity induces an interpretable
         prior on the network that proves to be most amenable for a class of models known
         as closed-form continuous-time neural networks (CfCs). We find that CfCs with
         fewer parameters can outperform their full-rank, fully-connected counterparts in
         the online setting under distribution shift. This yields memory-efficient and ro-
         bust agents while opening a new perspective on how we can modulate network
         dynamics through connectivity.


1     I NTRODUCTION

Building models that are robust under natural distribution shift has long been a goal in artificial
intelligence (Taori et al., 2020). Existing techniques have sought to address this challenge through
various approaches, including domain adaptation (Farahani et al., 2020), transfer learning (Zhuang
et al., 2019) and data augmentation (Perez & Wang, 2017). However, these techniques come with
drawbacks: domain adaptation and transfer learning can be computationally expensive, and data
augmentation often suffers from robustness gains that are not uniform across corruption types (Ford
et al., 2019). More generally, machine learning systems tend to perform poorly under distribution
shift because approaches like these only serve to ameliorate a problem that is rooted in the model
architecture itself.
Natural learning systems serve to address this problem by interacting with their environment to
understand the world. They make use of biologically-inspired frameworks that account for distri-
bution shifts by modeling temporal structure (Hasani et al., 2020b). These models are particularly
well-suited in a paradigm where they are fit on offline, passive datasets using imitation learning, but
deployed in closed-loop, active testing settings (de Haan et al., 2019). This domain is commonly re-
ferred to as the open-loop to closed-loop causality gap (Lechner et al., 2022) in which generalization
requires the agent to learn a coherent representation of its world (Lechner et al., 2020). One par-
ticularly effective framework known as closed-form continuous-time neural networks (CfCs) were
shown to outperform many state-of-the-art recurrent models in closed-loop settings (Hasani et al.,
2021). These models leverage a sparse wiring structure induced at initialization, yielding compact
and interpretable networks (Chahine et al., 2023). However, the reason as to why sparse connectivity
is useful in closed-loop systems is poorly understood. In this work, we will address this question by
proposing and analyzing an interpretable parameterization of connectivity in CfCs.
To do so, we turn to another class of models: low-rank recurrent neural networks (low-rank RNNs).
A low-rank RNN is a network whose recurrent connectivity matrix is low-rank. Deriving inspiration


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from neural activity in the brain, these networks have provably low-dimensional patterns of activity
which makes them successful in many simple neuroscience-based tasks (Mastrogiuseppe & Ostojic,
2018). In this paper, we leverage ideas from previous work on CfCs and low-rank RNNs in order
to devise a novel parameterization of recurrent connectivity that improves robustness in closed-loop
settings and offers interpretable measures for the network dynamics it incites. In doing so, we show
the following:

       • Parameterizing recurrent connectivity as a function of rank and sparsity yields provable and
         interpretable network dynamics (Section 3.1)
       • Low-rank and sparse recurrent neural networks can outperform their full-rank, fully-
         connected counterparts under distribution shift in closed-loop environments (Section 4.1)
       • Pruning by inducing sparsity and pruning by enforcing a low-rank structure are distinct in
         the types of network dynamics each induces (Section 4.3)
       • CfCs are more amenable to a low-rank and sparse connectivity prior than other canonical
         recurrent architectures such as LSTMs (Section 4.4)

2   R ELATED WORK
In this section, we describe previous works that are closely related to the core findings of the paper.
Robustness in closed-loop settings. A class of continuous-time recurrent models known as liquid
neural networks (Hasani et al., 2020a) have been shown to achieve state-of-the-art performance un-
der distribution shift by explicitly accounting for external interventions to environment conditions.
Liquid neural networks are a prime example of natural learning systems that learn robust, and prov-
ably causal, representations (Vorbach et al., 2021). CfCs are a specific instance of liquid neural
networks that can leverage sparse connectivity to learn robust representations in the closed-loop
causality gap setting.
Outside of modifying the model itself, other approaches to
training robust models under an imitation learning frame-
work include augmentation strategies, human interven-
tions (Ross et al., 2010), goal-conditioning (Codevilla
et al., 2017), reward conditioning (Srivastava et al., 2019),
task-embedding (James et al., 2018) and meta-learning
(Finn et al., 2017). These advances fail to consider the
structure of the underlying policy; in contrast, liquid
neural networks improve the robustness of the decision-
making process in autonomous agents, leading to better
generalization under the same training distribution (Vor-
bach et al., 2021).
Relating connectivity and network dynamics. A long-
standing goal in computational neuroscience is to under-
stand the relationship between structure and function in
the brain (Sporns, 2013). We can ask the analogous ques-
tion in the context of artificial neural networks: what role
does model connectivity at initialization play in learned
network dynamics? Amongst recurrent neural networks,
echo state networks (Goodfellow et al., 2016) present one Figure 1: Open-loop systems re-
example of a model that induces static sparsity in order ceive ground-truth observations x .
                                                                                                 i
to modulate the complexity of dynamics along the recur- Closed-loop systems receive observa-
rent dimension. However, unlike in our case, echo state tions x (a ) that are a function of the
                                                                   i i−1
networks fix their recurrent connectivity during training. previous actions the agent takes. There
Other works have found that sparse networks can yield is no external feedback to correct the
provably more robust models (Guo et al., 2018) that gen- agent in the closed-loop setting.
eralize across many tasks (Chen et al., 2022) outside the
recurrent setting. With respect to modulating network rank, the advent of the low-rank RNN frame-
work (Mastrogiuseppe & Ostojic, 2018) is one of the first attempts at explicitly modeling the low-
dimensional dynamics of the brain. Some follow-ups on this work include examining how low-rank


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


connectivity arises in full-rank settings (Schuessler et al., 2020) and an analysis of how some tasks
are more amenable to low-rank connectivity than others (Dubreuil, 2022). Our work borrows ap-
proaches and intuition from many of these prior studies, but is distinct with respect to the proposed
connectivity, analysis of network dynamics and task setting.
Pruning at initialization. Neural network pruning typically either removes connections in a costly
iterative training-retraining paradigm (Frankle & Carbin, 2018) or modifies the objective function to
promote sparsity (Goodfellow et al., 2016) which can lead to difficulties in optimization. Recently,
pruning at initialization has emerged as an approach to resolve these issues. Pruning at initialization
attempts to take a randomly initialized network and remove weights before training (Wang et al.,
2021). Various approaches include using connectivity sensitivity (Lee et al., 2018), maintaining
dynamical isometry (Lee et al., 2019) and training on supermasks (Ramanujan et al., 2019). Gener-
ally, these techniques outperform sparsity induced randomly at initialization. Another approach to
pruning is using rank decomposition. One example is low-rank matrix factorization, which is good
at reducing size but at the cost of performance (Sainath et al., 2013). The most effective low-rank
compression techniques usually leverage a low-rank approximation on the full-rank matrix either
during or after training (Xu et al., 2020). In contrast, in this work, we propose a parameterization of
connectivity that randomly induces sparsity and leverages a low-rank decomposition of the recurrent
weights at initialization – the most straightforward and least costly form of pruning.
Alternative RNN parameterizations. Existing works proposed other recurrent architectures such
as Lipschitz RNNs (Erichson et al., 2021), antisymmetric RNNs (Chang et al., 2019) and Cay-
ley RNNs (Helfrich et al., 2018) which, like us, propose alternative parameterizations of recurrent
connectivity. However, unlike our study, these works introduce changes to the underlying network
architecture, whereas our work focuses on the applications of low-rank and sparse recurrent connec-
tivity in more canonical recurrent networks. This is in line with previous works in the closed-loop
causality gap setting (Chahine et al., 2023) which also restrict the scope of their models as such.

3     PARAMETERIZATION OF CONNECTIVITY
Consider a standard RNN whose input is denoted by xt ∈ Rn and hidden state is given by ht ∈ Rh
for time step t, hidden size h and input size n. Then the functional form of the RNN is given by

                               ht = tanh(Wrec ht−1 + Winp xt + b)                                   (1)

such that Wrec ∈ Rh×h denotes the recurrent weights, Winp ∈ Rn×h denotes the input weights
and b denotes the bias. We now propose an alternative parameterization of connectivity for the re-
current weights. Consider a singular value decomposition of Wrec given by Wrec = U ΣV T . The
canonical rank r approximation of Wrec is Ur Σr VrT such that Σr consists of the top-r singular
values and Ur and VrT consist of the corresponding singular vectors. Using this low-rank approxi-
mation, we can construct the following parameterization of the recurrent weights for a given rank r
and sparsity level s:

                                Wrec (r, s) = W1 (r)W2 (r) ⊙ M (s)                                  (2)

where W1 = Ur (Σr )1/2 , W2 = (Σr )1/2 VrT and M ∈ F2 is a random binary mask such that
each entry Mij ∼ 1 − Bernoulli(s). This low-rank and sparse parameterization of Wrec is a
generalization of the parameterization studied in Herbert & Ostojic (2022) to recurrent connectivity
of arbitrary rank and trainable weights W1 , W2 as opposed to restricting ourselves to the setting of
rank-1 matrices and fixed weights in which dynamical analysis is more tractable, but the network is
constrained in expressivity. Note that the random mask M is fixed throughout training.

3.1   N ETWORK DYNAMICS AT INITIALIZATION

We propose this parameterization of recurrent connectivity as it allows us to modulate aspects of the
network that instill an inductive bias, which proves to be beneficial for performance in the closed-
loop setting, particularly under distribution shift. We care about three measures of Wrec (r, s) in
particular: the spectral radius, the spectral norm and the rate of decay of the singular value spectrum.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Figure 2: Parameterization of recurrent connectivity as a function of rank and sparsity.


The spectral radius λmax of Wrec (r, s) is widely accepted as a proxy for the rate at which the gradi-
ent evolves backwards in time (Pascanu et al., 2012). Namely, if λmax < 1, an RNN has a vanishing
gradient (refer to A.5.1 for details). In many time series applications, having a constant error flow
is a desirable property, as arbitrary data sequences may have long-term relations. However, in the
case of many closed-loop systems, learning long-term dependencies can be detrimental in the on-
line setting due to the short-term causality inherent to the task (Lechner et al., 2020). To put this
into context, in this work we consider agents learning to play games in various Arcade Learning
Environments (ALEs). Agents that perform well in ALEs often use frame stacking (Horgan et al.,
2018a) which enforces a strict short-horizon temporal prior by leveraging a look-back window of
only a few input frames. Hence, networks like LSTMs or GRUs may capture spurious long-term
dependencies and thus learn inadequate models. In contrast, the vanishing of gradients that tends to
be more pronounced in RNNs counterintuitively enhances the performance of the agent, as it places
a short-horizon prior on the temporal attention span of the network.
We will motivate the importance of the singular values in the distribution shift setting. Consider an
SVD on the recurrent weights given by Wrec (r, s) = U ΣV T . Furthermore, consider a perturbation
e sampled uniformly at random from the set of norm-1 vectors. If we apply this perturbation to the
hidden state ht , then to measure robustness we want to quantify the deviation between Wrec (r, s)ht
and Wrec (r, s)(ht + e). This is given by Wrec (r, s)e = U ΣV T e. Note that both U and V T
are unitary matrices and thus do not affect the magnitude of e. This means that Σ captures the
nature of the transformation on e. The two relevant aspects of the transformation are its magnitude
and direction. The spectral norm, the maximum singular value, measures the former (i.e. smaller
spectral norm implies better robustness). To quantify the latter, we examine the rate at which the
singular values decay. This provides a proxy for the effective number of directions e is expanded in
(i.e. faster decay implies better robustness). For details on this argument, refer to A.5.2.
Now that we have motivated the spectral properties of Wrec (r, s), we next aim to understand how
they change as a function of rank and sparsity. We consider two random initialization schemes for
Wrec (r, s): Glorot uniform spectral initialization (GU-spec) and orthogonal spectral initialization
(ortho-spec). To thoroughly motivate the proposed parameterization, we provide theoretical proof
of the relationships between rank/sparsity and spectral radius/spectral norm for both initialization
schemes where possible. For the cases we do not prove, we provide an empirical analysis instead.
Theorem 1. Given recurrent weights with parametrization shown in Equation (2) and initialization
scheme specified in parentheses, we prove the following:

       • The spectral radius of Wrec (r, s) decreases as a function of s (GU-spec)
       • The spectral radius of Wrec (r, s) increases as a function of r (ortho-spec)
       • The spectral norm of Wrec (r, s) decreases as a function of s (GU-spec)
       • The spectral norm of Wrec (r, s) is constant as a function of r (ortho-spec, GU-spec)

For proofs of the above properties and an empirical analysis for the unproven cases (which follow
the same trends as the proven cases), refer to A.6. And since our theoretical arguments do not readily
extend to the full singular value spectrum, we provide an empirical analysis as a function of rank and
sparsity for this as well (A.7) which shows that the rate of singular value spectrum decay increases
as a function of rank and decreases as a function of sparsity.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Online performance of recurrent networks under different ranks and sparsities in Seaquest
environment. For offline performance, refer to A.9. a) In-distribution rewards in the online, closed-
loop setting normalized by the rewards obtained by the expert in-distribution. b) Rewards averaged
across 5 distribution shifts, normalized by the rewards obtained by the expert under distribution shift.


4     E XPERIMENTS
Experimental setup. We study the offline-online generalization gap of various recurrent architec-
tures parameterized by low-rank, sparse connectivity under an imitation learning framework. In par-
ticular, we measure the performance of our models in the Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare
et al., 2012) and MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012). For ALEs, we run experiments in the Seaquest and
Alien environments and for MuJoCo we explore the HalfCheetah environment. For each environ-
ment, we train a deep-Q network to generate expert trajectories that we then use to fit our recurrent
networks in an offline setting. We evaluate the recurrent networks online, closed-loop when de-
ployed into the environment, both in-distribution and under distribution shift. For more details on
the experimental framework, refer to A.11.
Models. We examine the following recurrent architectures: RNNs, LSTMs, GRUs, CNNs and
CfCs. RNNs, LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and GRUs (Cho et al., 2014) refer to
their canonical implementations. CNNs serve to address whether supervision along the recurrent
dimension is even necessary. CfCs (Hasani et al., 2021) are a modified version of an RNN that
admit the following functional form:


    h(t) = σ(F (ht−1 , xt , θF )) ⊙ G(ht−1 , xt , θG ) + [1 − σ(F (ht−1 , xt , θf )] ⊙ H(ht−1 , xt , θH )

Here, H and G are vanilla RNNs and F can be interpreted as an adaptive gating mechanism that
interpolates between the state-space trajectories of H and G on a per-element basis in the hidden
vector h(t) (refer to A.4 for details). Finally, recall in Section 3.1 that we proposed a low-rank,
sparse parameterization of connectivity Wrec (r, s) for the recurrent weights in a vanilla RNN. We
generalize this parameterization to the other recurrent architectures by simply parameterizing all
recurrent weights in the network in the form of Wrec (r, s). For specifics, refer to A.11.

4.1     P ERFORMANCE IN CLOSED - LOOP SETTINGS

We first explore the impact of our proposed connectivity parameterization for various ranks r and
sparsities s in the Seaquest environment in the online, in-distribution setting. We observe that the
best performing models in-distribution tend to be low-sparsity, high-rank CfCs and LSTMs (Figure
3a). GRUs, on the other hand, tend to perform poorly for most (r, s) which aligns with previous work
which also shows that GRUs are not particularly well-suited for closed-loop settings (Chahine et al.,
2023). Due to the poor performance of GRUs relative to LSTMs, we will restrict most of our dis-
cussion and analysis to CfCs, LSTMs and RNNs. The most notable finding from the in-distribution
results is observed in the high-sparsity models; in particular, we find that LSTMs tend to perform


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: a) Spectral radius of recurrent weights Wrec (r, s) in trained CfC and LSTM networks
across ranks and sparsities (±1 SE). b) Frobenius norm of recurrent gradients Gt as a function of
time (±1 SE). Note that the norms are plotted in log space and translated to decay from 0 to enable
easier comparison. For details on the computation, refer to A.11.


much better than CfCs at high sparsities. Analogously, RNNs, which in general tend to perform
worse than CfCs, show similarly worse performance at high sparsities relative to LSTMs. We offer
intuition for these findings in Section 4.2 where we explore the relationship between sparsity and
the recurrent memory horizon of the network.
Under distribution shift, we find that the best performing models are low-rank, low-sparsity CfCs.
More generally, across all recurrent architectures, we find that the low-rank models tend to perform
on par with, and in many cases actually outperform, higher rank ones. This demonstrates that
we can construct models with fewer parameters at initialization yet still learn more robust models.
Interestingly, however, we find that the means through which we prune at initialization matters: in
particular for high-sparsity models, we do not achieve the same robustness that we observe in low-
rank ones. We will provide justification for the apparent disparity between pruning by increasing
sparsity and pruning by decreasing rank in Section 4.3. For analogous results in the Alien and
HalfCheetah environments, refer to A.9.

4.2   M ODULATING R ECURRENT MEMORY

Here, we aim to gain intuition for the results we observed in the online, in-distribution setting and
in particular offer an explanation as to why the only effective form of pruning in-distribution was
inducing sparsity in LSTMs. Recall in Section 3.1 we motivated the parameterization Wrec (r, s)
with respect to three measures, one of which was spectral radius, a proxy for a model’s attention span
across time. In particular, we showed at initialization that the spectral radius of Wrec (r, s) decreases
as a function of sparsity and increases as a function of rank. We first note that these trends persist
after training (Figure 4a). In particular, in both CfCs and LSTMs, the low-rank and highly-sparse
models tend to admit solutions with recurrent weights of low spectral radius.
Comparing CfCs and LSTMs, we note that CfCs tend to admit solutions with significantly lower
spectral radii. This is perhaps not surprising considering that LSTMs explicitly promote a more
consistent error flow over time (Jozefowicz et al., 2015) via their forget gate, and are thus more
likely to attend to distant observations. So, assuming that the spectral radius is a reasonable proxy
for the recurrent memory-horizon of a model, it appears that LSTMs tend to have longer-term mem-
                                                                                   ∂hk
ory than CfCs. However, note that the quantity we care about in practice is ∂h       k−1
                                                                                           = ∥Jk ∥ as
this is the true measure of gradient propagation backwards in time. Since ∥Jk ∥ depends not only
on the recurrent weights but also on the hidden state (for details, refer to A.4), it is possible that
the disparate functional forms of CfCs and LSTMs mitigates the efficacy of spectral radius as a
proxy for attention across time (for more details on this intuition, refer to A.5.1). Let us define
Gt = Jk Jk−1 . . . Jk−t+1 . Assuming that time k represents the end of the time series, Gt repre-
sent the gradient backpropagated t steps in time, which when analyzed as a function of t provides
a direct measure of how much importance a model assigns to inputs as a function of the time that
has passed since it last observed them. In particular, we compute log ∥Gt ∥ as a function of t and


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: a) Decay rate of singular value spectrum of CfC recurrent weights as a proxy for robust-
ness. b) Spectral norm of the recurrent weights as a proxy for robustness (±1 SE).


find that gradients decay significantly faster across time in CfCs than LSTMs (Figure 4b). One, this
demonstrates that spectral radius is an effective measure of recurrent memory across architectures in
this task setting. Two, we observe that in their full-rank, fully-connected forms, LSTMs have a long
recurrent memory-horizon, while CfCs do not. In the context of a closed-loop task, we know that it
is beneficial to limit the network’s temporal attention span (Lechner et al., 2020). Since an LSTM’s
recurrent gradient in its baseline form does not decrease particularly fast across time, inducing spar-
sity at initialization pushes the network into the vanishing gradient regime, reducing its attention
across time. This result provides support as to why LSTMs are quite effective at navigating envi-
ronments in-distribution in spite of high-sparsity in their recurrent weights (Figure 3a). In contrast,
CfCs in their baseline form already lie in the vanishing gradient regime: intuitively, inducing spar-
sity is less effective when the baseline network inherently possesses an affinity to selectively attend
to past observations. This aligns with an analogous trend observed in RNNs which are networks
that, like CfCs, are amenable to learning a vanishing gradient (Figure 19).
By analyzing the spectral radius of Wrec (r, s) as well as the recurrent gradients Gt , we have char-
acterized sparsity in its ability to modulate the network’s recurrent memory-horizon. However, note
that we also observe that low-rank LSTMs tend to admit solutions with lower spectral radius as
well (Figure 4b). Yet, low-rank LSTMs tend to perform worse in-distribution (Figure 3a) than their
sparse counterparts. To understand why there is a disparity between reducing rank and increasing
sparsity, we turn to an analysis of the singular values, which are best motivated in the distribution
shift setting.

4.3   ROBUSTNESS UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFT

In Section 4.1, we found that in the distribution shift setting, pruning by reducing rank improved
performance (most notably in CfCs) whereas pruning by increasing sparsity did not. This is in stark
juxtaposition to the in-distribution trends in which inducing sparsity in LSTMs was the only form of
pruning that did not worsen performance (Section 4.2). Here, we attempt to interpret these results by
understanding both why CfCs appear to be the most robust model type and why pruning by reducing
rank is distinct from pruning by increasing sparsity.
Recall in Section 3.1 we reduced the robustness of the hidden state under perturbation to two mea-
sures: the spectral norm and the decay of the singular value spectrum of Wrec (r, s) (for intuition,
refer to A.5.2). Regarding the former, across models we observe that CfCs have lower spectral norms
than both RNNs and LSTMs (Figure 5b, Figure 23). While this offers intuition as to the robustness
of CfCs, it is not sufficient as a standalone measure. This is because in practice, distribution shifts
are applied to the input xt , which in turn corrupts the hidden state ht+1 . Thus, while it remains
important to analyze the spectral norm of the recurrent weights, it is also pertinent to analyze the
spectral norm of the input weights. In doing so, we find that while there exist marginal differences
across architectures, the input spectral norm does not vary to the extent we observe in the recurrent


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


spectral norm (Figure 20b). This, along with the fact that CfCs learn significantly lower spectral
norms in their recurrent weights, offers intuition as to the heightened robustness of CfCs under dis-
tribution shift. In addition, the (albeit loose) relationship between weights with lower spectral norms
corresponding to networks with lower Lipschitz constants provides even further support as to why
CfCs tend to express more robust functions (elaborated upon in A.5.2).
Next, we address the observed disparity between sparse and low-rank recurrent connectivity. Across
ranks and sparsities, the spectral norm decreases as a function of increasing sparsity and decreas-
ing rank (Figure 5b), aligning with the trends induced at initialization. In Section 4.2, we similarly
showed that spectral radius decreases as a function of increasing sparsity and decreasing rank in
the trained networks. Thus, we cannot explain the apparent disparity between low-rank and sparse
connectivity via these measures, and instead turn to the decay of the singular values. Again, aligning
with the prior induced at initialization, we find that the decay of the singular values increases as a
function of increasing sparsity but decreases as a function of decreasing rank (Figure 5a). And this is
precisely where the two methods of pruning differ: since sparsity reduces the rate of spectral decay,
the resulting transformation (induced by Wrec ) on a perturbed version of the hidden state vector
expands in more directions (i.e. increasing the effect of the perturbation); lowering the rank does the
opposite. We can make this notion more concrete by analyzing the dimensionality of the state-space
trajectories of each model. Note that the trajectory induced by ht can be decomposed into two parts:
the recurrently-driven portion Wrec ht−1 and the input-driven portion Winp xt . Under this formu-
lation, we can consider the full state-space trajectory ht to be driven by Wf ull = [Wrec Winp ].
To measure the complexity of these
state-space trajectories, we ran PCA
on them to measure their effective
dimensionalities. We find that with
decreasing rank, the dimensional-
ity of the recurrently-driven trajec-
tories decreases, whereas with in-
creasing sparsity it increases (Fig-
ure 6a, Figure 6b). Hence, our
intuition is as follows: since the
activity along the recurrent axis is
constrained to lie in the subspace
spanned by the vectors comprising
Wrec (r, s), the recurrent dynamics Figure 6: Effective dimensionalities of the recurrent, input
of low-rank recurrent networks are and full state-space trajectories collected during online test-
lower-dimensional and hence sim- ing, in-distribution, as measured by the explained variance of
pler. We can imagine that in the in- the top 5 principal components. a) CfC state-space dynamics
distribution setting, it is not desir- (±1 SE). b) LSTM state-space dynamics (±1 SE).
able to arbitrarily constrain the net-
work’s capacity to learn recurrently. This provides justification as to why, in spite of the low-rank
LSTMs also having a shorter recurrent memory-horizon, inducing sparsity into LSTMs does not
worsen the in-distribution performance of the network like constraining rank does (Figure 3a). In
contrast, recall that under distribution shift, we observed the opposite: inducing sparsity at initializa-
tion was detrimental whereas constraining the network to be low-rank improved robustness. Con-
straining the recurrently-driven portion of the state-space is one means of reducing the network’s
variability in the presence of input perturbations. Supervision along the recurrent axis is pivotal
when the agent is faced with environmental occlusions, as it needs to lean on some notion of the
past to make a decision in the present. By making the recurrent state more robust, we are better able
to generalize under distribution shift.
We make one final note across the model axis to further justify why CfCs appear to be inherently
more robust than LSTMs and RNNs. In particular, in both the input-driven and full state-space
trajectories (each of which are little affected by changes in the recurrent connectivity), we find
that for all pairs (r, s), the dimensionality of LSTM trajectories is much higher than that of CfC
trajectories, offering additional justification for the robustness observed in CfCs. But what is perhaps
more surprising is that RNNs, despite their simpler functional form, also posses higher-dimensional
state-space dynamics than CfCs (Figure 18). Since RNNs and CfCs differ only with respect to the
time constant network F , we explore this gating mechanism further in A.2.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: We individually consider the Frobenius norm of the weights at initialization W0 and the
change in the weights after training ∆W . Note that the models shown here have no sparsity.


4.4   E XPLORING THE TASK DIMENSION GAP

We now have demonstrated two things: one is the efficacy of the proposed connectivity parame-
terization in units of its interpretability as a modulator of network dynamics. Second is the impact
connectivity has on each of the networks we examined: in particular, by disentangling the effects of
rank and sparsity, we showed why LSTMs are more amenable to sparse connectivity in-distribution
whereas CfCs tend to show the most promise with low-rank connectivity under distribution shift.
Here, we further our intuition on the performance of CfCs under distribution shift by understanding
why they tend to be the most amenable architecture to low-rank recurrent connectivity.
As we have noted, the efficacy of this parameterization rests upon the ability of the network to adhere
to the prior throughout training. And recall that we found that the spectral norm of the recurrent
weights in CfCs remained much closer to 1 in the full-rank, fully-connected network than in either
LSTMs or RNNs (Figure 5). To better understand this, we borrow from an analysis conducted
by Schuessler et al. (2020) in which they decomposed the recurrent weights as follows: Wrec =
W0 + ∆W where W0 denotes the weights at initialization and ∆W denotes the change in the
weights after training. In their setting, the purpose of the decomposition was to demonstrate that
in a set of simple tasks, the Frobenius norm of the weights at convergence ||Wrec ||F is dominated
by the norm of the weights at initialization ||W0 ||F . In spite of the recurrent connectivity they
used being full-rank, they found that the changes in the weights learned during training were in
fact low-rank as measured by ||∆W ||F . In our analysis, we find the opposite: ||W0 ||F certainly
does not dominate the norm of the final weights and is in fact lower than ||∆W ||F (Figure 7). This
reinforces the notion of task dimension put forth by Schuessler et al. (2020) which describes the rank
of the training-induced connectivity changes as a function of the task the network is trained on. In
particular, in their work, they showed that the task dimension of the simple tasks they examined was
low and hence a network with unconstrained, full-rank connectivity learned low-rank changes. In
contrast, in our setting we consider a significantly more complex task domain which incites higher-
rank changes in the recurrent connectivity. This brings forth the notion of a task dimension gap
between the offline, open-loop and online, closed-loop settings: namely, the networks we examined
are trained offline without being exposed to distribution shifts and hence learn higher-rank changes
in their connectivity. In contrast, as we have shown, succeeding in the closed-loop setting under
distribution shift means learning lower-rank dynamics. Thus, networks that are able to abide to our
low-rank prior and avoid learning high-rank changes in connectivity are better at generalizing under
distribution shift. This is precisely where CfCs supersede LSTMs and to some extent RNNs as well.
We find that despite each network starting at the same ||W0 ||F , ||∆W ||F is lowest in CfCs.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we investigated the use of a low-rank, sparse parameterization of recurrent connectiv-
ity in various architectures as a means of improving model robustness in closed-loop environments.
We showed that this type of connectivity was most amenable to CfCs and also showed promise in
more canonical networks like LSTMs and RNNs. Furthermore, we demonstrated the interpretability
of this prior by analyzing the network dynamics it induces as a function of both rank and sparsity.
Our results represent an application in pruning recurrent networks at initialization to improve per-
formance under distribution shift.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Research was sponsored by the United States Air Force Research Laboratory and the Department
of the Air Force Artificial Intelligence Accelerator and was accomplished under Cooperative Agree-
ment Number FA8750- 19-2-1000. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or
implied, of the Department of the Air Force or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is autho-
rized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright
notation herein.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

To ensure the reproducibility of our work, we extensively detail the experimental setup in the ap-
pendix as well as provide information regarding the analyses we conducted. The bulk of these
details can be found in appendix A.11 which describes how we constructed the dataset, how the
models were trained (including details on hyperparameters), the evaluation metrics for the models
and the intuition/implementation regarding the analyses that we performed on the trained models.
A key portion of our results is driven by an initialization scheme we proposed that deviates from
default initializers given in existing open-source implementations. We thoroughly describe how and
why our proposed initialization differs in appendix A.10, so the reader can leverage it to reproduce
our results. Regarding our theoretical work, we provide proofs for the claims we made in the main
portion of the paper which can be found in appendix A.6. In that section, we clearly delineate the
cases in which we were unable to prove certain claims and had to resort to an empirical analysis
instead.

R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu
 Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg,
 Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek G. Murray, Benoit Steiner, Paul Tucker, Vijay Vasudevan,
 Pete Warden, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. Tensorflow: A system for large-
 scale machine learning. In 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Imple-
 mentation (OSDI 16), pp. 265–283, 2016. URL https://www.usenix.org/system/
 files/conference/osdi16/osdi16-abadi.pdf.
Marc G. Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning en-
 vironment: An evaluation platform for general agents. CoRR, abs/1207.4708, 2012. URL
 http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.4708.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. CoRR, abs/1606.01540, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1606.01540.
Makram Chahine, Ramin Hasani, Patrick Kao, Aaron Ray, Ryan Shubert, Mathias Lechner, Alexan-
 der Amini, and Daniela Rus. Robust flight navigation out of distribution with liquid neural
 networks. Science Robotics, 8(77):eadc8892, 2023. doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.adc8892. URL
 https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/scirobotics.adc8892.
Bo Chang, Minmin Chen, Eldad Haber, and Ed H. Chi. Antisymmetricrnn: A dynamical system
  view on recurrent neural networks, 2019.
Tian Qi Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential
  equations. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-
  Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (eds.), NeurIPS, pp. 6572–6583, 2018. URL http://dblp.
  uni-trier.de/db/conf/nips/nips2018.html#ChenRBD18.
Tianlong Chen, Zhenyu Zhang, Pengjun Wang, Santosh Balachandra, Haoyu Ma, Zehao Wang,
  and Zhangyang Wang. Sparsity winning twice: Better robust generalization from more efficient
  training, 2022.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Çaglar Gülçehre, Fethi Bougares, Holger Schwenk, and
  Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical ma-
  chine translation. CoRR, abs/1406.1078, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.
  1078.

Felipe Codevilla, Matthias Müller, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Antonio M. López, and Vladlen Koltun.
  End-to-end driving via conditional imitation learning. CoRR, abs/1710.02410, 2017. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1710.02410.

Pim de Haan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Sergey Levine. Causal confusion in imitation learning. CoRR,
  abs/1905.11979, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.11979.

Valente A. Beiran M. et al. Dubreuil, A. The role of population structure in computations through
  neural dynamics, 2022.

N. Benjamin Erichson, Omri Azencot, Alejandro Queiruga, Liam Hodgkinson, and Michael W.
  Mahoney. Lipschitz recurrent neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=-N7PBXqOUJZ.

Abolfazl Farahani, Sahar Voghoei, Khaled Rasheed, and Hamid R. Arabnia. A brief review of
  domain adaptation, 2020.

Chelsea Finn, Tianhe Yu, Tianhao Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. One-shot visual imi-
  tation learning via meta-learning. CoRR, abs/1709.04905, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1709.04905.

Nic Ford, Justin Gilmer, Nicholas Carlini, and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. Adversarial examples are a
  natural consequence of test error in noise. CoRR, abs/1901.10513, 2019. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1901.10513.

Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Training pruned neural net-
  works. CoRR, abs/1803.03635, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.03635.

Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning, volume 1.
  MIT Press, 2016.

Yiwen Guo, Chao Zhang, Changshui Zhang, and Yurong Chen. Sparse dnns with improved ad-
  versarial robustness. CoRR, abs/1810.09619, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.
  09619.

Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Alexander Amini, Daniela Rus, and Radu Grosu. Liquid time-
  constant networks, 2020a.

Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Alexander Amini, Daniela Rus, and Radu Grosu. A natural lottery
  ticket winner: Reinforcement learning with ordinary neural circuits. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti
  Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4082–4093. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020b.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/hasani20a.html.

Ramin M. Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Alexander Amini, Lucas Liebenwein, Max Tschaikowski, Ger-
  ald Teschl, and Daniela Rus. Closed-form continuous-depth models. CoRR, abs/2106.13898,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13898.

Kyle Helfrich, Devin Willmott, and Qiang Ye. Orthogonal recurrent neural networks with scaled
  cayley transform, 2018.

Elizabeth Herbert and Srdjan Ostojic. The impact of sparsity in low-rank recurrent neural net-
  works. bioRxiv, 2022. doi: 10.1101/2022.03.31.486515. URL https://www.biorxiv.
  org/content/early/2022/04/01/2022.03.31.486515.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.

                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dan Horgan, John Quan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matteo Hessel, Hado van Hasselt,
  and David Silver. Distributed prioritized experience replay. CoRR, abs/1803.00933, 2018a. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.00933.
Dan Horgan, John Quan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matteo Hessel, Hado van Hasselt,
  and David Silver. Distributed prioritized experience replay. CoRR, abs/1803.00933, 2018b. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.00933.
Todd Huster, Cho-Yu Jason Chiang, and Ritu Chadha. Limitations of the lipschitz constant as a
  defense against adversarial examples. CoRR, abs/1807.09705, 2018. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1807.09705.
Stephen James, Michael Bloesch, and Andrew J. Davison. Task-embedded control networks for
  few-shot imitation learning. CoRR, abs/1810.03237, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1810.03237.
Rafal Jozefowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Ilya Sutskever. An empirical exploration of recurrent net-
  work architectures. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 2342–2350, Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v37/jozefowicz15.html.
Mathias Lechner, Ramin Hasani, and Alexander Amini. Neural circuit policies enabling auditable
 autonomy, 2020.
Mathias Lechner, Ramin Hasani, Alexander Amini, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Thomas A. Henzinger, and
 Daniela Rus. Are all vision models created equal? a study of the open-loop to closed-loop
 causality gap, 2022.
Namhoon Lee, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and Philip H. S. Torr. SNIP: single-shot network pruning
  based on connection sensitivity. CoRR, abs/1810.02340, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1810.02340.
Namhoon Lee, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Stephen Gould, and Philip H. S. Torr. A signal propaga-
  tion perspective for pruning neural networks at initialization. CoRR, abs/1906.06307, 2019. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.06307.
Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Joseph Gonzalez, Ken Gold-
  berg, and Ion Stoica. Ray rllib: A composable and scalable reinforcement learning library. CoRR,
  abs/1712.09381, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.09381.
Francesca Mastrogiuseppe and Srdjan Ostojic. Linking connectivity, dynamics, and computations
  in low-rank recurrent neural networks. Neuron, 99(3):609–623.e29, 2018. ISSN 0896-6273. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.07.003. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/S0896627318305439.
Razvan Pascanu, Tomás Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the exploding gradient prob-
  lem. CoRR, abs/1211.5063, 2012. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1211.5063.
Luis Perez and Jason Wang. The effectiveness of data augmentation in image classification us-
  ing deep learning. CoRR, abs/1712.04621, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.
  04621.
Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Eric Nguyen, Daniel Y. Fu, Tri Dao, Stephen Baccus, Yoshua
 Bengio, Stefano Ermon, and Christopher Ré. Hyena hierarchy: Towards larger convolutional
 language models, 2023.
Vivek Ramanujan, Mitchell Wortsman, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, and Mohammad Raste-
  gari. What’s hidden in a randomly weighted neural network? CoRR, abs/1911.13299, 2019. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.13299.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey J. Gordon, and J. Andrew Bagnell. No-regret reductions for imitation
   learning and structured prediction. CoRR, abs/1011.0686, 2010. URL http://arxiv.org/
   abs/1011.0686.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tara N. Sainath, Brian Kingsbury, Vikas Sindhwani, Ebru Arisoy, and Bhuvana Ramabhadran. Low-
  rank matrix factorization for deep neural network training with high-dimensional output targets.
  In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 6655–
  6659, 2013. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2013.6638949.
Kevin Scaman and Aladin Virmaux. Lipschitz regularity of deep neural networks: analysis and
  efficient estimation, 2019.
Friedrich Schuessler, Francesca Mastrogiuseppe, Alexis Dubreuil, Srdjan Ostojic, and Omri
  Barak.    The interplay between randomness and structure during learning in rnns.    In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 13352–13362. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/9ac1382fd8fc4b631594aa135d16ad75-Paper.pdf.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1707.06347.
Olaf Sporns. Structure and function of complex brain networks. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience,
  15(3):247–262, 2013. doi: 10.31887/DCNS.2013.15.3/osporns. URL https://doi.org/
  10.31887/DCNS.2013.15.3/osporns. PMID: 24174898.
Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Pranav Shyam, Filipe Mutz, Wojciech Jaskowski, and Jürgen Schmidhu-
  ber. Training agents using upside-down reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1912.02877, 2019.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.02877.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks, 2014.
Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Nicholas Carlini, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig
  Schmidt. Measuring robustness to natural distribution shifts in image classification. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 18583–18599. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/d8330f857a17c53d217014ee776bfd50-Paper.pdf.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033,
  2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.
Ryan Vogt, Maximilian Puelma Touzel, Eli Shlizerman, and Guillaume Lajoie. On lyapunov expo-
  nents for rnns: Understanding information propagation using dynamical systems tools, 2020.
Charles J Vorbach, Ramin Hasani, Alexander Amini, Mathias Lechner, and Daniela Rus. Causal
  navigation by continuous-time neural networks. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and
  J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=ckVbQs5zD7_.
Huan Wang, Can Qin, Yulun Zhang, and Yun Fu. Emerging paradigms of neural network pruning.
  CoRR, abs/2103.06460, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.06460.
Yuhui Xu, Yuxi Li, Shuai Zhang, Wei Wen, Botao Wang, Yingyong Qi, Yiran Chen, Weiyao Lin,
  and Hongkai Xiong. TRP: trained rank pruning for efficient deep neural networks. CoRR,
  abs/2004.14566, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.14566.
Fuzhen Zhuang, Zhiyuan Qi, Keyu Duan, Dongbo Xi, Yongchun Zhu, Hengshu Zhu, Hui Xiong,
  and Qing He. A comprehensive survey on transfer learning. CoRR, abs/1911.02685, 2019. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.02685.
Karol Życzkowski and H. J. Sommers. Truncations of random unitary matrices. Journal of Physics
  A, 33:2045–2057, 1999. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  27605911.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   D IMENSIONALITY ANALYSIS UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFT


Figure 8: Effective dimensionalities of the recurrent, input and full state-space trajectories collected
during online testing, under the noise distribution shift (for details, refer to A.11), as measured by
the explained variance of the top 5 principal components. a) CfC state-space dynamics (±1 SE). b)
RNN state-space dynamics (±1 SE). c) LSTM state-space dynamics (±1 SE).

Recall in Figure 6, we computed the effective dimensionalities of the recurrent, input and full state-
space trajectories across models, ranks and sparsities collected during an online, closed-loop simu-
lations of the agents in an in-distribution setting. In doing so, we found that the input and full state
space dimensionalities were not particularly affected by changes in the recurrent rank or sparsity.
Here, we will show that the same does not hold under distribution shift and understand why this is a
desirable property of the parameterization of recurrent connectivity.
In Figure 8, we find that in CfCs, RNNs and LSTMs, the effective dimensionalities of the input
and full state spaces increases with the rank of the recurrent weights. This is interesting as it
demonstrates the ability of the parameterization to modulate state-space dynamics outside of the
recurrently-driven subspace of activity. But it also begs the question as to why we do not observe
this effect in the in-distribution setting.
The primary distinction is that under distribution shift, we can imagine that adding noise to the inputs
causes the input state-space trajectory to evolve in random directions, raising its dimensionality.
Having a robust recurrent state presumably allows for the filtration of some of this noise, which
reduces the effect it has on future model inputs. Furthermore, since we examine these trajectories
in the context of a closed loop system, the input is itself a function of the previous hidden state. By
making this function more robust via our low-rank prior, this in turn reduces the dimensionality of
the input state-space trajectory (and by proxy the full state-space trajectory as well).
One final note is that while we observe this trend as a function of rank, we do not observe it as
a function of sparsity. In particular, modulations in the dimensionality of the recurrent state-space
via changes in the sparsity of the recurrent weights do not appear to impact the dimensionality of


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


input or full state-spaces (Figure 8). While this certainly requires further exploration, one possible
hypothesis is that this is caused by the counteracting effects of sparsity on robustness. Namely,
recall that sparsity both reduces the spectral radius which shortens the temporal attention span of
the network, making the model more robust across time. However, it also reduces the decay rate
of the singular value spectrum, making it less robust at any given point in time. These two effects
potentially offset one another and prevent the sparsity in the recurrent weights from modulating the
dimensionality of the input trajectory.

A.2    T IME CONSTANT ANALYSIS


  Figure 9: Average absolute deviation from 0.5 of time constant vectors in trained CfC models.

In Section 4.3, we demonstrated that on average, CfCs both learn lower spectral norms in their re-
current weights and express lower dimensional state-space trajectories than RNNs. Recall, the func-
tional form of a CfC differs from an RNN via the time constant network F (ht−1 , xt ) which learns
a vector of weights used to interpolate between G and H. Note that if F (ht−1 , xt ) = [1, 1, . . . , 1],
the network reduces to that of an RNN by placing all of its weight on a single trajectory. Because the
time-constant learned by F is a function of the input, the network can dynamically adapt its inter-
polation weights under distribution shift by changing how much it weighs the trajectory induced by
G versus the trajectory induced by H. While rationale beyond the effects of the time-constant mod-
ule on the overall network dynamics warrants further exploration, the notion of gating mechanisms
improving performance in neural networks is not a new one; recent work done in convolutional
language models shows similar findings (Poli et al., 2023).
In any case, to better understand the time constant network, here we provide an analysis on what
role modulating recurrent sparsity and rank has on the learned interpolation weights. In particular,
let wt denote the interpolation weights that are the output of F at time t. We compute
                                                         PT Ph
                                                                       |wti − 0.5|
                                    |wt − 0.5| = t=1 i=1
                                                                    hT
which measures the average deviation of the weights from 0.5. We consider this metric as a means
of understanding how much the interpolation between G and H tends to rely upon only one of the
trajectories (as we observe in the case of an RNN) versus evenly combining them (as would be the
case if F learns to output [ 12 , 12 , . . . , 12 ]). We find that as a function of increasing rank, the deviation
of the time constant from 0.5 decreases (Figure 9). This means that low-rank CfCs tend to place
more of their weight on one trajectory than the other which demonstrates the ability of the time
constant network to align with the simpler recurrent dynamics promoted in the low-rank setting.

A.3    TASK DIMENSION CONTINUED

Here, we provide some additional commentary on our discussion of the task dimension gap in Sec-
tion 4.4.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


At a high level, the notion of a task dimension gap which characterizes the disconnect between
agents learning passively in the offline setting and learning actively in the online setting warrants
further exploration and formalization. Furthermore, we note that, the notion of task dimension put
forth by Schuessler et al. (2020) itself is more aptly decomposed into recurrent task dimension and
input task dimension. In particular, as we have shown, changes in recurrent connectivity are not nec-
essarily synonymous with changes in input connectivity (Figure 6). A given task may necessitate
learning connectivities of different ranks along the input axis and recurrent axis: disentangling the
two is a necessity in understanding the dynamics of recurrent neural networks. Another point to note
is that recurrent task dimension is distinct from attention span along the recurrent axis, which can
also be considered a function of the task. We showed that while rank and sparsity both reduce tem-
poral attention span, they have opposing effects on the dimensionality of recurrently-driven activity.
Noting this distinction is pivotal in properly characterizing recurrent dynamics.


A.4     D ERIVING RECURRENT GRADIENTS
                                                                ∂ht
In this section, we provide details on the derivation for Jt = ∂ht−1
                                                                     in RNNs, LSTMs and CfCs.
Jt is the Jacobian of the hidden-state dynamics which captures information about the rate at which
the gradient is propagated across time. We motivate this further when we discuss the relationship
between Jt and the memory-horizon of a recurrent network in Section A.5.


A.4.1    RNN

Recall that the functional form of an RNN is given by


                                ht = tanh(Wh ht−1 + Wi xt + b)


where Wh denotes the recurrent weights, Wi denotes the input weights and b denotes the bias.
Then, if we let ⊙ denote row-wise multiplication in the case of a vector and matrix, then we have
that

                                 ∂ht
                                      = (1 − tanh2 (ht−1 )) ⊙ Wh
                                ∂ht−1

A.4.2    LSTM

The functional form of an LSTM is given by



                               it = σ(Wii xt + Whi ht−1 + bi )
                               ft = σ(Wif xt + Whf ht−1 + bf )
                               ot = σ(Wio xt + Who ht−1 + bo )
                               gt = tanh(Wic xt + Whc ht−1 + bc )
                               ct = ft ⊙ ct−1 + it ⊙ gt
                               ht = ot ⊙ tanh(ct )


Following the notation from Vogt et al. (2020), if we let

                                  y∗ = Wi∗ xt + Wh∗ ht−1 + b∗

where ∗ is determined by the gate and ⊙ denotes elementwise multiplication in the case of two
vectors and row-wise multiplication in the case of a vector and matrix, then we have that


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         ∂ft
              = [σ(yf ) ⊙ (1 − σ(yf ))]T ⊙ Whf
        ∂ht−1
         ∂it
              = [σ(yi ) ⊙ (1 − σ(yi ))]T ⊙ Whi
        ∂ht−1
         ∂ot
              = [σ(yo ) ⊙ (1 − σ(yo ))]T ⊙ Who
        ∂ht−1
         ∂gt
              = [(1 − tanh2 (yc ))]T ⊙ Whc
        ∂ht−1
         ∂ct      ∂ft                ∂it
              =         ⊙ ct−1 +          ⊙ tanh(yc ) + it ⊙ (1 − tanh2 (yc )) ⊙ Whc + ft
        ∂ht−1   ∂ht−1              ∂ht−1
         ∂ht      ∂ot                                           ∂ct
              =         ⊙ tanh(ct ) + ot ⊙ (1 − tanh2 (ct )) ⊙
        ∂ht−1   ∂ht−1                                          ∂ht−1

A.4.3       CFC
The functional form of a CfC is given by


  h(t) = σ(F (ht−1 , xt , θF )) ⊙ G(ht−1 , xt , θG ) + [1 − σ(F (ht−1 , xt , θf )] ⊙ H(ht−1 , xt , θH )

where θF , θG , θH refer to the parameters in each module as given by the following equations:


                        F (ht−1 , xt , θF ) = Wif xt + Whf ht−1 + bf
                        G(ht−1 , xt , θG ) = tanh(Wig xt + Whg ht−1 + bg )
                        H(ht−1 , xt , θH ) = tanh(Wih xt + Whh ht−1 + bh )


We note that in the work that originally proposed the CfC architecture (Hasani et al., 2021), F is
referred to as a liquid time constant network due to its motivation as a time constant in a dynamical
system. In general, time constants are more thoroughly motivated in the continuous-time setting
in which a neural network is used to model the derivative of the hidden state as opposed to the
hidden state itself (Chen et al., 2018). In that setting, a time constant represents a parameter that
characterizes the speed and coupling sensitivity of an ODE that models a system. However, our
work exists in the discrete-time setting in which we can no longer interpret the time constant as a
parameter of a continuous-time system. Instead, we interpret F as an adaptive gating mechanism,
as discussed in Section 4.
If we let
                                 y∗ = Wi∗ xt + Wh∗ ht−1 + b∗
where ∗ is determined by the gate, then it follows that
 ∂ht
      = σ(yf ) ⊙ (1 − tanh2 (yg ))Whg + tanh(yg ) ⊙ [σ(yf ) ⊙ (1 − σ(yf )) ⊙ Whf ]
∂ht−1
        + [1 − σ(yf )] ⊙ (1 − tanh2 (yh ))Whh + tanh(yh ) ⊙ [1 − (σ(yf ) ⊙ (1 − σ(yf )) ⊙ Whf )]

A.5     M OTIVATING SPECTRAL ANALYSES OF RECURRENT MODELS

In this section, we motivate the analyses employed in this paper in order to analyze the dynamics
of the various recurrent networks we examined. In particular, we will motivate the low-rank, sparse
parameterization of Wrec from the perspective of modulating the spectral radius and spectral norm
(and more generally the eigenspectrum and singular value spectrum) of the recurrent weights at
initialization and then extend this line of reasoning to the analyses performed on the trained models.
For specifics on the implementation details and computation performed for these analyses, refer to
A.11.5.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5.1    R ECURRENT MEMORY HORIZON
We leverage our parameterization of Wrec (r, s) as a function of rank and sparsity in order to mod-
ulate the spectral radius, spectral norm and singular value spectrum of the recurrent weights.
Here, we argue that the spectral radius of Wrec (r, s) is a pertinent measure for the memory horizon
of the network across time. We will demonstrate why in the context of an RNN as the computations
are most tractable under this functional form. In particular, in an RNN, the recurrent gradient in
        ∂ht
Jt = ∂h   t−1
              reflects how much the network’s hidden state is updated based on information from
the past. A higher recurrent gradient suggests the network is paying more attention to distant inputs
during training, while a lower recurrent gradient implies less reliance on such distant information.
The relevant quantity in backpropagation through time in an RNN is
                      ∂ht   Y ∂hi     Y
                          =         =   (1 − tanh2 (ht−1 )) ⊙ Wh
                      ∂hk     ∂hi−1
                              t≥i≥k            t≥i≥k

(refer to A.4 for details on the derivation of RNN recurrent gradient). We can re-express the element-
                                       ∂hi
wise product in the expression for ∂h    i−1
                                             as the product of two matrices as follows:

                                    diag[(1 − tanh2 (ht−1 ))]Wh
where the diag(v) operator constructs a diagonal matrix where the elements of v are placed along
the diagonal. Then, we have that
                             ∂hi
                                      ≤ diag[(1 − tanh2 (ht−1 ))] ∥Wh ∥
                            ∂hi−1
by the sub-multiplicativity of a matrix norm. As a function of rank and sparsity, if we assume that
  diag[(1 − tanh2 (ht−1 ))] is reasonably unaffected by the changes in Wrec (r, s) at initialization,
then variation in the bound arises only from ∥Wh ∥.
Drawing from the analysis presented in Pascanu et al. (2012), if we assume that the relevant variation
in the bound as a function of rank and sparsity comes only from ∥Wh ∥ and that Wh = P DP −1 is
diagonalizable, then we approximately have that

         ∂ht          Y
                ≤           diag[(1 − tanh2 (hi−1 ))]Wh ≈ (Wh )t−k = P D t−k P −1
         ∂hk
                    t≥i≥k

where P denotes a matrix of eigenvectors and D denotes a diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues
on the diagonal. It follows that for sufficiently large ℓ = t − k, P D t−k P −1 is dominated by
the eigenvalue of leading magnitude. One can argue this more formally using the power iteration
method, details of which can be found in Pascanu et al. (2012). We further note that this notion of
modifying the spectral radius in order to modulate attention across the time in recurrent networks
is not a new one. One prominent example can be found in echo state networks which like our
parameterization induces sparsity in the recurrent weights in order to control how much attention
the model pays to distant inputs.
Extending this mathematical argument to LSTMs and CfCs is less straightforward given the more
intricate gating mechanisms present in the functional forms of each model. While it is reason-
able to hypothesize that decreasing the spectral radius in these architectures will result in a faster
decay of gradients across time, it is unclear how fast/slow this decay is relative to the analysis pre-
sented above for an RNN. Furthermore, the assumption made in the argument above for gradient
decay in RNNs rested upon ignoring the portion of the gradient influenced by the hidden state:
  diag[(1 − tanh2 (ht−1 ))] . This assumption becomes less reasonable after training as the network
could potentially learn hidden-state vectors of small magnitude, causing the gradients to decay even
faster. And this assumption is even less reasonable in LSTMs and CfCs after training, again due to
the nuanced gating present in each architecture.
Thus, while we still examine the spectral radii of each architecture, we also conduct a more nuanced
recurrent memory analysis on all the architectures by computing the norm of the recurrent gradients


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               ∂ht
backpropagated through time. In particular, if we let Jt = ∂h    t−1
                                                                     denote the recurrent Jacobian,
then we can take the cumulative product of the Jacobians as follows:
                         [Jt , Jt Jt−1 , · · · , Jt Jt−1 . . . J2 , Jt Jt−1 . . . J2 J1 ]
Taking the norm of each of the matrices in the list above gives us a concrete measure of the extent
to which a given model attends to its past observations as a function of time. This enables us
to evaluate the effect of the recurrent weight’s spectral radius on the memory-horizon of a given
architecture which allows us to make comparisons not only within a given architecture across ranks
and sparsities, but also across the different recurrent architectures we analyze (i.e. RNN vs LSTM
vs CfC).

A.5.2   ROBUSTNESS UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFT
In the last section, we motivated the parameterization of Wrec (r, s) from the perspective of the
spectral radius and the implications it has on the attention profile of the network across time. In
this section, we will motivate the parameterization instead from the perspective of the singular value
spectrum of Wrec (r, s) and understand the implications it has on the robustness of the network
under distribution shift.
Before motivating the analysis of the singular value spectrum, we first clarify the nature of the
distribution shifts in the context of this work. Here, distribution shifts are applied to the input
image, which is then fed through a set of convolutional layers before entering the recurrent portion
of the network (A.11). The perturbed input denoted by x∗t then corrupts the hidden state h∗t via
the update rule for the hidden state specified by the recurrent model. To simplify our robustness
analysis, we do not consider the convolutional layers and instead restrict the scope of our analysis
to the input weights and recurrent weights of the recurrent network. Since both xt and ht are
affected by distribution shift, in practice we care about the robustness induced by both Winp and
Wrec . However, recall that our parameterization only constructs Wrec (r, s) as a function of rank
and sparsity, while maintaining the structure of Winp as full-rank and fully-connected. We note that
we did try extending the parameterization as a function of rank and sparsity to Winp , but found that
doing so was quite detrimental to performance (results not shown). Thus, at initialization, we only
modulate the robustness across the recurrent axis via the recurrent weights. Nonetheless, we still
examine the spectral properties of the input weights after training to understand whether modulating
the rank and sparsity of the recurrent weights implicitly affects the input weights during learning.
Now, let us more formally understand why modulating the spectral properties of the weights has an
impact on robustness. Consider a perturbation e applied to the hidden state ht such that ∥e∥ = 1 (in
practice recall that the perturbation is actually applied to xt which later corrupts ht , but we apply
the perturbation directly to ht to simplify our argument). Under distribution shift, we care about
our robustness against all possible perturbations since we can imagine e being sampled from some
arbitrary distribution over unit vectors. In particular, we want to understand how Wrec ht differs
from Wrec (ht + e). To motivate the importance of the singular value spectrum, consider an SVD
on Wrec as follows:
                   Wrec (ht + e) = U ΣV T (ht + e) = U ΣV T ht + U ΣV T e
Note that the quantity we care about for measuring robustness is U ΣV T e. Since V T is a unitary
matrix, V T e = e∗ has the same magnitude as e. Similarly, U is also a unitary matrix, so the only
transformation that affects the magnitude of e is the scaling performed by the singular value matrix
Σ. Now, we can reduce the robustness of Wrec to two things: the magnitude of the expansion
induced by Σ and the effective number of directions in which e is expanded.
First, we will discuss our approach to measuring the magnitude of the expansion induced by the
recurrent weights. A canonical measure of the expansion induced by a matrix is given by the spectral
norm which is equivalent to the leading singular value. In this case, the spectral norm of Wrec tells
us that Wrec (ht + e) deviates most from Wrec ht if e is the norm-1 vector parallel to the singular
vector corresponding to the largest singular value of Wrec ht . We can interpret this as a worst-case
(i.e. adversarial) analysis of robustness. The spectral norm of Wrec is further tied to robustness
via its relationship to the Lipschitz constant of the full network – a measure of the smoothness of
the function learned by the network. In particular, a trivial upper bound for the global Lipschitz
constant of a neural network is computed by multiplying the spectral norms of all the weights in

                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the network (Szegedy et al., 2014). However, this has been shown in many cases to be a poor
proxy for network robustness due to the looseness of the bound (Huster et al., 2018). Unfortunately,
since computing tight bounds for network-wide Lipschitz constants is NP-hard (Scaman & Virmaux,
2019), we maintain that it is reasonable to assume that a lower spectral norm in the recurrent weights
results in a lower global Lipschitz constant at initialization. Of course, it is possible that during
training, the spectral norm of other weights in the network increase and potentially counteract a
decrease in the spectral norm of the recurrent weights induced at initialization. In practice, since the
distribution shift is applied to the network input, it is also pertinent to analyze the input weights Winp
in the recurrent module. One thing to note is the limitation of this analysis when making comparisons
across architectures. In particular, recall that we have made the assumption that within a given
architecture, across ranks and sparsities, models that have input and recurrent weights with lower
spectral norms tend to express functions with lower Lipschitz constants (in which case a perturbation
applied to the input would have less of an effect on the output). However, this assumption becomes
less reasonable across architectures given the fact that the functional form varies significantly across
RNNs, LSTMs and CfCs. Optimally, we would actually compute the Lipschitz constants in order
to make such comparisons more viable, however we are unable to do this given the NP-hardness of
the problem. Hence, while we still aim to make comparisons across architectures via an analysis
of the spectral norm of the weights, it is important to acknowledge the potential limitation in this
approach.
Next, we will discuss our approach to quantifying the effective number of directions in which e is
expanded. Note that in order to remain robust against the many potential directions the perturbation
vector e can lie in, it is desirable for the singular values of Wrec to decay rapidly, as this implies
that only a few singular values (i.e. only a few directions corresponding to the top singular vectors)
contribute significantly to the transformation. Hence, we analyze the decay of the sorted spectrum
of singular values normalized by the leading singular value as a proxy for the effective numbers
of dimensions that contribute to the transformation of e by Wrec . Again, it is possible that during
training, the singular value spectrum of the input weights Winp counteracts the prior induced on
the recurrent singular value spectrum at initialization and thus also must be examined. As with the
spectral norm analysis discussed above, we also acknowledge the potential limitation in making
comparisons of spectral decay across different recurrent architectures.
While the decay of the singular value spectrum provides a good proxy for the directionality com-
ponent of robustness, it does so only for a single point in time. In actuality, we want to understand
the directions the hidden state evolves in across the entire trajectory of our model in order to have a
robustness measurement that takes into account all points in time. To do so, we perform a dimen-
sionality analysis on the hidden state-space trajectories collected over the course of a simulation in
the closed-loop environment. In particular, we are interested in three state-spaces: the recurrently-
driven state-space, input-driven state-space and full state-space. A canonical state-space trajectory
analysis collects the ht over time (i.e. the full state-space) and performs PCA in order to measure
the effective dimensionality of the trajectory. We extend this analysis by decomposing the full state-
space into the portion driven by the recurrent weights, Wrec ht and the portion driven by the input
weights Winp xt . This allows us to disentangle the effects of the proposed parameterization of the
recurrent weights into its individual effects on the recurrent and input state-spaces. Furthermore,
note that this dimensionality analysis enables us to make viable comparisons across recurrent ar-
chitectures whereas this is a potential limitation of analyzing only the decay of the singular value
spectra in the recurrent and input weights.
So, we have now motivated the spectral norm and decay of the singular value spectrum of both the
recurrent and input weights from the perspective of constructing a model that is robust to distribution
shift. This was done under the framework of assuming a perturbation applied to xt which also results
in a perturbation applied to ht which affects the output decision of the model at time step t. However,
we can also ask how does this perturbation affect the model into the future: namely, how does the
perturbation applied to ht affect ht∗ for t∗ > t. We can answer this question by understanding
how information is propagated through the network across time. But note that this is precisely the
intention of analyzing the time-horizon of the recurrent memory discussed in A.5.1. So, not only
does modulating the recurrent memory of the model serve the purpose of enforcing a short-horizon
temporal prior necessary to model the short-term causality inherent to closed-loop environment, it
also makes the network more robust across the time dimension. Thus, we have two measures of
robustness: one at the current point in time and another for all time points into the future.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6     T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF SPECTRAL RADIUS AND SPECTRAL NORM AT
        INITIALIZATION

In this section we provide proofs for the spectral radius and spectral norm, ρ(W ), ||W ||, respec-
tively, for connectivity matrices W at initialization. For clarity, we iterate that ρ(W ) = maxi |λi |,
i.e. the largest norm of eigenvalues of W , and ||W || = maxi σi , the largest singular value of W .
We consider sparse networks with Glorot uniform initialization and orthogonal initialization in ap-
pendices A.6.2 and A.6.4, respectively, and orthogonal low-rank matrices in appendix A.6.3. Note
that in our experiments, we only consider networks with orthogonally initialized recurrent weights
which we motivate further in A.10. Also, note that in the cases where we are unable to provide
proof, we still perform an empirical analysis.

A.6.1    G LOROT UNIFORM AND SPARSE

                                                  Glorot Uniform + Sparse
                            Spectral radius of W, (W)                              Spectral norm of W, ||W||
                1.0                                                    2.0                             Theoretical value
                0.8                                                    1.5
                0.6
          (W)


                                                               ||W||   1.0
                0.4
                                                                       0.5
                0.2
                0.0                                                    0.0
                      0.0     0.2   0.4    0.6     0.8   1.0                 0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6        0.8      1.0
                                    Sparsity, s                                           Sparsity, s

Figure 10: Spectral radius and spectral norm of uniform-sparse matrices as a function of sparsity, s,
for matrices initialized with Glorot uniform initialization, with n = 512. We additionally plot the
theoretical predicted value for large n.

We consider weight matrices W with dimension n × n and consider the limit as n → ∞.
Recall that Glorot  uniform initialization scheme initializes weights with entries iid Wij ∼
          √    √
Unif − √n3 , + √n3 , resulting in an entry-wise variance of n1 . We generate a sparse matrix by
element-wise multiplying a matrix, W 0 sampled from the Glorot uniform initialization by a spar-
sity map M , where Mij ∼ Bernoulli(p = 1 − s), with s being the sparse factor. Our final
weight matrix is given by W = W 0 ⊙ M . For sparsity s, the resulting variance of entries is given
by 1−s
     n . As the entries of W are all iid, we can apply the Girko-Ginibri circular law for large n,
which
√                               √ of W converge to a uniform disk in the complex plane with radius
       states that the eigenvalues
   1 − s, so we expect ρ(s) = 1 − s. This analysis follows closely with that of Herbert & Ostojic
(2022).
For ||W ||, we apply the Marchenko-Pastur law,√which states that the distribution of eigenvalues of
1   T                                 1                        (λ+ −λ)(λ−λ− )
n AA values converges to pAAT (λ) = 2πσ 2                           λ         1λ∈[λ− ,λ+ ] , with λ± = σ 2 (1 ± 1)2 ,
                                                                                        2
if A has
     √ entries iid from a distribution with zero mean and variance σ . For our setting we let
A = nW , so σ 2 = 1 − s. We see that the maximal eigenvalue of AAT p    is thus λ+ = 4(1 − s),
and so the upper bound for the largest singular value of W is ||W || = 2 (1 − s). We observe
good empirical agreement with these values in Figure 10.

A.6.2    O RTHOGONAL AND SPARSE
In the orthogonal-sparse case, we cannot apply the same arguments in appendix A.6.4, as the entries
of an orthogonal matrix are no longer iid. However, we note that the entries of orthogonal matrices
are approximately Gaussian when considered individually (Życzkowski & Sommers, 1999). Thus,
we expect with high sparsity, the correlations between entries break down and the entries of the
matrix behave iid. Thus, we expect for large values of s, ρ(W ) and ||W || to have the same behavior


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       Orthogonal + Sparse
                              Spectral radius of W, (W)                                Spectral norm of W, ||W||
                  1.0                                                      2.0
                  0.8                                                      1.5
                  0.6
            (W)


                                                                   ||W||
                                                                           1.0
                  0.4
                  0.2                                                      0.5

                  0.0                                                      0.0         Uniform + Sparse Theoretical value
                        0.0     0.2    0.4    0.6      0.8   1.0                 0.0     0.2      0.4      0.6        0.8      1.0
                                      Sparsity, s                                                Sparsity, s

Figure 11: Spectral radius and spectral norm of orthogonal-sparse matrices as a function of sparsity,
s, with n = 512. We additionally plot the theoretical predicted value for large n for the uniform-
sparse initialization. We see that orthogonal-sparse matrices behave like uniform-sparse ones at high
sparsities.


as in appendix √
               A.6.4. We verify this empirically
                                       √          in Figure 11, where we see that for large values
of s, ρ(W ) ≈ 1 − s and ||W || ≈ 2 1 − s, as with appendix A.6.4. Interestingly, ||W || is non-
monotonic in s. Calculating the exact forms of ρ(W ) and ||W || is an interesting direction for future
work.

A.6.3       O RTHOGONAL AND LOW RANK

                                                      Orthogonal + Low Rank
                              Spectral radius of W, (W)                                Spectral norm of W, ||W||
                  1.0                                                                                            Theoretical value
                                                                       1.04
                  0.8
                                                                       1.02
                  0.6
            (W)


                                                               ||W||


                                                                       1.00
                  0.4                                                  0.98
                  0.2                                                  0.96

                        0.0     0.2    0.4    0.6      0.8   1.0                 0.0     0.2      0.4      0.6        0.8      1.0
                                      Rank ratio, r                                            Rank ratio, r

Figure 12: Spectral radius and spectral norm of orthogonal-low-rank matrices as a function of rank
ratio, r, with n = 512. We additionally plot the theoretical predicted value for large n.

                                                     PnW
Recall that to generate our low rank connectivity matrix P, nwe first generate an orthogonal matrix
W 0 , then perform an SVD of it W = U SV T = i i ui viT , and then truncate it at rank k
              Pk
to get W = i ui viT with k ≤ n. For ||W ||, we note that because all the singular values are 1,
truncating the SVD does not change the maximum singular value so ||W || = 1 for all rank ratios
r = nk .
For ρ(W ), we note that one valid SVD of W 0 is W 0 = W 0 II, with U = W 0 , S = I and V = I.
It is sufficient to consider this particular SVD, as other SVDs correspond to arbitrary rotations of
U and V , which will not affect the final eigenvalue distribution in expectation. For this particular
SVD, W = [W10 , W20 , . . . , Wk0 , 0, . . . , 0], i.e. we take the first k columns of W 0 , and replace
the remaining entries with 0. Due to the large zero block in this matrix, W has the same non-zero
eigenvectors and eigenvalues as the k × k principal submatrix of W 0 : W1:k,1:k  0     1
                                                                                         . Życzkowski &
Sommers (1999) studies the eigenvalues of the principal submatrix of random orthogonal matrices
   1
       for eigenvectors we need to concatenate the remaining n − k zeros to have the correct dimension


                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                        √
and shows that the distribution of these eigenvalues has mean E[λ] = r for rank ratio r = nk .
        √ Var[λ] → 0 as n → ∞ at fixed r (Życzkowski & Sommers, 1999), so we have
Furthermore,
ρ(W ) = r for large n. Empirical verification of this is provided in Figure 12 for n = 512.


A.6.4    G LOROT U NIFORM AND L OW RANK


                                                 Glorot Uniform + Low Rank
                            Spectral radius of W, (W)                               Spectral norm of W, ||W||
                1.0                                                     2.0
                0.8
                                                                        1.5
          (W)


                                                                ||W||
                0.6
                                                                        1.0
                0.4
                                                                        0.5
                0.2
                                                                        0.0
                      0.0    0.2    0.4    0.6      0.8   1.0                 0.0    0.2    0.4    0.6     0.8   1.0
                                   Rank ratio, r                                           Rank ratio, r

Figure 13: Spectral radius and spectral norm of uniform-low-rank matrices as a function of rank
ratio, r, with n = 512.


As with the orthogonal-low-rank case, low-rank approximation does not affect the spectral norm
of W when using a Glorot Uniform initialization scheme. Proving results for the spectral radius of
low-rank uniform initialization is more difficult due to the more complex eigenstructure of uniformly
initialized matrices compared to orthogonal ones. Thus, we leave it to future work to formally prove
the relationship between rank ratio and spectral radius. We observe empirically in Figure 13 that
spectral radius is increasing with rank ratio, like with the orthogonal-low-rank case.


A.7     SINGULAR VALUE SPECTRUM AND EIGENSPECTRUM AT INITIALIZATION

Recall in A.6, we provided theoretical results for the spectral norm and spectral radius of randomly
initialized matrices as a function of rank and sparsity in order to provide theoretical guarantees
regarding the proposed parameterization of the recurrent weights Wrec (r, s) at initialization. As
explained in A.5.2, we also motivated the parameterization with respect to the entire the spectrum of
singular values due to its connection with robustness. Our theoretical results regarding the spectral
norm as a function of rank and sparsity do not extend to the full spectrum of singular values. So, here
we provide empirical evidence regarding the decay of the singular value spectrum of the recurrent
weights as a function of rank and sparsity (we also provide plots of the decay of the eigenspectrum
of the recurrent weights to demonstrate the similarity between the two related, yet distinct spectra).


A.7.1    O RTHOGONAL INITIALIZATION

Here, we examine the singular value spectrum for the orthogonally initialized recurrent weights
across various ranks and sparsities. We note that as sparsity increases, the rate at which the sin-
gular value spectrum decays decrease (Figure 14). As discussed in A.5.2, this raises the effective
dimensionality of the transformation induced by the recurrent weights on the hidden-state vector.
Similarly, as rank increases, the rate at which the singular value spectrum decays also decreases
(Figure 14). This is interesting as increasing sparsity removes parameters from the model, whereas
increases rank adds parameters to the model. Hence, we observe that pruning by increasing sparsity
and pruning by decreasing rank are distinct with respect to the decay each induces in the singular
value spectrum of the recurrent weights. Furthermore, note that we observe the exact same patterns
with respect to the recurrent eigenspectra as well (Figure 15).


                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Singular value spectra of orthogonally initialized recurrent weights across various ranks
and sparsities sorted in decreasing order.


Figure 15: Eigenspectra of orthogonally initialized recurrent weights across various ranks and spar-
sities sorted in decreasing order.


A.7.2   G LOROT UNIFORM INITIALIZATION

Here, we examine the singular value spectrum for the Glorot uniform initialized recurrent weights
across various ranks and sparsities. The decay patterns observed with respect to the singular value
and eigenvalue spectra in the orthogonally initialized weights hold here as well (Figures 16, 17).


Figure 16: Singular value spectra of Glorot uniform initialized recurrent weights across various
ranks and sparsities sorted in decreasing order.


Figure 17: Eigenspectra of Glorot uniform initialized recurrent weights across various ranks and
sparsities sorted in decreasing order.



                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.8   T RAINED NETWORK DYNAMICS RESULTS


In this section, we provide plots for various analyses we conducted on the trained networks that were
not included in the main portion of the paper.


Figure 18: Effective dimensionality of RNN state-space trajectories across various ranks and spar-
sities. Note that the dynamics of RNNs are higher-dimensional than the dynamics we observe in
CfCs. This, alongside the disparity in spectral norm, offers intuition as to why we find that CfCs
tend to outperform RNNs under distribution shift.


Figure 19: a) Spectral radius of recurrent weights Wrec (r, s) in trained RNN networks across ranks
and sparsities. b) Frobenius norm of recurrent gradients Gt as a function of time. Note that the
norms are plotted in log space and translated to decay from 0 to enable easier comparison. For
details on the computation, refer to A.11.


        Figure 20: Spectral norm of the input weights across models, ranks and sparsities.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 21: Decay of the recurrent singular value spectrum across models, ranks and sparsities as
measured by normalizing the sorted spectrum by the spectral norm. We find that the prior induced
at initialization holds at convergence: namely, as sparsity increases the rate of decay of the spectrum
decreases and as rank decreases the rate of decay of the spectrum increases.


Figure 22: Decay of the input singular value spectrum across models, ranks and sparsities as mea-
sured by normalizing the sorted spectrum by the spectral norm. We find that the decay is quite
similar across models, sparsities and ranks, which aligns with many of our findings suggesting that
the input weights are little affected by changes in the rank and sparsity of the recurrent weights.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 23: Singular value spectrum of the recurrent weights of the trained models across various
ranks and sparsities sorted in decreasing order.


Figure 24: Singular value spectrum of the input weights of the trained models across various ranks
and sparsities sorted in decreasing order.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 25: Eigenspectrum of the recurrent weights of the trained models across various ranks and
sparsities sorted in decreasing order of magnitude.


Figure 26: Dimensionality analysis of full state-space trajectories collected from the online, closed-
loop in-distribution simulation analyzed in Figure 6. Here, we plot the explained variance curve
over all principal components to provide a more complete view of the effective dimensionality of
the trajectories, as opposed to only the top 5 PCs.



                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.9     F ULL RESULTS

A.9.1    O NLINE AND OFFLINE PERFORMANCE
Here, we provide offline validation/test loss, online in-distribution rewards and online rewards under
distribution shift for each Gym environment (Brockman et al., 2016) that we ran experiments on:
Seaquest, Alien and HalfCheetah. For each environment, we considered 5 types of models: CfCs,
RNNs, LSTMs, GRUs and CNNs. For each of the recurrent architectures we considered models of
various 5 different ranks and 4 different sparsities. Full details on the experimental setup are given
in A.11.


Figure 27: Online and offline performance of recurrent networks under different ranks and sparsities
in the Seaquest environment. Note that online performance of Seaquest was presented in the main
portion of the paper, but here we include it alongside the offline losses evaluated on validation/test
set. a) In-distribution rewards in the online, closed-loop setting normalized by the rewards obtained
by the expert in-distribution. b) Rewards averaged across 5 distribution shifts, normalized by the re-
wards obtained by the expert under distribution shift. c) Loss of model evaluated on a validation/test
set.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Sparsity
            Model     Rank
                                   0              0.2               0.5        0.8
              CfC       1     0.86 (0.03)      0.93 (0.04)    0.88 (0.03)   0.8 (0.05)
                        5     0.81 (0.06)      0.86 (0.05)    0.79 (0.06)   0.71 (0.06)
                        16    1.01 (0.06)      0.92 (0.06)    0.79 (0.05)    0.9 (0.05)
                        27    0.91 (0.06)      0.97 (0.04)    0.88 (0.06)   0.83 (0.06)
                       full   0.97 (0.04)      0.76 (0.08)     0.7 (0.05)   0.76 (0.06)
            LSTM         1    0.99 (0.04)      0.83 (0.04)     0.9 (0.06)   0.92 (0.05)
                        5     0.94 (0.03)      0.94 (0.05)    0.88 (0.06)   0.88 (0.05)
                        16    0.94 (0.04)      0.94 (0.07)     0.9 (0.06)    0.9 (0.07)
                        27     1.0 (0.03)      0.99 (0.05)     0.9 (0.06)   0.88 (0.06)
                       full    0.9 (0.05)      0.98 (0.03)     0.9 (0.06)    0.9 (0.06)
             RNN        1     0.94 (0.06)      0.92 (0.06)    0.89 (0.05)    0.9 (0.05)
                        5     0.96 (0.05)      0.86 (0.05)    0.94 (0.06)   0.92 (0.06)
                        16    0.94 (0.06)       0.9 (0.05)    0.88 (0.06)   1.07 (0.02)
                        27    0.88 (0.05)      0.83 (0.05)    1.01 (0.06)   0.91 (0.03)
                       full   0.92 (0.04)      0.92 (0.04)    0.92 (0.05)   0.86 (0.06)
             GRU         1    0.81 (0.06)      1.04 (0.04)     1.0 (0.05)    0.9 (0.04)
                        5     0.85 (0.04)      0.84 (0.06)    0.85 (0.06)   0.91 (0.04)
                        16    0.92 (0.06)      0.92 (0.05)    0.78 (0.05)   0.94 (0.05)
                        27    0.79 (0.05)      0.95 (0.06)    0.79 (0.06)   0.84 (0.05)
                       full   0.82 (0.04)      0.95 (0.06)    0.93 (0.06)   0.94 (0.05)
             CNN        1          —                 —              —           —
                        5          —                 —              —           —
                        16         —                 —              —           —
                        27         —                 —              —           —
                       full    0.77 (0.05)           —              —           —

Table 1: Mean episodic in-distribution rewards in Seaquest environment normalized by rewards
obtained by expert policy. Normalized rewards are given ±1 SE which is shown in parentheses.


                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Sparsity
             Model     Rank
                                    0             0.2              0.5        0.8
              CfC        1     1.12 (0.05)     1.03 (0.03)   0.95 (0.02)   0.93 (0.03)
                          5    1.12 (0.03)     1.26 (0.03)   0.83 (0.02)   0.76 (0.03)
                         16    0.76 (0.03)     0.85 (0.03)   0.73 (0.03)   0.8 (0.03)
                         27    0.95 (0.02)     0.91 (0.03)   0.74 (0.02)   0.77 (0.03)
                        full   1.28 (0.03)     0.95 (0.03)   0.59 (0.04)   0.98 (0.03)
             LSTM        1     0.77 (0.03)     0.68 (0.04)   0.76 (0.03)   0.91 (0.02)
                          5    0.67 (0.04)     0.71 (0.04)   0.82 (0.03)   0.89 (0.02)
                         16    0.66 (0.05)     0.64 (0.04)   0.62 (0.05)   0.62 (0.05)
                         27     0.7 (0.04)     0.63 (0.05)   0.74 (0.04)   0.66 (0.05)
                        full   0.58 (0.05)     0.67 (0.04)   0.69 (0.04)   0.78 (0.05)
              RNN         1    0.78 (0.02)     0.96 (0.02)    0.7 (0.04)   0.87 (0.02)
                          5    0.78 (0.02)     0.82 (0.02)    0.7 (0.03)   0.83 (0.03)
                         16    0.96 (0.02)     0.76 (0.03)   0.73 (0.03)   0.73 (0.03)
                         27    0.71 (0.04)     0.68 (0.04)   0.62 (0.04)   0.71 (0.04)
                        full   0.51 (0.03)     0.61 (0.04)   0.61 (0.04)   0.78 (0.04)
              GRU        1     0.8 (0.05)      0.67 (0.05)   0.61 (0.04)   0.67 (0.04)
                          5    0.84 (0.05)      0.8 (0.05)   0.76 (0.04)   0.66 (0.04)
                         16    0.76 (0.04)     0.66 (0.04)   0.62 (0.04)   0.69 (0.04)
                         27    0.73 (0.05)     0.69 (0.04)   0.67 (0.04)   0.73 (0.04)
                        full   0.78 (0.04)     0.76 (0.04)    0.7 (0.04)    0.6 (0.04)
              CNN         1        —               —               —           —
                          5        —               —               —           —
                         16        —               —               —           —
                         27        —               —               —           —
                        full   0.58 (0.04)         —               —           —

Table 2: Mean episodic rewards under distribution shift in Seaquest environment normalized by
performance of the expert policy under distribution shift. Rewards are given ±1 SE which is shown
in parentheses.


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 28: Online and offline performance of recurrent networks under different ranks and sparsities
in the Alien environment. a) In-distribution rewards in the online, closed-loop setting normalized by
rewards obtained by the expert in-distribution. a) In-distribution rewards in the online, closed-loop
setting normalized by the rewards obtained by the expert in-distribution. b) Rewards averaged across
5 distribution shifts, normalized by the rewards obtained by the expert under distribution shift. c)
Loss of model evaluated on a validation/test set.


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Sparsity
             Model    Rank
                                   0              0.2              0.5        0.8
              CfC       1     0.59 (0.07)      0.81 (0.14)   0.95 (0.11)   0.83 (0.19)
                         5     0.52 (0.1)      0.84 (0.14)   0.66 (0.13)   0.98 (0.14)
                        16    0.94 (0.14)      0.45 (0.05)   0.42 (0.05)   0.47 (0.04)
                        27     1.1 (0.18)      0.94 (0.19)   1.01 (0.17)   0.58 (0.08)
                       full    1.2 (0.21)      0.64 (0.12)   0.47 (0.07)    0.7 (0.11)
             LSTM       1     0.92 (0.12)      0.8 (0.12)    0.92 (0.12)   0.81 (0.12)
                         5     0.9 (0.12)      0.93 (0.15)    0.8 (0.15)    1.1 (0.18)
                        16    0.87 (0.13)      0.9 (0.12)    1.09 (0.13)   0.84 (0.16)
                        27    1.11 (0.14)      1.12 (0.15)    0.8 (0.14)   0.92 (0.12)
                       full    1.0 (0.14)      0.95 (0.14)   1.15 (0.12)   0.88 (0.17)
             RNN         1    0.77 (0.12)      0.73 (0.11)     0.8 (0.1)    0.8 (0.11)
                         5    0.96 (0.11)      0.64 (0.11)    0.82 (0.1)   0.78 (0.14)
                        16     0.54 (0.1)      0.76 (0.11)   0.97 (0.06)   0.76 (0.11)
                        27    0.92 (0.11)      0.79 (0.12)   0.75 (0.1)    0.71 (0.11)
                       full   0.97 (0.09)      0.71 (0.13)   0.97 (0.11)    0.57 (0.1)
             GRU        1     0.81 (0.11)      0.64 (0.11)   0.71 (0.11)   0.52 (0.11)
                         5    0.72 (0.09)      0.87 (0.12)   0.83 (0.12)   0.44 (0.06)
                        16      0.8 (0.1)      0.86 (0.11)    0.72 (0.1)   0.64 (0.12)
                        27     0.54 (0.1)      0.67 (0.11)    0.55 (0.1)   0.79 (0.11)
                       full     0.6 (0.1)      0.54 (0.12)   0.77 (0.14)   0.89 (0.11)
             CNN         1        —                —               —           —
                         5        —                —               —           —
                        16        —                —               —           —
                        27        —                —               —           —
                       full   0.64 (0.09)          —               —           —

Table 3: Mean episodic in-distribution rewards in Alien environment normalized by rewards ob-
tained by expert policy. Normalized rewards are given ±1 SE which is shown in parentheses.


                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Sparsity
             Model     Rank
                                    0             0.2              0.5        0.8
              CfC        1     0.81 (0.04)     0.52 (0.02)   0.62 (0.03)   0.77 (0.05)
                          5     1.1 (0.02)     0.78 (0.02)   0.67 (0.02)   0.51 (0.03)
                         16     0.8 (0.02)     1.05 (0.05)   0.3 (0.02)    0.55 (0.03)
                         27    0.48 (0.02)     0.64 (0.02)   0.66 (0.02)   0.73 (0.01)
                        full   0.44 (0.01)     0.41 (0.02)    0.6 (0.03)    0.6 (0.02)
             LSTM        1     0.63 (0.03)     0.58 (0.05)   0.88 (0.05)   0.66 (0.06)
                          5    0.87 (0.06)      0.08 (0.0)   0.81 (0.06)   0.69 (0.05)
                         16    0.81 (0.06)      0.08 (0.0)   0.56 (0.03)    0.8 (0.04)
                         27    0.72 (0.06)      0.6 (0.05)   0.64 (0.05)   0.63 (0.05)
                        full   0.65 (0.06)      0.3 (0.01)   0.76 (0.06)   0.66 (0.04)
              RNN         1    0.68 (0.03)     0.84 (0.05)   0.65 (0.03)   0.62 (0.03)
                          5    0.69 (0.06)     0.48 (0.04)   0.82 (0.05)   0.62 (0.04)
                         16    0.65 (0.03)     0.68 (0.05)   0.76 (0.05)    0.6 (0.04)
                         27     0.8 (0.04)     0.67 (0.05)   0.74 (0.06)   0.72 (0.05)
                        full   0.58 (0.04)     0.77 (0.04)   0.64 (0.05)   0.49 (0.02)
              GRU        1      0.1 (0.0)      0.94 (0.05)   0.82 (0.03)   0.71 (0.04)
                          5    0.95 (0.05)     0.92 (0.08)   0.76 (0.05)   0.77 (0.05)
                         16    1.04 (0.03)     0.95 (0.05)    0.08 (0.0)   0.69 (0.03)
                         27    0.73 (0.04)     0.87 (0.05)   0.67 (0.05)   0.82 (0.07)
                        full   0.69 (0.05)      0.08 (0.0)   0.78 (0.03)   0.86 (0.05)
              CNN         1        —               —               —           —
                          5        —               —               —           —
                         16        —               —               —           —
                         27        —               —               —           —
                        full   0.67 (0.04)         —               —           —

Table 4: Mean episodic rewards under distribution shift in Alien environment normalized by per-
formance of the expert policy under distribution shift. Rewards are given ±1 SE which is shown in
parentheses.


                                                34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 29: Online and offline performance of recurrent networks under different ranks and sparsi-
ties in the HalfCheetah environment. a) In-distribution rewards in the online, closed-loop setting
normalized by the rewards obtained by the expert in-distribution. b) Rewards averaged across 5
distribution shifts, normalized by the rewards obtained by the expert under distribution shift. c) Loss
of model evaluated on a validation/test set.


                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     Sparsity
        Model    Rank
                                0              0.2              0.5           0.8
         CfC       1      0.945 (0.005)   0.929 (0.003)   0.924 (0.004)    0.92 (0.003)
                   5      0.941 (0.003)   0.926 (0.003)    0.91 (0.002)   0.936 (0.002)
                   16     0.932 (0.002)   0.941 (0.003)   0.919 (0.002)   0.963 (0.005)
                   27     0.937 (0.004)   0.874 (0.004)   0.914 (0.003)   0.883 (0.004)
                  full    0.934 (0.003)   0.816 (0.006)   0.877 (0.002)   0.847 (0.003)
        LSTM        1     0.933 (0.003)    0.94 (0.003)   0.927 (0.003)   0.936 (0.003)
                   5      0.95 (0.003)    0.925 (0.004)   0.937 (0.002)   0.962 (0.003)
                   16     0.937 (0.003)   0.991 (0.003)   0.968 (0.005)   0.905 (0.003)
                   27     0.931 (0.003)   0.965 (0.004)   0.945 (0.003)   0.872 (0.003)
                  full    0.951 (0.003)   0.875 (0.003)   0.889 (0.008)   0.842 (0.009)
         RNN       1      0.943 (0.004)   0.917 (0.007)    0.93 (0.005)   0.903 (0.003)
                   5      0.941 (0.003)   0.946 (0.003)   0.885 (0.003)   0.921 (0.003)
                   16     0.941 (0.002)   0.942 (0.003)   0.954 (0.003)   0.922 (0.004)
                   27     0.944 (0.003)   0.917 (0.003)    0.9 (0.029)    0.861 (0.006)
                  full    0.938 (0.003)    0.92 (0.002)   0.971 (0.003)   0.924 (0.021)
         GRU        1     0.937 (0.002)   0.938 (0.004)   0.932 (0.003)   0.937 (0.002)
                   5      0.944 (0.002)   0.935 (0.003)   0.938 (0.003)   0.927 (0.003)
                   16      0.93 (0.003)   0.934 (0.003)   0.927 (0.003)   0.943 (0.003)
                   27      0.94 (0.002)   0.943 (0.003)   0.926 (0.011)   0.934 (0.001)
                  full    0.937 (0.004)   0.936 (0.003)   0.949 (0.003)   0.935 (0.002)
         CNN       1           —               —                —              —
                   5           —               —                —              —
                   16          —               —                —              —
                   27          —               —                —              —
                  full    0.90 (0.003)         —                —              —

Table 5: Mean episodic in-distribution rewards in HalfCheetah environment normalized by rewards
obtained by expert policy. Normalized rewards are given ±1 SE which is shown in parentheses.


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     Sparsity
        Model     Rank
                                0              0.2              0.5             0.8
         CfC        1     0.842 (0.009)   0.919 (0.001)    0.903 (0.003)   0.852 (0.004)
                    5     0.915 (0.002)   0.869 (0.007)    0.848 (0.004)   0.82 (0.005)
                    16     0.86 (0.007)   0.838 (0.008)    0.871 (0.003)    0.908 (0.0)
                    27    0.822 (0.008)   0.858 (0.001)    0.813 (0.006)   0.898 (0.003)
                   full     0.9 (0.001)   0.891 (0.005)    0.812 (0.006)   0.795 (0.003)
        LSTN        1     0.871 (0.001)    0.894 (0.0)     0.86 (0.003)    0.872 (0.004)
                    5     0.849 (0.006)   0.885 (0.001)      0.88 (0.0)    0.909 (0.003)
                    16    0.875 (0.002)   0.847 (0.008)    0.83 (0.006)    0.918 (0.001)
                    27    0.848 (0.006)   0.893 (0.002)     0.882 (0.0)    0.903 (0.003)
                   full   0.888 (0.001)   0.848 (0.004)    0.905 (0.001)    0.86 (0.003)
         RNN        1     0.861 (0.003)   0.854 (0.002)    0.806 (0.009)   0.846 (0.003)
                    5      0.87 (0.003)   0.841 (0.006)    0.875 (0.001)   0.824 (0.008)
                    16    0.843 (0.006)   0.841 (0.007)    0.819 (0.009)   0.836 (0.005)
                    27    0.852 (0.004)   0.903 (0.004)    0.844 (0.006)    0.891 (0.0)
                   full    0.82 (0.009)   0.869 (0.002)     0.884 (0.0)    0.819 (0.009)
        LSTM         1    0.866 (0.001)   0.843 (0.003)     0.85 (0.003)   0.872 (0.001)
                    5     0.872 (0.003)   0.849 (0.006)     0.882 (0.0)    0.849 (0.004)
                    16    0.878 (0.002)   0.858 (0.006)    0.887 (0.001)   0.888 (0.001)
                    27    0.846 (0.004)   0.831 (0.007)    0.859 (0.004)   0.862 (0.004)
                   full   0.891 (0.001)    0.864 (0.0)     0.872 (0.003)   0.877 (0.001)
         CNN        1          —                —               —               —
                    5          —                —               —               —
                    16         —                —               —               —
                    27         —                —               —               —
                   full   0.836 (0.003)         —               —               —

Table 6: Mean episodic rewards under distribution shift in HalfCheetah environment normalized by
performance of the expert policy under distribution shift. Rewards are given ±1 SE which is shown
in parentheses.


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.10    I NITIALIZATION OF RECURRENT WEIGHTS

We leverage an initialization scheme consistent across each of the recurrent networks in order to
control for potential confounding effects that could arise due to differences present in the default
initializers for the recurrent weights. We will first discuss what the default initialization scheme
looks like for the recurrent networks we considered and then motivate our proposed method of
initialization.
Default initialization schemes. We define the default initialization schemes of recurrent weights in
RNNs, LSTMs and GRUs as those implemented by TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) and the default
initialization of recurrent weights in a CfC as given by the open-source implementation presented in
Hasani et al. (2021). The default initializers for these models differ in a couple key areas. For one,
RNNs, LSTMs and GRUs are orthogonally initialized whereas CfCs are initialized from a Glorot
uniform distribution.


Figure 30: Spectral norm of random square matrices drawn from orthogonal and Glorot uniform
distributions for various sized matrices.

In Figure 30, we investigate the spectral norm of random matrices drawn from orthogonal and Glorot
uniform distributions. Due to the significant disparity between the spectral norms inherent to the
distributions, we opt to standardize the initialization scheme across all recurrent models by drawing
the weights from an orthogonal distribution. We motivate this further in the description of our
initializer.
Another concern is that RNNs, LSTMs and GRUs are distinct with respect to how they are orthogo-
nally initialized: in particular, consider [W0 ], [W0 , W1 , W2 , W3 ], [W0 , W1 , W2 ] which represent
the concatenated recurrent weights in RNNs, LSTMs and GRUs respectively. Rather than initialize
each Wi to be orthogonal, TensorFlow draws the concatenated set of matrices from an orthogonal
distribution. The following result demonstrates why this is problematic in the context of our work.
Lemma 1. Consider matrices A ∈ Rn×p and B ∈ Rn×q . Let C = [A B] denote the concatenation
of the two matrices. Then, ||A|| ≤ ||C|| and ||B|| ≤ ||C|| where || · || denotes the spectral norm.

Proof. We will first consider the case of matrix A. By definition, ||A|| = supx̸=0 ||Ax||
                                                                                     ||x|| . If we
constrain x to be of unit norm, then ||A|| = supx̸=0 ||Ax||. Let z denote the unit norm vector
that maximizes ||Ax||. Then, we can construct another vector m = [z 0 0 · · · 0] which represents
the concatenation of z which contains p entries and a zero-vector which contains q entries. Note
that by construction m is also unit norm. It follows that ||Az|| ≤ ||Cm|| which means that the
maximum attainable value of ||Cx|| is greater than or equal to the maximum attainable value of
||Ax|| over all unit vectors x. Thus, ||A|| ≤ ||C||. An analogous argument can be made to show
that ||B|| ≤ ||C||.

By Lemma 1, it follows that the default initialization in LSTMs and GRUs produces submatrices Wi
with spectral norm less than the spectral norm of the default initialized recurrent weights in RNNs.
We will address this discrepancy in our proposed initialization scheme.


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Orthogonal spectral-initialization scheme. Orthogonal spectral-initialization refers to the initial-
ization scheme we utilized for the models in all the results we presented. First and foremost, this
standardizes the distribution of the recurrent weights to be orthogonal. Note that we also formalize
an analogous initializer which we call Glorot uniform spectral-initialization which is detailed in the
next subsection.
In practice, we use the orthogonal distribution as it leans on the intuition of our connectivity prior
in which we show empirically that networks initialized at lower spectral norms tends to converge to
solutions with lower spectral norms as well. Because we care about the robustness of the network
as measured by spectral norm at convergence and found that orthogonal weights have lower spectral
norm than Glorot uniform ones (Figure 30), we opt to draw from the orthogonal distribution.
With respect to the concatenation issue discussed above, we address this by instead drawing each
recurrent weight matrix from an orthogonal distribution as opposed to drawing the full, concatenated
set of matrices from one. This ensures equivalent spectral norms across all recurrent weights and
models.
Finally, the spectral-initialization refers specifically to the rank-r SVD performed on the full-rank
weights Wrec to generate W1 , W2 (Section 3.1) for training. We opted to perform a spectral de-
composition as opposed to drawing W1 and W2 from orthogonal distributions individually because
W1 W2 is no longer orthogonally distributed. In addition, note that multiplying the two matrices
does not preserve the spectral norm of Wrec . In contrast, by the Eckhart-Young-Minsky theorem, a
rank-r SVD is the most efficient approximation of Wrec under the spectral norm.
Note that the drawback of this initialization scheme is that we are unable to prove all the results posed
in Theorem 1 due to the dependence between entries in an orthogonal matrix (appendix A.6.2). In
contrast, we are able to prove Theorem 1 in the case of uniformly distributed matrices, which we
motivate next.
Glorot uniform spectral-initialization scheme. The Glorot uniform spectral-initializer refers to
the same construction as the orthogonal spectral-initializer, except recurrent weights are drawn from
Glorot uniform distributions instead. Note that this distribution is valuable if one wants theoretical
guarantees for all the properties given in Theorem 1. However, this comes at the cost of empirically
less robust models as evidenced by the learned weights possessing higher spectral norm relative to
their orthogonally initialized counterparts (results not shown).

A.11     D ETAILS OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

In this section, we extensively detail each of the experiments and analyses that were presented in the
main portion of the paper.

A.11.1    G ENERATING EXPERT TRAJECTORIES

Arcade learning environments. Within the set of ALEs, we considered the Seaquest and Alien
environments. These environments in particular were chosen as we were able to train reinforcement
learning agents that achieved performance competitive to state-of-the-art using out-of-the-box mod-
els provided by RLlib (Liang et al., 2017). For the ALEs, we train an Ape-X DQN (Horgan et al.,
2018b) model using the Atari pre-processing framework detailed in Horgan et al. (2018b). We em-
ploy the default implementation of the Ape-X DQN model given by RLlib which is a tuned version
of the model presented in Horgan et al. (2018b). After the model is trained to perform sufficiently
well in the environment, we use it to generate expert trajectories. Specifically, we generate 100 roll-
outs of the trained model’s observations and actions taken in the environment which were later used
to fit the recurrent models we examine in an imitation learning framework.
MuJoCo. Within the set of MuJoCo environments, we considered the HalfCheetah environment.
Again, this environment was chosen based on its amenability to models provided by RLlib. For the
MuJoCo environment, we employ an implementation of proximal policy optimization (PPO) given
by RLlib (Schulman et al., 2017). We also leverage the default set of hyperparameters given by
RLlib to train the model. As we did with the ALEs, we generate 100 rollouts of the trained model’s
observations and actions taken in the environment which were later used to fit the recurrent models
using imitation learning.


                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.11.2    I MITATION LEARNING FRAMEWORK

For each recurrent architecture, we construct a model to be fit offline on the generated expert tra-
jectories. We have layers in the network that act to preprocess the observations before entering the
recurrent portion of the network as well as output layers from the recurrent portion in accordance
to the action space specified by the environments. Since the observation and action spaces in ALEs
and MuJuCo environments are distinct, we construct different network architectures for each.
First, we consider the network architectures used for ALEs. In their raw form, observations are
given by a 210×160×3 dimensional image, but they are preprocessed using the Atari preprocessing
specified by Horgan et al. (2018b). This yields new observations of dimension 84 × 84 × 3 which
are used as inputs to the model.

                                     layer type          activation
                                 Conv(64, k=5, s=2)         relu
                                 Conv(128, k=5, s=2)        relu
                                 Conv(128, k=5, s=2)        relu
                                   AveragePooling          none
                                  TimeDistributed          none
                                    recurrentNet           none
                                  FC(numActions)          softmax

                                Table 7: ALE network architecture

In the table above, k denotes the kernel size and s denotes the stride of the convolution. recur-
rentNet refers to the recurrent network module that was varied and is discussed in further detail
below. numActions refers to the number of actions the agent can take in the environment. Since
the action space is a discrete categorical variable that can take on numActions different values, the
network is trained using categorical cross-entropy loss. We detail the model hyperparameters and
corresponding grid search in A.11.3.
Next, we will consider the network architecture employed for MuJoCo networks.

                                      layer type       activation
                                       FC(256)            relu
                                       FC(256)            relu
                                   TimeDistributed       none
                                     recurrentNet        none
                                   FC(numActions)         tanh

                              Table 8: MuJoCo network architecture


Since the action space for MuJuCo environments in continuous, the output is a continuous variable
that can take on numActions different values and the network is trained using MSE loss. Further-
more, since the action space is bounded within the interval [−1, 1], a tanh activation function is
applied to the output layer.

A.11.3    M ODEL HYPERPARAMETERS

Below is a table with the model hyperparameters that were used in both the ALE networks and
MuJoCo networks. Parameters in square brackets represent a grid search over which the best per-
forming model was chosen. Note that only offline performance on the validation/test set was used to
determine the best performing model in the grid search. Parameters in curly braces are dimensions
across which the network was individually evaluated for comparison.
The architecture of the convolutional head in the ALE networks was used on the basis of work
presented in Lechner et al. (2022) which conducting extensive grid searching across convolutional
architectures over many ALEs. Analogously, the dense head used in the MuJoCo architecture was
drawn from Hasani et al. (2021).


                                                 40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          hyperparameter                   value
                             optimizer       Adam (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999)
                            hidden size                      64
                           learning rate     [5 ∗ 10−5 , 1 ∗ 10−4 , 5 ∗ 10−4 ]
                              epochs                        150
                                rank               {1, 5, 16, 27, full}
                              sparsity              {0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8}

                                  Table 9: Model hyperparameters


In all the environments, we considered models of rank 1, 5, 16, 27, full and sparsities of
0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8. Note that the recurrent weights in the full rank networks are not rank decomposed,
as they are for the low-rank networks. These ranks and sparsities were chosen such that for each
rank we examined, we also looked at a sparsity level for which the number of recurrent parameters
in each parameterization is roughly equivalent. For example, since the networks we constructed had
a hidden dimension of size 64, a recurrent matrix with a sparsity level of 0.5 has the same number
of parameters as one with a rank of 16. We did not present results of networks with a very high
recurrent sparsity like 0.95 (which would roughly be the sparse analog to rank-1 networks) due to
optimization difficulties encountered, particularly in LSTMs and GRUs. In order to ensure that the
performance of a given network wasn’t due to a favorable random sparse mask, we trained each
model 3 times from different random seeds and averaged over the model performance.
Finally, we also employed an initialization scheme for the recurrent weights distinct from the default
initialization schemes given in open-source implementations. For details on this, refer to A.10.

A.11.4    E VALUATION METRICS

Trained models were evaluated offline on a validation/test set with respect to their cross-entropy loss
in the case of ALE networks and mean-squared error in the case of MuJoCo networks. However, in
practice, we care about how the agent performs when deployed in the environment closed-loop. The
online rewards were computed by performing 10 simulations of the agent in the environments and
averaging over the rewards from each episode. The in-distribution setting refers to the environments
in which the observations are not modified aside from preprocessing performed by RLlib.
In the distribution shift setting, for the ALE observations we perform 5 types of perturbations to the
agent’s observations: cutout, brighten, darken, noise, and blur. In cutout, we remove some pixels
from the center of the input image. In brighten, we shift all the pixel values by a constant amount
in the positive direction and do the same for darken but shift the pixels in the negative direction. To
noise the image, we draw random noise from a uniform distribution and add it to the input image.
For distribution shifts in the MuJoCo environments, we perform 3 types of perturbations: noise,
dropout and offset. To noise the observations, we draw random noise from a normal distribution
and add it to the observation vector. To blur the observations, we perform a Gaussian blurring on
the image. To perform dropout, we mask a subset of the dimensions in the observation vector. To
perform offset, we, with equal probability, shift the observation vector in the positive or negative
direction by an amount constant across all dimensions. For each of the inputs during closed-loop
navigation, we apply the distribution shift with probability p = 0.1.
To evaluate the models, both in-distribution and under distribution shift, we normalize the rewards
by the performance of the expert policy in order to convert the rewards into units that allow us to
benchmark the performance of the imitation learning agents while also making comparisons across
recurrent models and connectivities.

A.11.5    D ETAILS ON NETWORK ANALYSES

In this section, we further elaborate on the chosen modes of analysis in the trained recurrent net-
works and in cases where the metric computation is potentially ambiguous we elaborate on the
methodology used to compute it. All the plots shown in the paper regarding these analyses were
performed on models trained in the Seaquest environment.


                                                  41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Spectral analyses. For recurrent networks that have more than one set of recurrent weights (CfCs,
LSTMs, GRUs), any of the spectral statistics that were computed (i.e. eigenspectrum, recurrent
weights singular value spectrum, input weights singular value spectrum, etc.) we compute and plot
a single statistic that represents the average over the statistics of each of the individual recurrent
weight matrices.
On a separate note, with respect to measuring the decay of the singular value spectrum, note that we
normalized the sorted set of singular values by the spectral norm. This was done in order to explain
away the magnitude of the transformation, since we separately motivate and analyze the spectral
norm. Doing so also ensures each of the decay curves start at 1 which enables comparison across
models, ranks and sparsities.
Recurrent gradient analysis. In Section 4.2, we briefly discussed the analysis performed to analyze
the evolution of the recurrent gradients across time. Here, we provide some additional details that
were not addressed in the main portion of the paper.
Firstly, we computed the norm of the gradients in log space due to the exponential decay associated
with the gradients over time (which happens in practice because gradient propagation is multiplica-
tive). Secondly, note that each of the recurrent gradients start evolving from 0. We enforced the
decay to start from 0 since we do not care about the starting value of the gradients at the end of time,
but rather how this gradient evolves in units relative to the start value (i.e. the rate of decay matters,
but not the value it started decaying at). So, we translated the curves to begin at 0, irrespective of
their starting value.
Effective dimensionality of trajectories. To understand the complexity of the dynamics across
recurrent models, connectivity ranks and connectivity sparsities, we collected the trajectories of
the model during the simulation of the agent in the online, closed-loop setting and fit a PCA on the
entire set of trajectories. We then computed the explained variance of the top 5 principal components
(PCs) as a proxy for the effective dimensionality of the trajectories. This is a canonical approach to
analyzing state-space trajectories in recurrent networks (Lechner et al., 2020).
However, we extended the canonical analysis beyond just the full state-space trajectories by de-
composing the trajectories into recurrently-driven activity and input-driven activity. In particular,
we considered Wrec ht−1 as the recurrent activity and Winp xt as the input activity. We analo-
gously aggregated these trajectories individually and computed the explained variance of the top 5
PCs. This gives us separate measurements for what the dimensionality of activity looks like in the
recurrent subspace versus the input subspace and allows us to explicitly disentangle these two axes.
For recurrent networks that have more than one set of recurrent (and input) weights (CfCs, LSTMs,
GRUs), we computed the explained variance of the top 5 PCs individually for each set of weights
and then averaged across them to produce a single number summary for the complexity of network
dynamics.

A.12    M ODEL PARAMETER COUNTS

                                       model     parameter count
                                        CfC          61632
                                       LSTM          81726
                                       RNN           20544
                                       GRU           61632

Table 10: Parameter counts of the fully-connected, full-rank versions of each recurrent model. Input
size = 256, hidden state size = 64.


                                                   42
