Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A F RAMEWORK FOR P ROMPT O PS IN G ENAI A PPLICA -
TION D EVELOPMENT L IFECYCLE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         The use of ”prompts” in the creation process of Generative Artificial Intelli-
         gence (GenAI) systems is receiving increasing interest. The significance of these
         prompts throughout the development cycle, however, is not properly used by cur-
         rent software development lifecycle approaches. This study proposes a unique
         methodology for integrating timely engineering and management into the cre-
         ation of GenAI applications.Organizations may benefit from using “PromptOps”
         to create GenAI applications more quickly, effectively, and securely. It offers a
         technique to lower the danger of bias, increase the accuracy and dependability of
         GenAI systems, and decrease the cost of development and implementation.Our
         platform facilitates the seamless integration of several automated technologies in
         software development by performing prompt operations (PromptOps). These in-
         clude Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) pipelines, work-
         flows, APIs, and more. Our approach enables developers to easily include au-
         tomated technologies, leading to a more simplified and efficient process. Fur-
         thermore, this study indicates that the framework may enable all stakeholders,
         including non-engineering units, to convert prompts into services, expanding their
         use in the building of applications. This study emphasizes the critical significance
         of prompts in GenAI and shows how their incorporation may improve AI appli-
         cation development, eventually stimulating creativity and driving the adoption of
         Generative AI technology.


1   INTRODUCTION
The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) represents a monumental milestone in the field of
Natural Language Processing (NLP). Attention-based architectures have revolutionized the field by
replacing complex recurrent or convolutional neural networks with a network architecture solely
based on attention mechanisms, resulting in models that excel in both quality and efficiency, signifi-
cantly influencing subsequent LLM advancements (Kaplan et al., 2020; Vaswani et al., 2017). These
powerful LLMs, such as GPT-3 (Generative Pre-trained Transformer 3), Palm2 (Pathways Language
Model 2) and their successors, have demonstrated remarkable capabilities as versatile computational
engines.Their ability to process and generate natural language text has found applications across a
wide range of domains, from language translation to content generation. However, harnessing the
full potential of LLMs and effectively utilizing them in real-world applications necessitates a nu-
anced understanding of the critical role that prompts play in steering these models.
Emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) The emergence of LLMs has reshaped the land-
scape of AI-driven applications. These models have the capacity to understand, interpret, and gener-
ate human language at an unprecedented scale and complexity. They have demonstrated the capabil-
ity to perform tasks that range from text completion to question-answering and text summarization.
This transformative technology has laid the foundation for a new era of AI-driven applications,
where human-machine interactions are facilitated through natural language.
The Trend Towards LLM-Based Application Development In recent years, there has been a
noticeable trend towards building applications that leverage LLMs as the underlying intelligence.
This trend can be attributed to the versatility and adaptability of LLMs, which allow developers to
create a wide array of applications without the need for custom-built machine learning models. From
simple text-based chatbots to sophisticated content generators, LLMs have become the go-to choice


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for developers seeking to integrate natural language understanding and generation capabilities into
their applications. This shift is evident in domains like customer support, content creation, and data
analysis.
The Crucial Role of Prompts in LLM Communication To harness the power of LLMs effectively,
communication with these models is achieved primarily through prompts. A prompt is a natural
language input or instruction that is provided to the LLM to elicit a desired response or behavior.
It acts as the bridge between human intent and machine execution. For example, a prompt might
instruct an LLM to translate a sentence from English to French or generate a summary of a news
article. The quality, clarity, and specificity of prompts are paramount in obtaining the desired output
from the LLM.
The Impact of Prompts and Model Variants on Output However, it is essential to recognize that
prompts alone are not the sole determinants of LLM behavior. The choice of prompt and the spe-
cific LLM variant being used can significantly influence the output generated. Different prompts
may yield varying results, even when targeting the same task. Moreover, LLMs often exist in multi-
ple versions or variants, each with its own characteristics and performance nuances. The interaction
between prompts and model versions is complex and requires careful consideration. The signifi-
cance of prompts and their management has become increasingly evident as more organizations and
developers integrate LLMs into their workflows and applications. The quality of prompts directly
impacts the utility, reliability, and accuracy of LLM-based systems. Hence, the effective control and
optimization of prompts have emerged as critical areas of research and development in the field of
NLP.
As LLMs continue to evolve and grow in power, the importance of prompt engineering becomes
a prominent concern. There has been some prior research of identifying suitable prompts (Sanh et
al., 2021;Mishra et al., 2021) along with the proposal of relevant tools (Bach et al., 2022; Zhou et
al., 2023). However, there is a lack of research concerning prompt management and operation. To
address this gap, we propose the ”GenFlow” framework, aimed at streamlining prompt management
and operations. Our main contributions are:

       • We introduce the concept of incorporating prompt management into the DevOps (Devel-
         opment and Operations) flow. By aligning PromptOps with established software develop-
         ment practices, we facilitate the seamless integration of prompt operations into develop-
         ment pipelines, workflows, and APIs. This integration ensures that prompts are managed
         consistently, enhancing the reliability and efficiency of GenAI application development.

       • Our proposed method, ”GenFlow”, empowers both developers and non-coders. This tool
         democratizes Prompt usage by providing an accessible interface for creating, modifying,
         and optimizing prompts. Its user-friendly design allows stakeholders from diverse back-
         grounds to harness the potential of prompts, thereby broadening their utility in application
         development.

       • Within our framework, we introduce the concept of Prompt as a Service (PaaS). This ex-
         tends the reach of prompts beyond development teams, enabling various stakeholders to
         utilize prompts as integral components in application building. This extension aligns with
         the growing recognition that prompt engineering will be a pivotal focus in the future of
         GenAI technology.



2   RELATED WORK

Prompt Engineering The utilization of prompts provides an intuitive and natural way for human
interaction with generative models, such as text-to-image model and LLMs. (Brown et al., 2020;
Schick & Schütze, 2021; Sanh et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022). However, the effectiveness of
LLMs requires accurate prompt design, either through manual intervention Laria & Kyle (2021) or
automated methods (Gao et al., 2021; Shin et al., 2020). It is primarily since LLMs do not interpret
prompts in the same manner as humans Albert & Ellie (2021) Yao et al. (2021). While numer-
ous successful prompt tuning methods have leveraged gradient-based optimization over continuous


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: (a) Prompt is the bridge between application and LLM (b) The diagram which describes
each step in the workflow of prompt management


spaces (Liu et al., 2021; Qin & Eisner, 2021; Lester et al., 2021), the computational cost of comput-
ing gradients escalates, especially when access to models shifts to APIs that may not offer gradient
access. This raises a practical challenge: How can we empower users to create, design, and refine
prompts effectively? This process, known as prompt engineering, is crucial for successful deploy-
ment due to the significant impact downstream predictions caused by prompt choices, especially in
zero-shot settings (Perez et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021; Albert & Ellie (2021).
      Prompt Management Prompt management is a vital aspect of the emerging field of Natural
Language Processing (NLP) where prompts serve as a bridge for interaction with Large Language
Models (LLMs). Researchers have developed various techniques to search suitable prompts, such
as prompt generation Tianyu et al. (2021) Eyal et al. (2021), prompt scoring Joe et al. (2019), and
prompt paraphrasing Jiang et al. (2020) Weizhe et al. (2021). However, the journey doesn’t end
with well-engineered prompts, there arises a need for prompt management. Prompt management
encompasses the organization, storage, and retrieval of these well-designed prompts to facilitate their
efficient use in different contexts. The most notable tools in prompt management are OpenPrompt
Ning et al. (2022) and PromptSource (Bach et al., 2022).
     OpenPrompt simplifies prompt management within the world of pre-trained language models
(PLMs). With the rise of prompt learning in natural language processing, there emerged a pressing
need for a standardized framework. OpenPrompt fills this void by offering a user-friendly, research-
focused toolkit. It’s designed to cater to diverse PLMs, task formats, and prompting modules, pro-
viding a unified platform for effective prompt management.
Alongside OpenPrompt, PromptSource steps in as an essential tool for prompt development and
sharing within the NLP landscape. As a prompt repository, its templating language for crafting
data-linked prompts, an intuitive iterative development interface, and a vibrant community that
contributes and collaborates, PromptSource empowers users with a wealth of over 2,000 prompts
spanning around 170 datasets. This invaluable resource fosters seamless prompt management and
utilization in language model training and querying, ultimately enhancing your NLP endeavors.
Although these tools have been introduced, the increasing prevalence of incorporating large lan-
guage models (LLMs) into diverse applications highlights the imperative requirement for establish-
ing operational workflows for prompts within this context. In pursuit of enhanced operational
capabilities for prompts, encompassing Continuous Delivery (CD), version control, and more, we
introduce a novel framework known as ”GenFlow.”



                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3      SYSTEM DESIGN AND WORKFLOW

The conventional approach to leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) often involves the use of
numerous prompts and processes to construct an application, particularly when each prompt requires
fine-tuning. This method, while effective in achieving specific results, can lead to complications in
maintenance, deployment, and management.


3.1    G EN F LOW FRAMEWORK

Through the abstraction of prompts into a configurable format, we simplify the development ”pro-
cess” significantly. Once prompts are transformed into configurations, they consist of parameters
(variables) and prompt text. The prompt’s parameters can be set through a user-friendly front-end
interface. Prompt configurations become a resource introduced to the backend, allowing the backend
or core application to focus on communication with the generative AI model, reducing its coupling
with backend or core applications. A simplified representation of a PromptConfig is as follows:
PromptConfig:
{
 ”param1”: ”value1”,
 ”param2”: ”value2”,
 ...
}
PromptConfig can be engineered by AI consumers from various domains and can be configured
accordingly. In other words, the same backend/core application can generate different applications
simply by employing different PromptConfigs.
With PromptConfigs in place, we can establish independent version control processes for prompts.
This includes version tracking, diff comparisons, and version control. Prompts become indepen-
dently manageable, effectively transforming prompts into PromptOps that seamlessly integrate into
DevOps practices. (Figure 2c)
However, this architecture has its limitations, as it does not facilitate a sequence of operations,
even though many applications are composed of a series of prompts. To address this limitation, we
elevate the concept of promptConfig to that of a web API. Web APIs are constructed using URLs
(Endpoints) and parameters, where each Endpoint can represent a functional module. This implies
that every promptConfig can become an individual API. The structure of a PromptConfig as a web
API is represented as follows:
PromptConfig:
{
 ”param1”: ”value1”,
 ”param2”: ”value2”,
 ...
}
PromptAPI (GET): https://domain.name/{promptName}?param1=value1&param2=value2...
PromptAPI (POST):
https://domain.name/{promptName}
POST data:
{
 ”param1”: ”value1”,


                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 ”param2”: ”value2”,
 ...
}

When each prompt becomes an API, it becomes straightforward to manage and integrate through
workflow management tools. Consequently, diverse prompts can be seamlessly combined to create
extensive applications, and even the composition of prompts can be exposed as an API.
promptCombosAPI = (prompt 1 API -¿ prompt 2 API -¿ prompt 3 API)
This approach allows us to regard Prompts as a Service. We term this entire process a ”FLOW,”
where each PromptConfig/PromptAPI serves as a ”NODE.” This sequence of operations forms a
”FLOW”, as Figure 2b, where PromptConfigs are used as ”NODES” that can be orchestrated into a
coherent process.


Figure 2: (a) This diagram illustrates how users utilize GenFlow framework (upper) (b) The diagram
of a “FLOW” (down left) (c) The PromptOps workflow (down right)


                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   G E N ODE

Within the GenFlow framework, there exists a fundamental component known as ”GeNode,” which
assumes the role of facilitating prompt editing and serves as a fundamental unit for prompt configu-
ration. Within the user interface of GeNode, users are provided with the flexibility to tailor various
facets of GeNode in accordance with their specific requirements. This entails the ability to designate
a user-defined title, specify personalized variables, and construct the prompt content according to
their preferences. For instance, users have the autonomy to create a GeNode themselves, as exempli-
fied in Figure 3. Once these configurations have been meticulously defined and subsequently saved,
the GeNode is preserved as a prompt template, effectively culminating in the creation of a GeNode
aptly named ”Social Media Post Generator.”
Through the innovative power of GeNode, users gain the remarkable ability to effortlessly create a
multitude of applications, all without the need for advanced coding skills. By simply configuring
various parameters within the GeNode interface, users can easily craft a diverse range of utilities.
These encompass a broad spectrum of functions, including translation services, computational tools,
code generation aids, and much more.
By wholeheartedly embracing GeNode’s capabilities, users not only unlock the untapped potential
of prompts for comprehending natural language but also effectively harness this resource to build an
impressive array of real-world applications. Each of these applications is meticulously tailored to
meet their unique requirements. This adaptability and flexibility undeniably position GeNode as an
indispensable and cardinal component within the continually evolving landscape of prompt-driven
tool development.


                              Figure 3: An example of GeNode design


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   G E N ODE VERSION LIST

Within the GenFlow framework, we have incorporated the concept of version control. When cre-
ating a GeNode, users have the ability to establish new versions for the same GeNode. These new
versions can be directly modified from the original GeNode prompt. Consequently, a single appli-
cation (GeNode) can have multiple distinct versions, with the option to select one as the published
version. Users can access this published version through a user-friendly URL link that leads to the
application’s web user interface. Alternatively, they can serve the application directly by copying its
API URL link.
Through this meticulously designed system, we have seamlessly integrated prompt configuration,
version control, and serving as API endpoints and web UIs within our framework. This integration
greatly simplifies the processes of application development and deployment, rendering them more
accessible, manageable, and user-friendly.

3.4   G E N ODE L IST

Once a GeNode has been successfully created, it will be listed in the GeNode List page. Each
GeNode will be accompanied by essential details such as its title, published version, version Create
time, and actions. Specifically, under the “Actions” column, users will find convenient links to
perform actions such as creating a new version, accessing the UI via URL link, and serving the
application using the API URL link. In the GenFlow UI section, visual representations will provide
further insights and guidance on these features.


                         Figure 4: The diagram of GenFlow version control


4     IMPLEMENT BASED ON OUR FRAMEWORK

To facilitate user interaction and streamline the process further, we have developed the GenFlow
web interface, as illustrated in Figure 5. Within this interface, users can seamlessly engage in prompt
design and editing on the GeNode edit page. This flexibility allows a single GeNode to be edited
into multiple versions, with users having the prerogative to select which version to publish.
Figure 7 showcases a user-friendly version list UI, which enhances the management of these differ-
ent GeNode versions. This framework empowers users to rapidly create customized applications.
Through the utilization of UI links and API links, these applications can be served effortlessly. No-
tably, this entire workflow is devoid of coding complexities, as users can solely focus on prompt
editing. This concept aligns harmoniously with our previously introduced notion of ”Prompt as a
service,” revolutionizing the application development paradigm.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By using nodes (GeNode) strung together as a flow can be achieved through various methods. Cur-
rently, there are similar services available. For instance, GCP offers Workflow (as shown in Figure
6), and AWS provides Step Functions.


    Figure 5: With the GeNode view, users can build their own application by designing the prompt


                                Figure 6: GeNode Version List view



5     CONCLUSION
In this study, we have introduced a comprehensive framework, GenFlow, to streamline and enhance
the development of applications powered by Large Language Models (LLMs) through prompt man-
agement and operation. As the utilization of LLMs becomes increasingly prevalent in diverse appli-
cations, the role of prompts in shaping the behavior of these models has become paramount.
Our framework, GenFlow, addresses the critical need for prompt management within the context of
LLM-driven application development. By seamlessly integrating prompt operations (PromptOps)
into established DevOps practices, we have demonstrated the potential to enhance the reliability
and efficiency of GenAI application development. This integration extends to Continuous Integra-
tion/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) pipelines, workflows, APIs, and more, ensuring that prompts
are consistently managed.

One of the key contributions of our approach is the democratization of prompt usage. Genflow em-
powers not only developers but also non-engineering units to create, modify, and optimize prompts
through its accessible interface. This democratization broadens the utility of prompts in application
development, facilitating collaboration and creativity across diverse teams.
Furthermore, our framework introduces the concept of Prompt as a Service (PaaS), allowing various
stakeholders to leverage prompts as integral components in application building. This extension


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Figure 7: An example of GCP Workflow service


aligns with the growing recognition that prompt engineering will play a pivotal role in the future of
GenAI technology.
Overall, the GenFlow framework offers a holistic solution to the challenges of prompt management
and operation in GenAI application development. It empowers users to harness the full potential of
LLMs while simplifying the process and promoting collaboration across disciplines. As the field
of GenAI continues to evolve, prompt management will remain a critical aspect, and GenFlow is
poised to play a pivotal role in driving innovation and efficiency in this domain.
In conclusion, the effective control and optimization of prompts through GenFlow hold the promise
of transforming the GenAI landscape, ultimately fostering creativity, reliability, and widespread
adoption of Generative AI technology. We look forward to further research and development in this
exciting field, with the aim of advancing the state of the art in GenAI application development.


R EFERENCES
Webson Albert and Pavlick Ellie. Do prompt-based models really understand the meaning of their
 prompts? 2021.

Ben-David Eyal, Oved Nadav, and Reichart Roi. Pada: A prompt-based autoregressive approach for
  adaptation unseen domains. 2021.

Zheng Bao Jiang, Frank F, Xu, Junaraki, Howcanweknowwhatlanguage, and Transactionsoftheas-
  sociationforcomputationallinguistics. 8:423–438, 2020.

Davison Joe, Feldman Joshua, and Rush Alexander M. Common sense knowledge mining from
  pretrained models. pp. 1173–1178, 2019.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reynolds Laria and Mcdonell Kyle. Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond the
  few-shot paradigm. pp. 1–7, 2021.
Ding Ning, Hu Shengding, Zhao Weilin, Chen Yulin, Liu Zhiyuan, Zheng Haitao, and Sun Maosong.
  Openprompt: An open-source framework for prompt-learning. pp. 105–113, 2022.
Gao Tianyu, Fisch Adam, and Chen Danqi. Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
  learners. pp. 3816–3830, 2021.
Yuan Weizhe, Neubig Graham, and Liu Pengfei. Bartscore: Evaluating generated text as text gener-
  ation. 34:27263–27277, 2021.
Lu Yao, Bartolo Max, Moore Alastair, Riedel Sebastian, and Stenetorp Pontus. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. 2021.


                                               10
