Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A SSESSING THE I MPACT OF D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT ON
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING P ERFORMANCE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Research in machine learning is making progress in fixing its own reproducibility
         crisis. Reinforcement learning (RL), in particular, faces its own set of unique chal-
         lenges. Comparison of point estimates, and plots that show successful convergence
         to the optimal policy during training, may obfuscate overfitting or dependence
         on the experimental setup. Although researchers in RL have proposed reliability
         metrics that account for uncertainty to better understand each algorithm’s strengths
         and weaknesses, the recommendations of past work do not assume the presence of
         out-of-distribution observations. We propose a set of evaluation methods that mea-
         sure the robustness of RL algorithms under distribution shifts. The tools presented
         here argue for the need to account for performance over time while the agent is
         acting in its environment. In particular, we recommend time series analysis as a
         method of observational RL evaluation. We also show that the unique properties of
         RL and simulated dynamic environments allow us to make stronger assumptions
         to justify the measurement of causal impact in our evaluations. We then apply
         these tools to single-agent and multi-agent environments to show the impact of
         introducing distribution shifts during test time. We present this methodology as a
         first step toward rigorous RL evaluation in the presence of distribution shifts.


1    I NTRODUCTION

The field of RL has enjoyed some spectacular recent advancements, like reaching superhuman levels at
board games (Silver et al., 2016; 2018; Bakhtin et al., 2022), sailboat racing (McKinsey & Company,
2021), multiplayer poker (Brown & Sandholm, 2019), and real-time strategy games (Berner et al.,
2019; Vinyals et al., 2019). Transitioning RL toward a rigorous science, however, has been a more
complicated journey. Like other fields in machine learning, progress in RL might be compromised
by a lack of focus on reproducibility combined with more emphasis on best-case performance. To
remedy this problem, reliability metrics have been proposed to improve reproducibility by making
RL evaluation more rigorous. Some examples include the dispersion and risk of the performance
distribution (Chan et al., 2020), and interquartile mean with score distributions (Agarwal et al., 2021).
Past work, however, does not assume the presence of distribution shift during test time.
In general, distribution shift in machine learning occurs when there is a difference between the
training and test distributions, which can significantly impact performance when the machine learning
system is deployed in the real world (Koh et al., 2021). In supervised learning, distribution shift could
cause a decrease in accuracy. We will focus on distribution shift in RL, which could cause a decline
in expected returns. This impact on performance is a symptom of overfitting in deep RL, which is
a problem that requires carefully designed evaluation protocols for detection (Zhang et al., 2018).
While there are many types of distribution shift, we will focus on test-time adversarial examples and
the introduction of new agents in multi-agent ad hoc teamwork.
Taking inspiration from car crash tests and safety ratings from trusted organizations, like the ratings
standards of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) or the Insurance Institute
for Highway Safety (IIHS), we believe RL would benefit from techniques that evaluate robust
performance after training. Here, we contribute some recommendations for evaluation protocols
using time series analysis to measure the performance of RL agents that encounter distribution
shift at test time. Specifically, we recommend (1) the comparison of time series forecasting models
of agent performance, (2) using prediction intervals to capture the distribution and uncertainty of


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


future performance, and (3) counterfactual analysis when distribution shift has been applied by the
experimenter. We believe this stress-test methodology is a promising start towards reliable comparison
of pretrained RL agents exposed to distribution shift in both single and multi-agent environments.
In section 2, we mention past related work on distribution shift and RL reproducibility. In section 3,
we argue why time series analysis is needed for evaluation of RL algorithms under distribution shift.
In section 4, we outline our recommendations for RL evaluation with time series analysis. In section
5, we provide examples of such analyses in single and multi-agent RL. In section 6, we conclude
with suggestions for future research in RL evaluation and describe how it can advance ML safety and
regulation.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Distribution (or dataset) shift occurs when the data distribution at training time differs from the data
distribution at test time (Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008). The focus of this paper is not to detect
distribution shift (Rabanser et al., 2019), but to assume it exists while measuring agent performance.
There has been work on reproducibility under distribution shift for supervised learning (Koh et al.,
2021), but RL will be the focus here. In particular, we focus on how overfitting to the training
environment can affect the agent’s performance during evaluation in a test environment (Zhang et al.,
2018). Although we are taking a time series perspective in this paper, we are not proposing a new
method of machine learning to train time series models (Ahmed et al., 2010; Masini et al., 2023).
Also, we are not proposing a method of causal machine learning (Peters et al., 2017). That is, we are
not advocating a model that learns causal representations. Furthermore, we do not claim to be the first
to use interventions in simulations for RL, or other areas of machine learning (Ahmed et al., 2021;
Lee et al., 2021; Verma & Srivastava, 2021; Lee et al., 2023; Verma et al., 2023). We contribute a
methodology that includes counterfactual time series analysis, using the impact visualization strategy
from Brodersen et al. (2015), as a way to measure the impact of distribution shift after training. We
will use time series and counterfactual analysis only as methods of RL performance evaluation. For
clarity, what we propose is not a technique to train time series or causal machine learning models, but
a methodology for RL evaluation and reliability on models that have already been trained.
Any distribution shift can be used in our methodology. Due to the interest and research progress in
adversarial attacks and ad hoc teamwork, the distribution shifts we investigate are adversarial attacks
on images (Atari game observations) and agent switching in multi-agent environments. There has
been extensive research on adversarial attacks on supervised learning models, like support vector
machines and neural networks (Huang et al., 2011; Biggio et al., 2012; Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Kurakin et al., 2016). While we will focus on the adversarial attacks proposed in Huang et al. (2017),
there has been related research on adversarial attacks in single-agent (Kos & Song, 2017; Pattanaik
et al., 2017; Rakhsha et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020), and multi-agent RL (Gleave et al., 2019; Ma
et al., 2019; Figura et al., 2021; Fujimoto et al., 2021; Casper et al., 2022; Cui et al., 2022). Another
set of experiments will test the ad hoc teamwork of the group of agents (Stone et al., 2010; Barrett &
Stone, 2015; Rahman et al., 2021; Mirsky et al., 2022), where agent switching will be treated as a
distribution shift among the group.
Rigorous evaluation of RL algorithms is still a topic that requires further investigation. Henderson
et al. (2018) show that even subtle differences, like random seeds and code implementation, can affect
the training performance of deep RL agents. Engstrom et al. (2020) give a more thorough study of
RL implementation and provide evidence that seemingly irrelevant code-level optimizations might be
the main reason why Proximal Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2017) tends to perform better
than Trust Region Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2015). Colas et al. (2018) show how the
number of random seeds relates to the probability of statistical errors when measuring performance
in the context of deep RL. The inherent brittleness in current deep RL algorithms calls into question
the reproducibility of some published results. This has led to proposals for rigorous and reliable RL
evaluation techniques grounded in statistical practice. Chan et al. (2020) recommended reliability
metrics like interquartile range (IQR) and conditional value at risk (CVaR). Jordan et al. (2020)
suggested metrics like performance percentiles, proposed a game-theoretic approach to quantifying
performance uncertainty, and developed a technique to quantify the uncertainty throughout the entire
evaluation procedure. Agarwal et al. (2021) recommended stratified bootstrap confidence intervals,
score distributions, and interquartile means. For multi-agent cooperative RL, Gorsane et al. (2022)


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    Comparing Evaluation Performance over Time
                                         20.0                                                Agent 1
                                         17.5                                                Agent 2
                                                                                             Agent 3
                                         15.0


                       Average Returns
                                         12.5
                                         10.0
                                          7.5
                                          5.0
                                          2.5
                                          0.0
                                                0        2         4              6    8         10
                                                                       Episodes

Figure 1: In this simplified plot of agent performance in the presence of worsening distribution shifts
over time. All three agents have average returns of 10. It is clear, however, that agent 3 is the least
desired agent over time. Even though agent 3 starts out with the highest average returns, it seems
to have overfit to the training environment and fails to maintain its superior performance. Point
estimates alone would not capture this behavior.


proposed a standard performance evaluation protocol using RL recommendations from past papers.
What sets our methodology apart from past work is the emphasis on time series analysis of RL
performance with distribution shift during test time. Chan et al. (2020) has included after learning
metrics in their work, but focuses on performance variability from trained policy rollouts alone, which
is unlikely to capture performance in the presence of significant environment changes.

3     T HE N EED TO M EASURE P ERFORMANCE OVER T IME

3.1   A T IME S ERIES P ERSPECTIVE

We argue for time series analysis as a solution to the problems that point estimates and confidence
intervals alone cannot fix. Because we are not certain of the agent’s future performance, forecasting
the agent’s performance is needed if we assume RL agents will inevitably encounter distribution shifts
in its environment after training. Point estimates alone can fail to explain decreases in performance at
test time. In Figure 1, we assume three agents that act in an environment that experiences increasing
distribution shift as the number of episodes continues. Each episode can be interpreted as a day’s
performance of an RL agent. This is motivated by a hypothetical scenario where RL developers are
deploying their agents in an environment that experiences changes they did not anticipate. All agents
achieve the same average returns, but there is a clear difference of performance over time. In this
hypothetical example, Agent 3 seems to have overfit to the training environment because it starts high
but ends as the lowest performer. In the longer term, Agent 2 is preferable because its decrease in
performance is slower, and eventually outperforms Agent 3. Agent 1 represents the ideal RL agent
because its performance over time never decreases.
As shown in previous work (Chan et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2021), confidence intervals are
important to quantify the uncertainty of point estimates of aggregate performance. In evaluating
performance in the presence of distribution shift, however, confidence intervals for mean scores
are insufficient. If we want to account for the uncertainty of the performance trends, it would be
preferable to understand the distribution of values and where we expect our forecasting model to
generate the next data point sampled (Buteikis, 2020). Hence, when evaluating trends in performance
under distribution shift, prediction intervals can be more helpful than confidence intervals. Time
series analysis can also be used to measure the causal impact of distribution shift on one (or many)
agents. One way to accomplish this is counterfactual analysis. That is, we need a model of the
agent acting in the environment as if the change had never taken place. In our methodology, we will
assume the trained agents have achieved a flat (slope = 0) trend in performance (as opposed to noisy
or random) in the absence of distribution shift at test time.
Within-episode performance is difficult to measure because it requires knowledge of the particular
environment’s states to know when to make an intervention. To make our methodology more
general, we measure the impact of distribution shift over many episodes, where X A (t) is the expected


                                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


performance at an episode t. This allows us to measure the positive (or negative) impact of distribution
shifts over time. An example of this could be measuring the energy usage or customer satisfaction of
a RL-trained HVAC system each day over a week if exposed to distribution shift.

3.2   RL AND THE F UNDAMENTAL P ROBLEM OF C AUSAL I NFERENCE

Practitioners of causal inference must remember its fundamental problem: If we were to expose
a unit u to some intervention, we will never see the world where we never exposed the unit u to
that intervention (Holland, 1986). That is, observing individual treatment effect is impossible. This
has not discouraged researchers from developing methods that circumvent this problem (Spirtes
et al., 2000; Pearl, 2009; Imbens & Rubin, 2015; Peters et al., 2017). These methods usually require
assumptions that manage the messiness of the real world, which makes it possible to construct valid
arguments in favor of causal inference. RL agents in simulated environments, however, allow us to
make assumptions that might be too strong for less predictable units (like humans or animals). In a
deterministic environment, with a given random seed, regardless of how many times you reach a state
s, the agent will choose the same action and receive the same reward at state s. That is, RL agents in
deterministic environments with fixed random seeds allow us to circumvent the fundamental problem
of causal inference because we can just reset the environment and see what happens when we choose
to intervene or not. This does not contradict Henderson et al. (2018), where they argue that different
random seeds can lead to different performances and behaviors. Here, we claim that different RL
agents with their own random seed may exhibit different behaviors, but will repeat those behaviors if
the random seeds are fixed. Now that we are concerned with RL evaluation over time, we can make
the following assumption:
3.1 RL Fixed Seed Assumption. Let T , such that 1 ≤ T ≤ N , be the time an intervention occurs.
Let G designate groups such that G = 1 indicates the treatment group and G = 0 indicates the control
group. Consider a time series outcome X A (t), where A is a RL agent in a simulated deterministic
environment M. Let X A (t < T ) be the performance before time T. Then,
                           E[X A (t < T )|G = 1] = E[X A (t < T )|G = 0]                               (1)

Let XUA=u (t) be the performance measurement as above with the counterfactual intervention U = u.
We define U = 1 and U = 0 as being exposed to an intervention (e.g., distribution shift) and not
exposed, respectively. Then, on average, the performance of the control group is the counterfactual
performance of the treatment group as if it had not been exposed to the intervention:
                               E[X A (t)|G = 0] = E[XUA=0 (t)|G = 1]                                   (2)

This assumption basically says that if we have a fixed set of random seeds1 in a deterministic
environment, then, on average, the expected returns of the control group is the same as the expected
returns of the treatment group if no out-of-distribution intervention ever occurred. This makes
intuitive sense because both groups have the same random seeds, which implies they will exhibit
identical behavior in deterministic environments if no outside influence is introduced. This is helpful
when justifying causal inference in the Appendix.

4     R ECOMMENDATIONS FOR T IME S ERIES E VALUATION
4.1   I F YOU CAN CONTROL WHEN THE DISTRIBUTION SHIFT OCCURS , MEASURE THE CAUSAL
      IMPACT

Similar to car crash tests in controlled settings, we propose an evaluation method where the experi-
menter can control when a RL agent experiences a shift in distribution. First, take a trained RL agent
and have it interact in its environment until some time (or episode) T , which will be the pre-treatment
period. At time T , the post-treatment period starts with the experimenter applies a shift in distribution.
Such distribution shifts include adversarial examples (Goodfellow et al., 2014). In the multi-agent
cooperative tasks, sudden replacement of agents can also cause shifts in distribution (Mirsky et al.,
2022). The experimenter logs the performance scores at each point in time. When the agent reaches
   1
     Reproducibility can be difficult to achieve when running on a GPU. We discuss this further and how to
control for it in the Appendix.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Prediction Trends of Agent Performance                                                           Prediction Trends of Agent Performance
                                                                                                                      10
                     6

                     4
                                                                                                                      5


   Average Returns


                                                                                                    Average Returns
                     2

                     0                                                                                                0

                     2

                     4                                                                                                 5


                     6        Agent 1                                                                                          Agent 1
                              Agent 2                                                                                 10       Agent 2
                     8        Agent 3                                                                                          Agent 3
                              Start of prediction trend lines                                                                  Start of prediction trend lines
                          0                   20                40              60   80   100                              0                   20                40              60   80   100
                                                                     Episodes                                                                                         Episodes

Figure 2: The idea behind these graphs is the same as in Figure 1. The main differences are that we
use time series forecasts and prediction intervals to show the predicted performance trend of each
agent. Here, the performances between episodes 0-50 are the measured performances of the agents
in the environment. The plots at episodes 50-100 are not measured performance, but prediction
trends of future performance with prediction intervals. Left: The differences in performance are clear
because the prediction intervals do not overlap at the end of the plot. Hence, Agent 1 has the best
performance because the forecast is not decreasing and the prediction interval is small. The fact that
Agent 2’s interval does not overlap with Agent 3’s prediction interval shows that Agent 1 and Agent
2 have significantly better performance forecasts. Right: Here, all agents have noisier performance.
Even though Agent 3 still has a downward trend, its much noisier performance briefly spikes up to
match Agent 1’s performance. Hence, we want prediction intervals that anticipate this uncertainty
by showing interval overlap between agent performance over time. There is no longer a significant
difference between Agents 2 and 3 because their prediction intervals overlap at every time step.


the end of the experiment (or some time threshold), evaluate the causal impact from the counterfactual
model (the RL agent control group) and the treatment group’s post-treatment performance using
difference-in-differences (DiD) (Cunningham, 2021; Huntington-Klein, 2021). The results will show
how much the distribution shift impacted the performance of the agent assuming a counterfactual
model that represents the agent’s performance if the distribution shift never happened.
To show the impact of the distribution shift, we use the template of time-series impact plots from
Brodersen et al. (2015). This template consists of three panels: an original plot, a pointwise plot, and
a cumulative plot. In the original plot, the raw performance is shown. The pointwise plot shows the
difference between the observed data and the counterfactual predictions, which is the inferred causal
impact of intervention. The cumulative plot shows the cumulative impact of the intervention over
time. Unlike in Brodersen et al. (2015), instead of Bayesian structural time-series models, we use
DiD because we are measuring only one variable (returns) and our assumptions justify its application.
The justification for DiD in this methodology is provided in the methods section of the Appendix.

4.2                      OTHERWISE , COMPARE AGENTS USING SIMPLE TIME SERIES TRENDS WITH PREDICTION
                         INTERVALS

Here, we assume the experimenter has no control over when the distribution shift will occur. It is
also possible that multiple instances of distribution shift can occur at different times. Such scenarios
are intended to be a closer representation of real-world RL agent deployment. This implies, without
further assumptions, an observational study is the best we can do. We propose comparison of RL
performance using time series trends, like Holt’s Linear Damped Trend Method (Gardner Jr &
McKenzie, 1985; Holt, 2004; Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018), with prediction intervals. An
example is provided in Figure 2. Here, we can compare the performance of agents trained on different
RL algorithms. The idea is similar to the comparison of agents in Figure 1. The main difference is
that we are not just focusing on the agents’ measured performance, but also on the forecast of future
performance with prediction intervals. Here, robust performance can be interpreted as the the forecast
of future performance and the prediction intervals visualize its uncertainty over time. Ideally, the
agent that performs the best would have the highest trend line and the smallest prediction interval.
Using time series forecasts with prediction intervals are meant to be an improvement over point
estimates with confidence intervals to better show the uncertainty of measured RL performance over
time. Since we will be using Holt’s linear damped trend method, 95% prediction intervals might be
too narrow (Hyndman, 2014). Hence, we will default to 99% prediction intervals. Like in section 3,


                                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we interpret each time point as an episode, and X A (t) represents the RL agent’s performance during
that episode. Further description of this method is provided in the methods section of the Appendix.
In a style similar to Gorsane et al. (2022), we summarize the previous recommendations into the
following protocol:
    A Protocol for Measuring Performance in the Presence of Distribution Shift

    Input: Environments E1 . . . EK , Algorithms A1 . . . AM with corresponding time series
    metric X A (t), Distribution Shifts d1 . . . dN .
    1. Evaluation parameters - defaults
           • Number of episodes for impact and observational plots.
           • Number of episodes for forecasting with prediction intervals (= 100).
           • Number of random seeds/runs (= 10 from Agarwal et al. (2021)).
    2a. If you can control when the distribution shift occurs, measure the causal impact
           • Measure the causal impact of each distribution shift intervention dn using difference-
             in-differences with plots of the (i) raw performance, (ii) pointwise impact, and (iii)
             cumulative impact (from Brodersen et al. (2015)).
           • For each pair (Ek , dn ), algorithm Ai performs better than Aj in the presence of dn
             if Ai ’s cumulative impact of average returns is higher than Aj ’s at the end of the
             experiment.
    2b. Otherwise, compare agents using time series trends with prediction intervals
           • In the presence of a distribution shift, plot a forecast, using Holt’s Linear Damped
             Trend Method, with 99% prediction intervals over 100 episodes after the last mea-
             sured performance (from Holt (2004)).
           • For each pair (Ek , dn ), algorithm Ai achieves significantly higher trend in perfor-
             mance than Aj in the presence of dn if Ai has a higher forecast prediction line than
             Aj with no overlap between the corresponding prediction intervals.
    3. Reporting
           • Experiment Parameters: Report all distribution shift implementations, hyperpa-
             rameters, code-level optimizations, computational requirements, and framework
             details.
           • Plots: For each environment E1 . . . EK , create plots from 2a or 2b (preferably both)
             for each algorithm A1 . . . AM in the presence of distribution shifts d1 . . . dN .
           • Analysis: Provide analysis for the plots and derive conclusions.


5   E XAMPLES OF RL T IME - SERIES A NALYSIS
In our time series evaluation, we model the scenario as deploying the agent(s) out in the intended
environment. In this scenario, we have the pretrained agents run over a number of episodes. As
mentioned previously, the causal impact procedure can be interpreted as the RL version of car crash
tests, where RL agent(s) are deployed in a controlled environment and undergo repeated performance
testing. When evaluating the causal impact of the distribution shift, we introduce the shift at some
halfway point. We measure the performance of the treatment and control groups, then measure the
difference and cumulative impact of the shift. This can be interpreted as the human maintainers
measuring robust agent performance and quantifying the losses that can accrue when the agent is
deliberately exposed to a distribution shift. In both single and multi-agent settings, we use the causal
impact plot template from Brodersen et al. (2015). In the observational case, we can interpret having
the agents run over a number of episodes as deploying the agent into the environment each day while
recording its performance. The distribution shifts in the observational evaluations happen randomly,
so the human maintainers have no control over how the shifts are introduced.
For the observational evaluations, the single-agent and multi-agent cases use different approaches to
randomly introducing distribution shift. In the single-agent case, we define a probability threshold


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    Agent: a2c Env: BreakoutNoFrameskip-v4                                                       100       Agent: ppo Env: BreakoutNoFrameskip-v4
                                          100


                               Original


                                                                                                                                      Original
                                           50                                                                                                     50
      Average Returns                       0                                                                                                      0


                                                                                                             Average Returns
                              Pointwise                                                                                                            0


                                                                                                                                     Pointwise
                                            0

                                           20                                                                                                     20

                                            0                                                                                                  0
                        Cumulative


                                                                                                                               Cumulative
                                                                                                                                            2000
                                     2000
                                                                                                                                            4000
                                                0       100              200       300         400                                                     0       100              200       300         400
                                                                            Episode                                                                                                Episode
                                                        Counterfactual          Epsilon 0.05   Epsilon 0.5                                                     Counterfactual          Epsilon 0.05   Epsilon 0.5
                                                        Epsilon 0.01            Epsilon 0.1    Epsilon 1.0                                                     Epsilon 0.01            Epsilon 0.1    Epsilon 1.0


                                                     Agent: a2c Env: PongNoFrameskip-v4                                                                     Agent: ppo Env: PongNoFrameskip-v4
                                           20                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                     Original
                              Original


                                            0                                                                                                      0
                                           20                                                                                                     20



                                                                                                             Average Returns
      Average Returns


                                            0                                                                                                      0


                                                                                                                                     Pointwise
                              Pointwise


                                           20                                                                                                     20
                                           40                                                                                                     40
                                            0                                                                                  Cumulative          0
                        Cumulative


                                     1000                                                                                                   1000
                                                0        20              40             60       80                                                    0        20              40             60       80
                                                                              Episode                                                                                                Episode
                                                        Counterfactual          Epsilon 0.05   Epsilon 0.5                                                     Counterfactual          Epsilon 0.05   Epsilon 0.5
                                                        Epsilon 0.01            Epsilon 0.1    Epsilon 1.0                                                     Epsilon 0.01            Epsilon 0.1    Epsilon 1.0


Figure 3: The causal impact plots shown here illustrate the impact of FGSM adversarial attacks on RL
agents trained on the Pong Atari game. Each row represents an Atari game. Each column represents a
RL algorithm (A2C or PPO). The original plots here show the rolling mean of the rewards over time.
The pointwise plots show the difference between the counterfactual performance and the performance
when the agent is attacked. The cumulative performance is the summation of the rewards gained or
lost over time. As expected, the performance tends to drop as   increases.


for adversarial attacks. If the random number generator (like random.random() in Python) gives
a number above the threshold, the Atari game image is attacked. In the multi-agent case, we use a
strategy similar to Rahman et al. (2021), where the number of steps an agent is switched out is drawn
from a uniform distribution. Figure 4 provides some Atari game examples of observational studies.
We use 10 random seeds for both causal and observational time-series evaluation. More information
on the plots is provided in the Appendix.

5.1                A NALYSIS ON A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON A2C AND PPO AGENTS

Here, we measure the performance of RL agents trained on Atari games (Bellemare et al., 2013) in
the presence of adversarial attacks. In Figure 3 and the Atari impact graphs in Appendix D, we use
pretrained A2C and PPO pretrained agents provided by RL Baselines3 Zoo (RLZoo) (Raffin, 2020)
implemented in Stable-Baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021). For adversarial attacks on the Atari game
images, we use the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). In most cases,
like in Figure 3, the adversarial attacks work as expected and generally decreases the performance
as   increases. One noticeable pattern is that the agents significantly deviate from the baseline
performance when   ≥ 0.5. PPO performance is generally equal or worse than A2C after the
distribution shift intervention at the halfway point. There are games, like Qbert and Space Invaders,
where PPO achieves much worse cumulative returns than A2C when exposed to the highest values
of  . Another strange finding was that the RLZoo A2C agent showed non-decreasing (or slightly
increasing) cumulative returns in Asteroids and Road Runner. One conclusion that can be drawn from
these findings is that the pretrained RLZoo A2C is more robust than PPO against constant adversarial
examples.


                                                                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Prediction Trends in PongNoFrameskip-v4 with FGSM( =0.01)                                                                               Prediction Trends in PongNoFrameskip-v4 with FGSM( =0.50)
                         21
                                                                                                                                                                 21

                                                                                                                                                                 20
                         20
       Average Returns


                                                                                                                                               Average Returns
                                                                                                                                                                 19


                                                                                                       A2C                                                       18
                         19
                                                                                                       PPO
                                                                                                       Start of prediction trend lines                           17

                         18                                                                                                                                      16

                                                                                                                                                                 15

                         17                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A2C
                                                                                                                                                                 14                                                                              PPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Start of prediction trend lines
                                                                                                                                                                 13
                                 0              25            50          75     100       125           150           175        200                                     0           25              50         75        100       125           150           175        200
                                                                               Episode                                                                                                                                Episode

                          Prediction Trends in BreakoutNoFrameskip-v4 with FGSM( =0.01)                                                                           Prediction Trends in BreakoutNoFrameskip-v4 with FGSM( =0.50)
                         60                                                                                                                                      40



                                                                                                                                                                 30
    Average Returns


                                                                                                                                               Average Returns
                         40



                         20                                                                                                                                      20



                         0                                                                                                                                       10


                                      A2C                                                                                                                                     A2C
                         20                                                                                                                                      0
                                      PPO                                                                                                                                     PPO
                                      Start of prediction trend lines                                                                                                         Start of prediction trend lines
                                 0                   100            200          300             400             500              600                                     0                100             200             300             400             500             600
                                                                               Episode                                                                                                                                Episode

Figure 4: These plots take the rolling mean (window=25) of the observational performance up to
a certain time point with some probability of being in the presence of adversarial attacks. After
that time point, it shows the time series forecast with 99% prediction intervals. Top Row: In the
PongNoFrameskip-v4 plots, PPO performs significantly better and has smaller prediction intervals.
The plot on the right, however, uses attacks with higher  , where both agents have larger prediction
intervals. Bottom Row: In the BreakoutNoFrameskip-v4 plots, the prediction intervals overlap. One
noticeable difference is that the stronger attacks cause the PPO interval to shrink in size while the
mean rewards are slightly less. This decrease in variability accounts for the decrease in the maximum
rewards achieved.


                                     220
                                                                    Replaced with Trained Agents                                                          0                                      Replaced with Untrained Agents
                                                           Counterfactual                                                                                                            Counterfactual
                                                                                                                                                       2500
                      Original


                                     240                   1 Agent Switched                                                                                                          1 Agent Switched
                                                           2 Agents Switched                                                                                                         2 Agents Switched
                                     260                   3 Agents Switched                                                                           5000                          3 Agents Switched

                                        0                                                                                                                 0
                                                           Difference                                                                                                                Difference
                         Pointwise
 Rewards


                                      20                   1 Agent Switched                                                                            2500                          1 Agent Switched
                                                           2 Agents Switched                                                                                                         2 Agents Switched
                                      40                   3 Agents Switched                                                                           5000                          3 Agents Switched

                                        0                                                                                                                             0
             Cumulative


                                                           Cumulative Sum                                                                                                            Cumulative Sum
                                 1000                      1 Agent Switched                                                                                                          1 Agent Switched
                                                           2 Agents Switched                                                                   200000                                2 Agents Switched
                                 2000                      3 Agents Switched                                                                                                         3 Agents Switched
                                            0                      20             40                   60                    80          100                              0                      20                   40              60                         80                100
                                                                                         Episode                                                                                                                           Episode

Figure 5: The plots here show the impact of the ad hoc switching of agents in a group of 5 in the
PowerGridworld environment. Left Column: We replace 1, 2, or 3 agents out of the group of 5
with agents that trained with a different group. While there is little change when only replacing 1
or 2 agents, we see that performance dramatically decreases when 3 agents have been switched out.
Right Column: We see that just switching out 1 agent in the group with 1 untrained agent causes a
significantly large decrease in group performance.


                                                                                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The observational plots, like in Figure 4 and Appendix D, tell a more nuanced story. Except for
Pong, where the PPO performance trends are significantly better than A2C, PPO’s forecasts trends
are higher than A2C’s but there is overlap between the prediction intervals. It seems that the PPO
agents are able to recover and choose better actions when not observing adversarial examples. This
is consistent with the RL Baselines3 Zoo benchmark scores, where PPO scores higher than A2C in
every Atari game (without the presence of adversarial attacks). Hence, we conclude that RLZoo PPO
agents have trends that perform (not significantly) better in the presence of random attacks, but the
impact plots show clear signs of overfitting in some environments. On the other hand, A2C agents
tend to be relatively more robust than PPO against adversarial attacks in Atari games.

5.2   A NALYSIS ON AGENT S WITCHING IN P OWER G RIDWORLD

In the multi-agent case (Figure 5), we measure the performance of a cooperative group of 5 decen-
tralized PPO agents in the presence of ad hoc agent switching. The multi-agent environment we
use is a framework for power-systems-focused simulations called PowerGridworld (Biagioni et al.,
2022). As seen on the impact plots in Figure 5, we investigate what happens when 1 to 3 agents
in the group are switched out with the corresponding number of outside pretrained or untrained
agents. The outside pretrained agents were trained as a separate group of 5 agents that achieve a score
similar to the original group. When switching out the agents with the outside group of pretrained
agents, there was a slight impact when switching out 1 or 2 agents. The performance dramatically
decreased when 3 agents were switched out, which is a majority of the agents. Replacing one agent
of the group with one untrained agent, as can be seen in Figure 5, is much worse than switching
out 3 agents with outside pretrained agents. The observational PowerGridworld plots in Appendix
D provide complementary results. Hence, in this PowerGridworld environment, we can conclude
that (i) switching out and replacing the majority of agents (including pretrained) can significantly
diminish performance, and (ii) replacing even one trained agent with an untrained agent can be worse
than switching out the majority with outside trained agents. When switching the original agents with
similarly-trained outside agents, it seems that group performance is robust when only switching out a
minority of the agents, but is significantly less robust when a majority of agents is switched out.

6     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we show that relying on point estimates, even alternatives that are more reliable and less
biased than what is typically used in practice, are limited in their ability to evaluate RL performance
in the presence of distribution shifts. In particular, we argue that the methodology proposed here
provides more of a necessary emphasis on test-time evaluation, and can assess both single and
multi-agent performance. If, or when, we choose to deploy RL agents into the real world, how such
agents perform after training will matter more than during training. The decline in performance
during ad hoc agent switching in the PowerGridworld shows what could happen if we need to start
replacing intelligent agents to ensure energy usage is minimized. Such experiments reveal a workflow
that will likely be closer to representing real-world safety checks and maintenance of AI systems.
Our methodology might also be useful for investigating general single or multi-agent RL behavior.
There is still work to accomplish in ensuring RL research is reproducible. A weakness of our approach
is that it does not account for non-deterministic environments. We also did not investigate if more
complex time series models would be more appropriate in certain scenarios would be an obvious
next step. Time series clustering and motifs (Mueen et al., 2009; Imani et al., 2021) can be used to
better understand how different types of distribution shift can affect RL performance. One could also
investigate if time series ensemble models (Wichard & Ogorzalek, 2004) provide better forecasts
than simpler models. Finding answers to these shortcomings can be investigated in future research.
Nations, like the United States (White House, 2022), have signed legislation to invest in modern-
ization of infrastructure and communities to meet the growing challenges of the 21st century (e.g.,
cybersecurity and climate change). RL is advancing the automation of complex decision making
in real-world infrastructure systems (e.g., energy and transportation). Like other areas in AI, the
role of RL in critical infrastructure and other high-consequence applications requires robust, reliable,
repeatable, and standardized evaluation protocols (European Union, 2021; Biden Jr, 2023). The
methodology we propose here, inspired by the NHTSA ratings standards, is a start toward a general,
standardized protocol for evaluating pretrained RL performance over time.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.
Nesreen K Ahmed, Amir F Atiya, Neamat El Gayar, and Hisham El-Shishiny. An empirical
  comparison of machine learning models for time series forecasting. Econometric reviews, 29(5-6):
  594–621, 2010.
Ossama Ahmed, Frederik Träuble, Anirudh Goyal, Alexander Neitz, Manuel Wuthrich, Yoshua
  Bengio, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Stefan Bauer. Causalworld: A robotic manipulation benchmark
  for causal structure and transfer learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SK7A5pdrgov.
Anton Bakhtin, Noam Brown, Emily Dinan, Gabriele Farina, Colin Flaherty, Daniel Fried, Andrew
  Goff, Jonathan Gray, Hengyuan Hu, Athul Paul Jacob, et al. Human-level play in the game of
  diplomacy by combining language models with strategic reasoning. Science, 378(6624):1067–1074,
  2022.
Samuel Barrett and Peter Stone. Cooperating with unknown teammates in complex domains: A
  robot soccer case study of ad hoc teamwork. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 29, 2015.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:
 253–279, 2013.
Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław D˛ebiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large scale
  deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
David Biagioni, Xiangyu Zhang, Dylan Wald, Deepthi Vaidhynathan, Rohit Chintala, Jennifer
  King, and Ahmed S. Zamzam. Powergridworld: A framework for multi-agent reinforcement
  learning in power systems. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth ACM International Conference on
 Future Energy Systems, e-Energy ’22, pp. 565–570, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association
  for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450393973. doi: 10.1145/3538637.3539616. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3538637.3539616.
Joseph Biden Jr. Executive order on the safe, secure, and trustworthy development and use of artificial
  intelligence. White House, 2023. URL https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
  room/presidential-actions/2023/10/30/executive-order-on-the-
  safe-secure-and-trustworthy-development-and-use-of-artificial-
  intelligence/. [Accessed November 2, 2023].
Battista Biggio, B Nelson, P Laskov, et al. Poisoning attacks against support vector machines.
  In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2012, pp.
  1807–1814. ArXiv e-prints, 2012.
Kay H Brodersen, Fabian Gallusser, Jim Koehler, Nicolas Remy, and Steven L Scott. Inferring causal
  impact using bayesian structural time-series models. The Annals of Applied Statistics, pp. 247–274,
  2015.
Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Superhuman ai for multiplayer poker. Science, 365(6456):
  885–890, 2019.
A Buteikis. Practical econometrics and data science. Vilnius University: Vilnius, Lithuania, 2020.
Stephen Casper, Dylan Hadfield-Menell, and Gabriel Kreiman. White-box adversarial policies in
  deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.02167, 2022.
Stephanie CY Chan, Samuel Fishman, Anoop Korattikara, John Canny, and Sergio Guadarrama.
  Measuring the reliability of reinforcement learning algorithms. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Cédric Colas, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. How many random seeds? statistical power
  analysis in deep reinforcement learning experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08295, 2018.
Jiaxun Cui, Xiaomeng Yang, Mulong Luo, Geunbae Lee, Peter Stone, Hsien-Hsin S Lee, Benjamin
   Lee, G Edward Suh, Wenjie Xiong, and Yuandong Tian. Macta: A multi-agent reinforcement
   learning approach for cache timing attacks and detection. In The Eleventh International Conference
   on Learning Representations, 2022.
Scott Cunningham. Causal inference: The mixtape. Yale university press, 2021.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry Rudolph,
  and Aleksander Madry. Implementation matters in deep policy gradients: A case study on ppo and
  trpo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.12729, 2020.
European Union. Laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act)
  and amending certain union legislative acts. proposal for a regulation of the european parliament
  and of the council, 2021. URL https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
  TXT/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0206.
Martin Figura, Krishna Chaitanya Kosaraju, and Vijay Gupta. Adversarial attacks in consensus-based
 multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 2021 American Control Conference (ACC), pp. 3050–3055.
 IEEE, 2021.
Ted Fujimoto, Timothy Doster, Adam Attarian, Jill Brandenberger, and Nathan Hodas. Reward-free
  attacks in multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00940, 2021.
Everette S Gardner Jr and ED McKenzie. Forecasting trends in time series. Management science, 31
  (10):1237–1246, 1985.
Adam Gleave, Michael Dennis, Cody Wild, Neel Kant, Sergey Levine, and Stuart Russell. Adver-
  sarial policies: Attacking deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2019.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Rihab Gorsane, Omayma Mahjoub, Ruan John de Kock, Roland Dubb, Siddarth Singh, and Arnu
  Pretorius. Towards a standardised performance evaluation protocol for cooperative marl. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:5510–5521, 2022.
Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
  Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Paul W Holland. Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the American statistical Association, 81
  (396):945–960, 1986.
Charles C Holt. Forecasting seasonals and trends by exponentially weighted moving averages.
  International journal of forecasting, 20(1):5–10, 2004.
Ling Huang, Anthony D Joseph, Blaine Nelson, Benjamin IP Rubinstein, and J Doug Tygar. Ad-
  versarial machine learning. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM workshop on Security and artificial
  intelligence, pp. 43–58, 2011.
Sandy Huang, Nicolas Papernot, Ian Goodfellow, Yan Duan, and Pieter Abbeel. Adversarial attacks
  on neural network policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.02284, 2017.
Nick Huntington-Klein. The effect: An introduction to research design and causality. CRC Press,
  2021.
Rob J Hyndman. Prediction intervals too narrow, Oct 2014. URL https://robjhyndman.com/
  hyndsight/narrow-pi/.
Rob J Hyndman and George Athanasopoulos. Forecasting: principles and practice. OTexts, 2018.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shima Imani, Alireza Abdoli, and Eamonn Keogh. Time2cluster: Clustering time series using
  neighbor information. In Time Series Workshop at the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2021.
Guido W Imbens and Donald B Rubin. Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical sciences.
  Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Scott Jordan, Yash Chandak, Daniel Cohen, Mengxue Zhang, and Philip Thomas. Evaluating the
  performance of reinforcement learning algorithms. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 4962–4973. PMLR, 2020.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021.
Jernej Kos and Dawn Song. Delving into adversarial attacks on deep policies. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1705.06452, 2017.
Alexey Kurakin, Ian J Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial machine learning at scale. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Tabitha E Lee, Jialiang Alan Zhao, Amrita S Sawhney, Siddharth Girdhar, and Oliver Kroemer.
  Causal reasoning in simulation for structure and transfer learning of robot manipulation policies. In
  2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4776–4782. IEEE,
  2021.
Tabitha Edith Lee, Shivam Vats, Siddharth Girdhar, and Oliver Kroemer. SCALE: Causal learning
  and discovery of robot manipulation skills using simulation. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot
  Learning, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WmF-fagWdD.
Yuzhe Ma, Xuezhou Zhang, Wen Sun, and Jerry Zhu. Policy poisoning in batch reinforcement
  learning and control. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Ricardo P Masini, Marcelo C Medeiros, and Eduardo F Mendes. Machine learning advances for time
  series forecasting. Journal of economic surveys, 37(1):76–111, 2023.
McKinsey and Company, Mar 2021. URL https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/
 mckinsey-digital/how-we-help-clients/flying-across-the-sea-
 propelled-by-ai.
Reuth Mirsky, Ignacio Carlucho, Arrasy Rahman, Elliot Fosong, William Macke, Mohan Sridharan,
  Peter Stone, and Stefano V Albrecht. A survey of ad hoc teamwork research. In Multi-Agent
  Systems: 19th European Conference, EUMAS 2022, Düsseldorf, Germany, September 14–16, 2022,
  Proceedings, pp. 275–293. Springer, 2022.
Abdullah Mueen, Eamonn Keogh, Qiang Zhu, Sydney Cash, and Brandon Westover. Exact discovery
  of time series motifs. In Proceedings of the 2009 SIAM international conference on data mining,
  pp. 473–484. SIAM, 2009.
Anay Pattanaik, Zhenyi Tang, Shuijing Liu, Gautham Bommannan, and Girish Chowdhary. Robust
  deep reinforcement learning with adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.03632, 2017.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations
  and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.
Joaquin Quinonero-Candela, Masashi Sugiyama, Anton Schwaighofer, and Neil D Lawrence. Dataset
  shift in machine learning. Mit Press, 2008.
Stephan Rabanser, Stephan Günnemann, and Zachary Lipton. Failing loudly: An empirical study of
  methods for detecting dataset shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Antonin Raffin. Rl baselines3 zoo. https://github.com/DLR-RM/rl-baselines3-zoo,
  2020.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  20-1364.html.
Muhammad A Rahman, Niklas Hopner, Filippos Christianos, and Stefano V Albrecht. Towards open
 ad hoc teamwork using graph-based policy learning. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 8776–8786. PMLR, 2021.
Amin Rakhsha, Goran Radanovic, Rati Devidze, Xiaojin Zhu, and Adish Singla. Policy teaching
 via environment poisoning: Training-time adversarial attacks against reinforcement learning. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7974–7984. PMLR, 2020.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
  learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):
 1140–1144, 2018.
Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, prediction, and search. MIT
  press, 2000.
Peter Stone, Gal Kaminka, Sarit Kraus, and Jeffrey Rosenschein. Ad hoc autonomous agent teams:
  Collaboration without pre-coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 24, pp. 1504–1509, 2010.
Pulkit Verma and Siddharth Srivastava. Learning causal models of autonomous agents using interven-
  tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.09586, 2021.
Pulkit Verma, Rushang Karia, and Siddharth Srivastava. Autonomous capability assessment of
  sequential decision-making systems in stochastic settings. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  VqclD6Nfaj.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in
  starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
White House. A guidebook to the bipartisan infrastructure law for state, local, tribal, and territorial
 governments, and other partners. White House, 2022. URL https://www.whitehouse.gov/
 wp-content/uploads/2022/05/BUILDING-A-BETTER-AMERICA-V2.pdf. [Ac-
 cessed November 2, 2023].
Jorg D Wichard and Maciej Ogorzalek. Time series prediction with ensemble models. In 2004 IEEE
  international joint conference on neural networks (IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37541), volume 2, pp.
  1625–1630. IEEE, 2004.
Chiyuan Zhang, Oriol Vinyals, Remi Munos, and Samy Bengio. A study on overfitting in deep
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06893, 2018.
Xuezhou Zhang, Yuzhe Ma, Adish Singla, and Xiaojin Zhu. Adaptive reward-poisoning attacks
  against reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11225–
 11234. PMLR, 2020.


                                                 13
