Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S TEERING N O -R EGRET L EARNERS TO O PTIMAL E QUI -
LIBRIA

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         We consider the problem of steering no-regret-learning agents to play desirable
         equilibria via nonnegative payments. We first show that steering is impossible if
         the total budget (across all iterations) is finite, both in normal- and extensive-form
         games. However, we establish that vanishing average payments are compatible with
         steering. In particular, when players’ full strategies are observed at each timestep,
         we show that constant per-iteration payments permit steering. In the more challeng-
         ing setting where only trajectories through the game tree are observable, we show
         that steering is impossible with constant per-iteration payments in general extensive-
         form games, but possible in normal-form games or if the maximum per-iteration
         payment may grow with time. We supplement our theoretical positive results with
         experiments highlighting the efficacy of steering in large games, and show how our
         framework relates to optimal mechanism design and information design.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Any student of game theory learns that games can have multiple equilibria of different quality—for
example, in terms of social welfare (Figure 1). How can a mediator—a benevolent third party—steer
players toward an optimal one? In this paper, we consider the problem of using a mediator who can dis-
pense nonnegative payments and offer advice to players so as to guide to a better collective outcome.
Importantly, our theory does not rest upon strong assumptions regarding agent obedience; instead,
we only assume that players have sublinear regret, a mild assumption on the rationality of the
players adopted in several prior studies (e.g., Nekipelov et al., 2015; Kolumbus & Nisan, 2022b; Ca-
mara et al., 2020). Variants of this problem have received tremendous interest in the literature
(e.g., Monderer & Tennenholtz, 2004; Anshelevich et al., 2008; Schulz & Moses, 2003; Agussurja
& Lau, 2009; Balcan, 2011; Balcan et al., 2013; 2014; Mguni et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Kempe
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022 and references therein), but prior work either operates in more restricted
classes of games or makes strong assumptions regarding player obedience. We study the steering
problem in its full generality for general (imperfect-information) extensive-form games under an
entire hierarchy of equilibrium concepts, and we establish a number of positive algorithmic results
and complementing information-theoretic impossibilities.

Summary of Our Results Our formulation enables the mediator to 1) reward players with non-
negative payments and 2) offer advice. Of course, with no constraints on the payments, the problem
becomes trivial: the mediator could enforce any arbitrary outcome by paying players to play that out-
come. On the other extreme, we show that if the total realized payments are constrained to be bounded,
the decentralized steering problem is information-theoretically impossible (Proposition 3.2). There-
fore, we compromise by allowing the total realized payments to be unbounded, but insist that the aver-
age payment per round is vanishing. Further, to justify 2) above, we show that without advice, steering
to mixed-Nash equilibria is impossible already in normal-form games (Appendix D), although advice
is not necessary for pure-Nash equilibria (Sections 4 and 5). Offering recommendations is in line
with much of prior work (Appendix A), and is especially natural for correlated equilibrium concepts.
The goal of the mediator is to reach an equilibrium, either explicitly provided or provided as a principal
utility function. We first assume that the mediator is provided an equilibrium. We distinguish between
realized payments and potential payments. Realized payments are the payments actually dispensed


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         Without payments                                   With vanishing payments         Realized per-iteration payment
               C
                                                                                     A                                                     A
                                                        3.9                              B                                                    B                       2.0
                                                                                                         D                                                    D


                                                              Strategy of Player 2


                                                                                                                    Strategy of Player 2
                                                        3.6


                                       Social Welfare
                         1                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                        3.3
                     H S                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                        3.0
         2         3,0       2
                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                        2.7                                              C                                                    C
     H S                 H S
                                                        2.4                                                                                                           0.0
   0,3       0,0    0,0          4,4                                                     Strategy of Player 1                                 Strategy of Player 1                    Iteration


Figure 1: Left: An extensive-form version of a stag hunt. Chance plays uniformly at random at
the root note, and the dotted line connecting the two nodes of Player 2 indicates an infoset: Player
2 cannot distinguish the two nodes. Introducing vanishing realized payments alters the gradient
landscape, steering players to the optimal equilibrium (star) instead of the suboptimal one (opposite
corner). The capital letters show the players’ initial strategies. Lighter color indicates higher welfare
and the star shows the highest-welfare equilibrium. Further details are in Appendix C.


to the players. Potential payments are payments that players would have received, had they played
different strategies.
We first consider the full-feedback (Section 5) setting where players’ payments may depend on
players’ full strategies. We present steering algorithms that establish under different computational
assumptions the first main result.
Theorem (Informal; precise versions in Theorem 5.2). For both normal-form and extensive-form
games, the decentralized steering problem can be solved under full feedback.

Intuitively, the mediator sends payments in such a way as to 1) reward the player a small amount
for playing the equilibrium, and 2) compensate the player for deviations of other players. Next,
we consider the more challenging bandit setting, wherein only game trajectories are observed. In
extensive-form games, this condition significantly restricts the structure of the payment functions,
and in particular rules out the full-feedback algorithm above. We show that the decentralized steering
problem under bandit feedback is information-theoretically impossible in the general case with
bounded potential payments.
Theorem (Informal; precise version in Theorem 5.4). For extensive-form games, the decentralized
steering problem is impossible under bandit feedback with bounded potential payments.

To circumvent this lower bound, we next allow the potential payments to depend on the time horizon,
while still insisting that they vanish in the limit.
Theorem (Informal; precise version in Theorem 5.6). For extensive-form games, if the payments may
depend on the time horizon, the decentralized steering problem can be solved under bandit feedback.

The proof of this theorem is more involved than the previous two. In particular, one might hope
that the desired equilibrium can be made (strictly) dominant by adding appropriate payments as in
k-implementation (Monderer & Tennenholtz, 2004). In extensive-form games, this is not the case:
there are games where making the welfare-optimal equilibrium dominant would require payments in
equilibrium, thereby inevitably leading to non-vanishing realized payments. Nevertheless, we show
that steering is possible despite even without dominance. This leads to the intriguing behavior where
some players may actually move farther from obedience before they move closer (compare Figure 1).
As such, we significantly depart from the approach of Monderer & Tennenholtz (2004); we elaborate
on this comparison and further related work in Appendix A.
Both previous positive results require computing an equilibrium upfront, which is both computa-
tionally expensive and not adaptive to players’ actions. We next analyze an online setting, where
the mediator employs an online regret minimization algorithm to compute an optimal equilibrium
while guiding the players toward it. As expected, algorithms for the online steering problem attain
slightly worse rates compared to algorithms for the offline problem. The rates we obtain for the
various versions of the steering problem all decay polynomially with the number of rounds, and we
highlight the time dependence in Table 1. We complement our theoretical analysis by implementing
and testing our steering algorithms in several benchmark games in Section 7.


                                                                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Summary of our positive algorithmic results. We hide game-dependent constants and
logarithmic factors, and assume that regret minimizers incur a (typical) average regret of T 1/2 .
                                           Steering to Fixed Equilibrium       Online Steering
      Normal Form or Full Feedback               T   1/4
                                                           (Theorem 5.2)        T   1/6
                                                                                          (Theorem 6.5)
    Extensive Form and Bandit Feedback           T   1/8
                                                           (Theorem 5.6)            Open problem

2     P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we introduce some basic background on extensive-form games.
Definition 2.1. An extensive-form game        with n players has the following components:

1. a set of players, identified with the set of integers JnK := {1, . . . , n}. We will use i, for i 2 JnK,
   to denote all players except i;
2. a directed tree H of histories or nodes, whose root is denoted ?. The edges of H are labeled with
   actions. The set of actions legal at h is denoted Ah . Leaf nodes of H are called terminal, and the
   set of such leaves is denoted by Z;
3. a partition H \ Z = HC t H1 t · · · t Hn , where Hi is the set of nodes at which i takes an action,
   and C denotes the chance player;
4. for each player i 2 JnK, a partition Ii of i’s decision nodes Hi into information sets. Every node
   in a given information set I must have the same set of legal actions, denoted by AI ;
5. for each player i, a utility function ui : Z ! [0, 1] which we assume to be bounded; and
6. for each chance node h 2 HC , a fixed probability distribution c(· |h) over Ah .

At a node h 2 H, the sequence i (h) of an agent i is the set of all information sets encountered by
agent i, and the actions played at such information sets, along the ? ! h path, excluding at h itself.
An agent has perfect recall if i (h) = i (h0 ) for all h, h0 in the same infoset. Unless otherwise stated
(Section 6), we assume that all players have perfect recall. We will use ⌃i := { i (z) : z 2 Z} to
denote the set of all sequences of player i that correspond to terminal nodes.
A pure strategy of player i is a choice of one action in AI for each information set I 2 Ii . The
sequence form of a pure strategy is the vector xi 2 {0, 1}⌃i given by xi [ ] = 1 if and only if
i plays every action on the path from the root to sequence 2 ⌃i . We will use the shorthand
xi [z] = xi [ i (z)]. A mixed strategy is a distribution over pure strategies, and the sequence form of a
mixed strategy is the corresponding convex combination xi 2 [0, 1]⌃i . We will use Xi to denote the
polytope of sequence-form mixed strategies of player i.
A profile of mixed strategies x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) 2 X := X1 ⇥ · · · ⇥ Xn , induces a distribution over
terminal nodes. We will use z ⇠ x to denote sampling from such a distribution. The expected utility
of agent i under such a distribution is given by ui (x) := Ez⇠x ui (z). Critically, the sequence form
has the property that each agent’s expected utility is a linear function of its own sequence-form mixed
strategy. For a profile
                 Q      x 2 X and set N ✓ JnK, we will use the notation x̂N 2 RZ to denote the
vector x̂N [z] = j2N xj [z], and we will write x̂ := x̂JnK . A Nash equilibrium is a strategy profile
x such that, for any i 2 JnK and any x0i 2 Xi , ui (x) ui (x0i , x i ).


3     T HE S TEERING P ROBLEM

In this section, we introduce what we call the steering problem. Informally, the steering problem asks
whether a mediator can always steer players to any given equilibrium of an extensive-form game.
Definition 3.1 (Steering Problem for Pure-Strategy Nash Equilibrium). Let be an extensive-form
game with payoffs bounded in [0, 1]. Let d be an arbitrary pure-strategy Nash equilibrium of . The
mediator knows the game , as well as a function R(T ) = o(T ), which may be game-dependent,
that bounds the regret of all players. At each round t 2 JT K, the mediator picks payment functions
                  (t)                                        (t)
for each player, pi : X1 ⇥ · · · ⇥ Xn ! [0, P ], where pi is linear in xi and continuous in x i , and
                                                                                         (t)
P defines the largest allowable per-iteration payment. Then, players pick strategies xi 2 Xi . Each
                            (t)                  (t)     (t)      (t)
player i then gets utility vi (xi ) := ui (xi , x i ) + pi (xi , x i ). The mediator has two desiderata.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (S1) (Payments) The time-averaged realized payments to the players, defined as
                      PT      (t)
         maxi2JnK T1 t=1 pi (x(t) ), converges to 0 as T ! 1.
    (S2) (Equilibrium) Players’ actions are indistinguishable from the Nash equilibrium d. That is,
                                          PT                  ˆ
         the directness gap, defined as T1 t=1 Ez⇠x(t) (1 d[z]),   converges to 0 as T ! 1.

The assumption imposed on the payment functions in Definition 3.1 ensures the existence of Nash
equilibria in the payment-augmented game (e.g., Glicksberg, 1952). Throughout this paper, we will
refer to players as direct if they are playing actions prescribed by the target equilibrium strategy d.
Critically, (S2) does not require that the strategies themselves converge to the direct strategies, i.e.,
  (t)
xi ! di , in iterates or in averages. They may differ on nodes off the equilibrium path. Instead,
the requirement defined by (S2) is equivalent to the reach probability of every node not reached in
the equilibrium d converging to 0, so that, on path, the players play the equilibrium. Similarly, (S1)
                                   (t)                                                     (t)
refers to the realized payments pi (x(t) ), not the maximum offered payment maxx2X pi (x).
For now, we will assume that a pure Nash equilibrium has been computed, and therefore our only
task is to steer the agents toward it. In Section 6 we show how our steering algorithms can be directly
applied to other equilibrium concepts such as mixed or correlated equilibria, and communication
equilibria, and to the case where the equilibrium has not been precomputed.
The mediator does not know anything about how the players pick their strategies, except that they
will have regret bounded by a function that vanishes in the limit and is known to the mediator.
This condition is a commonly adopted behavioral assumption (Nekipelov et al., 2015; Kolumbus
& Nisan, 2022b; Camara et al., 2020). The regret of Player i 2 JnK in this context is defined as
                                      "       T                T
                                                                             #
                                 1           X     (t)
                                                              X    (t)   (t)
                        T                               ⇤
                     RegXi :=           max       v (xi )         vi (xi ) .
                               P + 1 x⇤i 2Xi t=1 i            t=1

That is, regret takes into account the payment functions offered to that player.1 The assumption of
bounded regret is realistic even in extensive-form games, as various regret minimizing algorithms
exist. Two notable examples are the counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) framework (Zinkevich
et al., 2007), which yields full-feedback regret minimizers, and IXOMD (Kozuno et al., 2021), which
yields bandit-feedback regret minimizers.
How large payments are needed to achieve (S1) and (S2)? If the mediator could provide totally
unconstrained payments, it could enforce any arbitrary outcome. On the other hand if the total
payments are restricted to be bounded, the steering problem is information-theoretically impossible:
                                                                     p
Proposition 3.2. There exists a game and some function R(T ) = O( T ) such that, for all B 0,
                                                           P1 Pn         (t)
the steering problem is impossible if we add the constraint t=1 i=1 pi (x(t) )  B.

(Proofs are in Appendix E unless otherwise stated.) Hence, a weaker requirement on the size of the
payments is needed. Between these extremes, one may allow the total payment to be unbounded, but
insist that the average payment per round must vanish in the limit.

4       S TEERING IN N ORMAL -F ORM G AMES
We start with the example of normal-form games. A normal-form game, in our language, is simply
an extensive-form game in which every player has one information set, and the set of histories
correspond precisely to the set of pure profiles, i.e., for every pure profile x, we have x̂[z] = 1 for
exactly one terminal node z. This setting is, much more simple than the general extensive-form
setting which we will consider in the next section. In normal-form games, the strategy sets Xi are
simplices, Xi = (Ai ), where Ai is the action set of player i at its only decision point. In this
setting, we are able to turn to a special case of a result of Monderer & Tennenholtz (2004):
Theorem 4.1 (Costless implementation of pure Nash equilibria, special case of k-implementation,
Monderer & Tennenholtz, 2004). Let d be a pure Nash equilibrium in a normal-form game. Then
there exist functions p⇤i : X1 ⇥ · · · ⇥ Xn ! [0, 1], with p⇤i (d) = 0, such that in the game with utilities
vi := ui + p⇤i , the profile d is weakly dominant: vi (di , x i ) vi (xi , x i ) for every profile x.
    1                                                          (t)
        The division by 1/(P + 1) is for normalization, since vi s has range [0, P + 1].


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Indeed, it is easy to check that the payment function
                                                     ⇣            Y           ⌘
                                  p⇤i (x) := (d>
                                               i xi ) 1                  d>
                                                                          j xj ,
                                                                  j6=i

which on pure profiles x returns 1 if and only if xi = di and xj 6= dj for some j 6= i, satisfies these
properties. Such a payment function is almost enough for steering: the only problem is that d is only
weakly dominant, so no-regret players may play other strategies than d. This is easily fixed by adding
a small reward ↵ ⌧ 1 for playing di . That is, we set
                                                           ⇣         Y         ⌘
                    pi (x) := ↵d>          ⇤          >
                                 i xi + pi (x) = (di xi ) ↵ + 1         d>j xj .                    (1)
                                                                                    j6=i

On a high level, the structure of the payment function guarantees that the average strategy of any
no-regret learner i 2 JnK should be approaching the direct strategy di by making di the strictly
dominant strategy of player i. At the same time, it is possible to ensure that the average payment
will also be vanishing by appropriately selecting parameter ↵. With appropriate choice of ↵, this is
enough to solve the steering problem for normal-form games:
                                                                                    p
Theorem 4.2 (Normal-form steering). Let pi (x) be defined as in (1), set ↵ = ", where " :=
4nR(T )/T , and let T be large enough that ↵  1. Then
                                                     p players will be steered toward equilibrium,
with both payments and directness gap bounded by 2 ".

5     S TEERING IN E XTENSIVE -F ORM G AMES
The extensive-form setting is significantly more involved than the normal-form setting, and it will
be the focus for the remainder of our paper, for two reasons. First, in extensive form, the strategy
spaces of the players are no longer simplices. Therefore, if we wanted to write a payment function
pi with the property that pi (x) = ↵ {x = d} + {xi = di ; 9j xj 6= dj } for pure x (which is what
was needed by Theorem 4.2), such a function would not be linear (or even convex) in player i’s
strategy xi 2 Xi (which is a sequence-form strategy, not a distribution over pure strategies). As such,
even the meaning of extensive-form regret minimization becomes suspect in this setting. Second, in
extensive form, a desirable property would be that the mediator give payments conditioned only on
what actually happens in gameplay, not on the players’ full strategies—in particular, if a particular
information set is not reached during play, the mediator should not know what action the player would
have selected at that information set. We will call this the bandit setting, and distinguish it from the
full-feedback setting, where the mediator observes the players’ full strategies.2 This distinction is
meaningless in the normal-form setting: since terminal nodes in normal form correspond to (pure)
profiles, observing gameplay is equivalent to observing strategies. (We will discuss this point in more
detail when we introduce the bandit setting in Section 5.2.)
We now present two different algorithms for the steering problem, one in the full-feedback setting,
and one in the bandit setting.

5.1    S TEERING WITH F ULL F EEDBACK

In this section, we introduce a steering algorithm for extensive-form games under full feedback.
Algorithm 5.1 (F ULL F EEDBACK S TEER). At every round, set the payment function pi (xi , x i ) as
            ↵d>i xi         + [ui (xi , d i ) ui (xi , x i )]    min [ui (x0i , d i )          ui (x0i , x i )],   (2)
                                                                x0i 2Xi
            | {z }            |              {z             }   |                 {z                          }
         directness bonus            sandboxing payments                  payment to ensure nonnegativity

where ↵  1/|Z| is a hyperparameter that we will select appropriately.

By construction, pi satisfies the conditions of the steering problem (Definition 3.1): it is linear in
xi , continuous in x i , nonnegative, and bounded by an absolute constant (namely, 3). The payment
function defined above has three terms:
     2
       To be clear, the settings are differentiated by what the mediator observes, not what the players observe. That
is, it is valid to consider the full-feedback steering setting with players running bandit regret minimizers, or the
bandit steering setting with players running full-feedback regret minimizing algorithms.


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1. The first term is a reward for directness: a player gets a reward proportional to ↵ if it plays di .
 2. The second term compensates the player for the indirectness of other players. That is, the second
    term ensures that players’ rewards are as if the other players had acted directly.
 3. The final term simply ensures that the overall expression is nonnegative.
We claim that this protocol solves the basic version of the steering problem. Formally:
                        p
Theorem 5.2. Set ↵ = ", where " := 4nR(T )/T , and let T be large enough that ↵  1/|Z|. p Then,
F ULL F EEDBACK S TEER results in average realized payments and directness gap at most 3|Z| ".

5.2     S TEERING IN THE BANDIT S ETTING

In F ULL F EEDBACK S TEER, payments depend on full strategies x, not the realized game trajectories.
In particular, the mediator in Theorem 5.2 observes what the players would have played even at
infosets that other players avoid. To allow for an algorithm that works without knowledge of full
              (t)
strategies, pi must be structured so that it could be induced by a payment function that only gives
payments for terminal nodes reached during play. To this end, we now formalize bandit steering.
Definition 5.3 (Bandit steering problem). Let be an extensive-form game in which rewards are
bounded in [0, 1] for all players. Let d be an arbitrary pure-strategy Nash equilibrium of . The
mediator knows and a regret bound R(T ) = o(T ). At each t 2 JT K, the mediator selects a payment
           (t)                                            (t)
function qi : Z ! [0, P ]. The players select strategies xi . A terminal node z (t) ⇠ x(t) is sampled,
                                                                                              (t)
and all agents observe the terminal node that was reached, z (t) . The players get payments qi (z (t) ),
                                   (t)               (t)
so that their expected payment is pi (x) := Ez⇠x qi (z). The desiderata are as in Definition 3.1.
The bandit steering problem is more difficult than the non-bandit steering problem in two ways. First,
as discussed above, the mediator does not observe the strategies x, only a terminal node z (t) ⇠ x.
                                               (t)
Second, the form of the payment function qi : Z ! [0, P ] is restricted: this is already sufficient
to rule out F ULL F EEDBACK S TEER. Indeed, pi as defined in (2) cannot be written in the form
Ez⇠x qi (z): pi (xi , x i ) is nonlinear in x i due to the nonnegativity-ensuring payments, whereas
every function of the form Ez⇠x qi (z) will be linear in each player’s strategy.
We remark that, despite the above algorithm containing a sampling step, the payment function is
                                                                         (t)             (t)
defined deterministically: the payment is defined as the expected value pi (x) := Ez⇠x qi (z).
Thus, the theorem statements in this section will also be deterministic.
In the normal-form setting, the payments pi defined by (1) already satisfy the condi-
tion of bandit steering.       In particular, let z be the terminal node we have pi (x) =
Ez⇠x [↵ {z = z ⇤ } + {xi = di ; 9j xj 6= dj }]. Therefore, in the normal-form setting, Theorem 4.2
applies to both full-feedback steering and bandit steering, and we have no need to distinguish between
the two. However, in extensive form, as discussed above, the two settings are quite different.

5.2.1    L OWER B OUND ON R EQUIRED PAYMENTS
Unlike in the full-feedback or normal-form settings, in the bandit setting, steering is impossible in the
general case in the sense that per-iteration payments bounded by any constant do not suffice.
Theorem 5.4. For every P > 0, there exists an extensive-form game with O(P ) players, O(P 2 )
                                                                   (t)
nodes, and rewards bounded in [0, 1] such that, with payments qi : Z ! [0, P ], it is impossible to
steer players to the welfare-maximizing Nash equilibrium, even when R(T ) = 0.
For intuition, consider the extensive-form game in Figure 2, which can be seen as a three-player
version of Stag Hunt. Players who play Hare (H) get a value of 1/2 (up to constants); in addition, if
all three players play Stag (S), they all get expected value 1. The welfare-maximizing equilibrium is
“everyone plays Stag”, but “everyone plays Hare” is also an equilibrium. In addition, if all players are
playing Hare, the only way for the mediator to convince a player to play Stag without accidentally
also paying players in the Stag equilibrium is to pay players at one of the three boxed nodes. But
those three nodes are only reached with probability 1/n as often as the three nodes on the left, so the
mediator would have to give a bonus of more than n/2. The full proof essentially works by deriving
an algorithm that the players could use to exploit this dilemma to achieve either large payments or
bad convergence rate, generalizing the example to n > 3, and taking n = ⇥(P ).


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             C
                                                                                    j=?

                                                                                                           C
                                                                                              k=1         k=2         k=3
                                    j=1             j=2      j=3                    1                      2                       3
                                                                                H S                       H S                     H S

                                                                            0,0,0        2            0,0,0     3             0,0,0     1
                                                                                        H S                    H S                     H S

                     1                      2                       3           0,0,0         3           0,0,0       1           0,0,0       2
                H        S             H        S              H        S                H        S               H       S               H       S
            1
              ,0,0       0,0,0   0, 12 ,0       0,0,0     0,0, 12       0,0,0       0,0,0         1,1,1     0,0,0         1,1,1     0,0,0         1,1,1
            2



Figure 2: The counterexample for Theorem 5.4, for n = 3. Chance always plays uniformly at
random. Infosets are linked by dotted lines (all nodes belonging to the same player are in the same
infoset).


5.2.2    BANDIT S TEERING WITH L ARGE O FF -PATH PAYMENTS
To circumvent the lower bound in Theorem 5.4, in this subsection, we allow the payment bound
P 1 to depend on both the time limit T and the game. Consider the following algorithm.
Algorithm 5.5 (BANDIT S TEER). Let ↵, P be hyperparameters. Then, for all rounds t = 1, . . . , T ,
                                                                                      ˆ = 1), pay all
sample z ⇠ x(t) and pay players as follows. If all players have been direct (i.e., if d[z]
players ↵. If at least one player has not been direct, pay P to all players who have been direct. That
         (t)           ˆ + P di [z](1 d[z]).
                                           ˆ
is, set qi (z (t) ) = ↵d[z]

Theorem 5.6. Set the hyperparameters ↵ = 4|Z|1/2 "1/4 and P = 2|Z|1/2 " 1/4 , where " :=
R(T )/T , and let T be large enough that ↵  1. Then, running BANDIT S TEER for T rounds results
in average realized payments bounded by 8|Z|1/2 "1/4 , and directness gap by 2"1/2 .

The proof of this result is more involved than those for previous results. One may hope that—as
in F ULL F EEDBACK S TEER—the desired equilibrium can be made dominant by adding payments.
But this is impossible: in the smaller “stag hunt” game in Figure 1, for Player 2, Stag cannot be a
weakly-dominant strategy unless a payment is given at the boxed node, which would be problematic
because such payments would also appear in equilibrium, in violation of (S1). In fact, a sort of
“chicken-and-egg” problem arises: (S2) requires that all players converge to equilibrium. But for this
to happen, other players’ strategies must first converge to equilibrium so that i’s incentives are as they
would be in equilibrium. The main challenge in the proof of Theorem 5.6 is therefore to carefully set
the hyperparameters to achieve convergence despite these apparent problems.

6    OTHER E QUILIBRIUM N OTIONS AND O NLINE S TEERING
So far, Theorems 5.2 and 5.6 refer only to pure-strategy Nash equilibria of a game. We now show
how to apply these algorithms to other equilibrium notions such as mixed-strategy or correlated
equilibrium. The key insight is that many types of equilibrium can be viewed as pure-strategy
equilibria in an augmented game. For example, an extensive-form correlated equilibrium of a game
  can be viewed as a pure-strategy equilibrium of an augmented game 0 in which the mediator
samples actions (“recommendations”) and the acting player observes those recommendations. Then,
in 0 , the goal is to guide players toward the pure strategy profile of following recommendations.
We now formalize these ideas. For this section, let refer to a mediator-augmented game (Zhang &
Sandholm, 2022), which has n + 1 players i 2 JnK [ {0}, where player 0 is the mediator. We will
assume the revelation principle, which allows us to fix a target pure strategy profile d that we want to
make the equilibrium profile for the non-mediator players. We will write µ to refer to the n-player
game in which the mediator is fixed to playing the strategy µ.


                                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 6.1. An equilibrium in the mediator-augmented game is a strategy µ 2 X0 for the
mediator such that d is a Nash equilibrium of µ . An equilibrium µ is optimal if, among all equilibria,
it maximizes the mediator’s objective u0 (µ, d).
By varying the construction of the augmented game , the family of solution concepts for extensive-
form games captured by this framework includes, but is not limited to, normal-form coarse corre-
lated equilibrium (Aumann, 1974; Moulin & Vial, 1978); extensive-form correlated equilibrium
(EFCE)3 (von Stengel & Forges, 2008); communication equilibrium (Forges, 1986); mechanism
design; and information design/Bayesian persuasion (Kamenica & Gentzkow, 2011).
Unlike the offline setting (where the target equilibrium is given to us), in the online setting we
can choose the target equilibrium. In particular, we would like to steer players toward an optimal
equilibrium µ, without knowing that equilibrium beforehand. To that end, we add a new criterion:
   (S3) (Optimality) The mediator’s reward should converge to the reward of the optimal equilibrium.
                                          PT
        That is, the optimality gap u⇤0 T1 t=1 u0 (µ(t) , x(t) ), where u⇤0 is the mediator utility in
        an optimal equilibrium, converges to 0 as T ! 1.
In Appendix D, we discuss why it is in some sense necessary to allow the mediator to give recom-
mendations, not just payments, if the target equilibrium is not pure.
Since equilibria in mediator-augmented games are just strategies µ under which d is a Nash equi-
librium, we may use the following algorithm to steer players toward an optimal equilibrium of :

Algorithm 6.2 (C OMPUTE T HEN S TEER ). Compute an optimal equilibrium µ. With µ held fixed,
run any steering algorithm in µ .
As observed earlier, the main weakness of C OMPUTE T HEN S TEER is that it must compute an
equilibrium offline. To sidestep this, in this section we will introduce algorithms that compute the
equilibrium in an online manner, while steering players toward it. Our algorithms will make use of a
Lagrangian dual formulation analyzed by Zhang et al. (2023).
Proposition 6.3 (Zhang et al. (2023)). There exists a (game-dependent) constant ⇤ 0 such that,
for every       ⇤
                  , the solutions µ to
                                             Xn
                     max min u0 (µ, d)           [ui (µ, xi , d i ) ui (µ, di , d i )],           (3)
                       µ2X0 x2X
                                                   i=1
are exactly the optimal equilibria of the mediator-augmented game.
Algorithm 6.4 (O NLINE S TEER). The mediator runs a regret minimization algorithm R0 over its
own strategy space X0 , which we assume has regret at most R0 (T ) after T rounds. On each round,
the mediator does the following:
                                                              (t)                       (t)
          • Get a strategy µ(t) from R0 . Play µ(t) , hand set pi as defined in (2) in µ i .
                                             Pn                 (t)
          • Pass utility µ 7! 1 u0 (µ, d)       i=1 ui (µ, xi , d i )     ui (µ, di , d i ) to R0 , where
                 1 is a hyperparameter.
Theorem 6.5. Set the hyperparameters ↵ = "2/3 |Z| 1/3 and           = |Z|2/3 " 1/3 , where " :=
(R0 (T ) + 4nR(T ))/T is the average regret bound summed across players, and let T be large enough
that ↵  1/|Z|. Then running O NLINE S TEER results in average realized payments, directness gap,
and optimality gap all bounded by 7 ⇤ |Z|4/3 "1/3 .
The argument now works with the zero-sum formulation (3), and leverages the fact that the agents’
average strategies are approaching the set of Nash equilibria since they have vanishing regrets. Thus,
each player’s average strategy should be approaching the direct strategy, which in turn implies that
the average utility of the mediator is converging to the optimal value, analogously to Theorem 5.2.
O NLINE S TEER has a further guarantee that F ULL F EEDBACK S TEER does not, owing to the fact that
it learns an equilibrium online: it works even when the players’ sets of deviations, Xi , is not known
upfront. In particular, the following generalization of Theorem 6.5 follows from an identical proof.
   3
       This requires the mediator to have imperfect recall.


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Sheriff (EFCE, Pmult = 1)                                                  Ridesharing (EFCE, Pmult = 1)                                      Battleship (EFCE, Pmult = 1)
                 12.5                                                                            6.0                                      2.0                                                            2.0
                                                        50                                                                                                         0.55
                 10.0


                                                             Realized payment


                                                                                                                                                Realized payment


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Realized payment
Social welfare                                                                                                                            1.5                                                            1.5


                                                                                Social welfare


                                                                                                                                                 Social welfare
                                                        40                                       5.5                                                               0.60
                  7.5
                                                        30                                                                                1.0                                                            1.0
                  5.0                                                                                                                                              0.65
                                                        20                                       5.0
                  2.5                                                                                                                     0.5                      0.70                                  0.5
                                                        10
                                                                                                 4.5
                  0.0                                   0                                                                                 0.0                      0.75                                  0.0
                        0          20            40                                                    0        5               10   15                                   0     20         40    60
                                     Iteration                                                                      Iteration                                                        Iteration


Figure 3: Sample1 experimental results. The blue line1                                1
                                                        in each figure is the social welfare (left y-axis)
of the players with steering enabled. The green dashed line is the social welfare without steering.
The yellow line gives the payment (right y-axis) paid to each player. The flat black line denotes the
welfare of the optimal equilibrium. The panels show the game, the equilibrium concept (in this figure,
always EFCE). In all cases, the first ten iterations are a “burn-in” period during which no payments
are issued; steering only begins after that.


Corollary 6.6. Suppose that each player i, unbeknownst to the mediator, is choosing from a subset
Yi ✓ Xi of strategies that includes the direct strategy di . Then, running Theorem 6.5 with the same
hyperparameters yields the same convergence guarantees, except that the mediator’s utility converges
to its optimal utility against the true deviators, that is, a solution to (3) with each Xi replaced by Yi .

At this point, it is very reasonable to ask whether it is possible to perform online steering with bandit
feedback. In normal-form games, as with offline setting, there is minimal difference between the
bandit and the full-feedback setting. This intuition carries over to the bandit setting: O NLINE S TEER
can be adapted into an online bandit steering algorithm for normal-form games, with essentially the
same convergence guarantee. We defer the formal statement of the algorithm and proof to Appendix F.
The algorithm, however, fails to extend to the extensive-form online bandit setting, for the same
reasons that the offline full-feedback algorithm fails to extend to the online setting.

7                   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We ran experiments with our BANDIT S TEER algorithm (Algorithm 5.5) on various notions of
equilibrium in extensive-form games, using the C OMPUTE T HEN S TEER framework suggested by
Algorithm 6.2. Since the hyperparameter settings suggested by Algorithm 5.5 are very extreme, in
practice we fix a constant P and set ↵ dynamically based on the currently-observed gap to directness.
We used CFR+ (Tammelin, 2014) as the regret minimizer for each player, and precomputed a welfare-
optimal equilibrium with the LP algorithm of Zhang & Sandholm (2022). In most instances tested, a
small constant P (say, P  8) is enough to steer CFR+ regret minimizers to the exact equilibrium
in a finite number of iterations. Two plots exhibiting this behavior are shown in Figure 3. More
experiments, as well as descriptions of the game instances tested, can be found in Appendix G.

8                   C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE R ESEARCH
We established that it is possible to steer no-regret learners to optimal equilibria using vanishing
rewards, even under bandit feedback. There are many interesting avenues for future research.
First, is there a natural bandit online algorithm that combines the desirable properties of both
O NLINE S TEER and BANDIT S TEER? Also, it is important to understand the best rates attainable
for the different settings of the steering problem. Furthermore, is there a steering algorithm for which
the mediator needs to know even less information about the game upfront? For example, could a
mediator without knowledge of the players’ utilities still steer toward optimal equilibria? Finally,
our main behavioral assumption throughout this paper is that players incur vanishing average regret.
Yet, stronger guarantees are possible when specific no-regret learning dynamics are in place; e.g.,
see (Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis et al., 2020; Giannou et al., 2021a;b) for recent characterizations in the
presence of strict equilibria. Concretely, it would be interesting to understand the class of learning
dynamics under which the steering problem can be solved with a finite cumulative budget.


                                                                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Lucas Agussurja and Hoong Chuin Lau. The price of stability in selfish scheduling games. Web Intell.
  Agent Syst., 7(4):321–332, 2009.

Elliot Anshelevich, Anirban Dasgupta, Jon M. Kleinberg, Éva Tardos, Tom Wexler, and Tim Rough-
  garden. The price of stability for network design with fair cost allocation. SIAM Journal on
  Computing, 38(4):1602–1623, 2008.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E. Schapire. The nonstochastic multiarmed
  bandit problem. SIAM Journal of Computing, 32:48–77, 2002.
Robert Aumann. Subjectivity and correlation in randomized strategies. Journal of Mathematical
  Economics, 1:67–96, 1974.
Maria-Florina Balcan. Leading dynamics to good behavior. SIGecom Exch., 10(2):19–22, 2011.
Maria-Florina Balcan, Avrim Blum, and Yishay Mansour. Improved equilibria via public service
 advertising. In Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp. 728–737,
 2009.
Maria-Florina Balcan, Avrim Blum, and Yishay Mansour. Circumventing the price of anarchy:
 Leading dynamics to good behavior. SIAM Journal on Computing, 42(1):230–264, 2013.
Maria-Florina Balcan, Sara Krehbiel, Georgios Piliouras, and Jinwoo Shin. Near-optimality in
 covering games by exposing global information. ACM Trans. Economics and Comput., 2(4):
 13:1–13:22, 2014.
Mark Braverman, Jieming Mao, Jon Schneider, and Matt Weinberg. Selling to a no-regret buyer. In
 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), pp. 523–538, 2018.
William Brown, Jon Schneider, and Kiran Vodrahalli. Is learning in games good for the learners?
 CoRR, abs/2305.19496, 2023.
Linda Cai, S. Matthew Weinberg, Evan Wildenhain, and Shirley Zhang. Selling to multiple no-regret
  buyers. CoRR, abs/2307.04175, 2023.
Modibo K Camara, Jason D Hartline, and Aleck Johnsen. Mechanisms for a no-regret agent: Beyond
 the common prior. In Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp.
 259–270. IEEE, 2020.
In-Koo Cho and Jonathan Libgober. Machine learning for strategic inference. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2101.09613, 2021.
Maurizio D’Andrea. Playing against no-regret players. Operations Research Letters, 2023.
Yuan Deng, Pingzhong Tang, and Shuran Zheng. Complexity and algorithms of k-implementation.
  In Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, pp. 5–13. ACM, 2016.
Yuan Deng, Jon Schneider, and Balasubramanian Sivan. Strategizing against no-regret learners. In
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 1577–1585, 2019.
Paul Duetting, Tomer Ezra, Michal Feldman, and Thomas Kesselheim. Multi-agent contracts. CoRR,
  abs/2211.05434, 2022.
Paul Dütting, Tomer Ezra, Michal Feldman, and Thomas Kesselheim. Combinatorial contracts. In
  Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 815–826. IEEE, 2021a.
Paul Dütting, Tim Roughgarden, and Inbal Talgam-Cohen. The complexity of contracts. SIAM
  Journal on Computing, 50(1):211–254, 2021b.
Gabriele Farina, Chun Kai Ling, Fei Fang, and Tuomas Sandholm. Correlation in extensive-form
  games: Saddle-point formulation and benchmarks. In Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Francoise Forges. An approach to communication equilibria. Econometrica: Journal of the Econo-
  metric Society, pp. 1375–1385, 1986.
Rupert Freeman, David M. Pennock, Chara Podimata, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. No-regret and
  incentive-compatible online learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3270–3279. PMLR, 2020.
Angeliki Giannou, Emmanouil-Vasileios Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis, and Panayotis Mertikopoulos. On
  the rate of convergence of regularized learning in games: From bandits and uncertainty to optimism
  and beyond. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 22655–
  22666, 2021a.
Angeliki Giannou, Emmanouil-Vasileios Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis, and Panayotis Mertikopoulos.
  Survival of the strictest: Stable and unstable equilibria under regularized learning with partial
  information. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), volume 134 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pp. 2147–2148. PMLR, 2021b.
I. L. Glicksberg. A further generalization of the Kakutani fixed point theorem, with application to
   Nash equilibrium points. American Mathematical Society, 3(1):170–174, 1952.
Shengyuan Hu, Dung Daniel Ngo, Shuran Zheng, Virginia Smith, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Federated
  learning as a network effects game, 2023.
Emir Kamenica and Matthew Gentzkow. Bayesian persuasion. American Economic Review, 101(6):
  2590–2615, 2011.
David Kempe, Sixie Yu, and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik. Inducing equilibria in networked public goods
  games through network structure modification. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
  on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS ’20, pp. 611–619. International Foundation
  for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2020.

Robert D. Kleinberg, Katrina Ligett, Georgios Piliouras, and Éva Tardos. Beyond the nash equilibrium
  barrier. In Innovations in Computer Science - ICS 2011, pp. 125–140. Tsinghua University Press,
  2011.
Yoav Kolumbus and Noam Nisan. How and why to manipulate your own agent: On the incentives
  of users of learning agents. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2022a.
Yoav Kolumbus and Noam Nisan. Auctions between regret-minimizing agents. In Frédérique
  Laforest, Raphaël Troncy, Elena Simperl, Deepak Agarwal, Aristides Gionis, Ivan Herman, and
  Lionel Médini (eds.), WWW ’22: The ACM Web Conference 2022, pp. 100–111. ACM, 2022b.
Elias Koutsoupias and Christos Papadimitriou. Worst-case equilibria. In Symposium on Theoretical
  Aspects in Computer Science, 1999.
Tadashi Kozuno, Pierre Ménard, Remi Munos, and Michal Valko. Learning in two-player zero-sum
  partially observable markov games with perfect recall. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:11987–11998, 2021.
H. W. Kuhn. A simplified two-person poker. In H. W. Kuhn and A. W. Tucker (eds.), Contributions
  to the Theory of Games, volume 1 of Annals of Mathematics Studies, 24, pp. 97–103. Princeton
  University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1950.
Jiayang Li, Jing Yu, Yu Marco Nie, and Zhaoran Wang. End-to-end learning and intervention in
   games. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Kai Li, Wenhan Huang, Chenchen Li, and Xiaotie Deng. Exploiting a no-regret opponent in repeated
  zero-sum games. Journal of Shanghai Jiaotong University (Science), 2023.
Boyi Liu, Jiayang Li, Zhuoran Yang, Hoi-To Wai, Mingyi Hong, Yu Nie, and Zhaoran Wang. Inducing
  equilibria via incentives: Simultaneous design-and-play ensures global convergence. In Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, Jon Schneider, and Balasubramanian Sivan. Strategizing against
  learners in bayesian games. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), volume 178 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5221–5252. PMLR, 2022.
David Mguni, Joel Jennings, Emilio Sison, Sergio Valcarcel Macua, Sofia Ceppi, and Enrique
  Munoz de Cote. Coordinating the crowd: Inducing desirable equilibria in non-cooperative systems.
  In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Sys-
  tems, AAMAS ’19, pp. 386–394. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
  Systems, 2019.
Dov Monderer and Moshe Tennenholtz. K-implementation. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 21:37–62, 2004.
H. Moulin and J.-P. Vial. Strategically zero-sum games: The class of games whose completely mixed
  equilibria cannot be improved upon. International Journal of Game Theory, 7(3-4):201–221, 1978.
Roger B Myerson. Multistage games with communication. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
  Society, pp. 323–358, 1986.

Denis Nekipelov, Vasilis Syrgkanis, and Éva Tardos. Econometrics for learning agents. In ACM
  Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), pp. 1–18, 2015.
Ioannis Panageas and Georgios Piliouras. Average case performance of replicator dynamics in
  potential games via computing regions of attraction. In ACM Conference on Economics and
  Computation (EC), pp. 703–720. ACM, 2016.
Tim Roughgarden. Selfish routing and the price of anarchy. MIT Press, 2005.
Tim Roughgarden. Intrinsic robustness of the price of anarchy. Journal of the ACM, 62(5):32:1–32:42,
  2015.
Tim Roughgarden and Okke Schrijvers. Online prediction with selfish experts. In Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 1300–1310, 2017.
Andreas S. Schulz and Nicolás E. Stier Moses. On the performance of user equilibria in traffic
  networks. In Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp. 86–87, 2003.
Oskari Tammelin. Solving large imperfect information games using CFR+.              arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1407.5042, 2014.
Emmanouil-Vasileios Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis, Lampros Flokas, Thanasis Lianeas, Panayotis Mer-
 tikopoulos, and Georgios Piliouras. No-regret learning and mixed nash equilibria: They do not
 mix. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Bernhard von Stengel and Françoise Forges. Extensive-form correlated equilibrium: Definition and
  computational complexity. Mathematics of Operations Research, 33(4):1002–1022, 2008.
Brian Hu Zhang and Tuomas Sandholm. Polynomial-time optimal equilibria with a mediator in
  extensive-form games. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Brian Hu Zhang, Gabriele Farina, Andrea Celli, and Tuomas Sandholm. Optimal correlated equilibria
  in general-sum extensive-form games: Fixed-parameter algorithms, hardness, and two-sided
  column-generation. In ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), pp. 1119–1120.
  ACM, 2022.
Brian Hu Zhang, Gabriele Farina, Ioannis Anagnostides, Federico Cacciamani, Stephen McAleer,
  Andreas Haupt, Andrea Celli, Nicola Gatti, Vincent Conitzer, and Tuomas Sandholm. Computing
  optimal equilibria and mechanisms via learning in zero-sum extensive-form games. In Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Martin Zinkevich, Michael Bowling, Michael Johanson, and Carmelo Piccione. Regret minimization
 in games with incomplete information. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), 2007.



                                                12
