Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R ETHINKING P SEUDO -L ABELING : DATA -C ENTRIC I N -
SIGHTS I MPROVE S EMI -S UPERVISED L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Pseudo-labeling is a popular semi-supervised learning technique to leverage un-
         labeled data when labeled samples are scarce. The generation and selection of
         pseudo-labels heavily rely on labeled data. Existing approaches implicitly assume
         that the labeled data is gold standard and “perfect”. However, this can be violated
         in reality with issues such as mislabeling or ambiguity. We address this overlooked
         aspect and show the importance of investigating labeled data quality to improve
         any pseudo-labeling method. Specifically, we introduce a novel data characteriza-
         tion and selection framework called DIPS to extend pseudo-labeling. We select
         useful labeled and pseudo-labeled samples via analysis of learning dynamics. We
         demonstrate the applicability and impact of DIPS for various pseudo-labeling
         methods across an extensive range of real-world tabular and image datasets. Addi-
         tionally, DIPS improves data efficiency and reduces the performance distinctions
         between different pseudo-labelers. Overall, we highlight the significant benefits of
         a data-centric rethinking of pseudo-labeling in real-world settings.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Machine learning heavily relies on the availability of large numbers of annotated training examples.
However, in many real-world settings, such as healthcare and finance, collecting even limited numbers
of annotations is often either expensive or practically impossible. Semi-supervised learning leverages
unlabeled data to combat the scarcity of labeled data (Zhu, 2005; Chapelle et al., 2006; van Engelen
& Hoos, 2019). Pseudo-labeling is a prominent semi-supervised approach applicable across data
modalities that assigns pseudo-labels to unlabeled data using a model trained on the labeled dataset.
The pseudo-labeled data is then combined with labeled data to produce an augmented training set. This
increases the size of the training set and has been shown to improve the resulting model. In contrast,
consistency regularization methods (Sohn et al., 2020) are less versatile and often not applicable to
settings such as tabular data, where defining the necessary semantic-preserving augmentations proves
challenging (Gidaris et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2022a). Given the broad applicability across data
modalities and competitive performance, we focus on pseudo-labeling approaches.
Labeled data is not always gold standard. Current pseudo-labeling methods focus on unlabeled
data selection. However, an equally important yet overlooked problem is around labeled data quality,
given the reliance of pseudo-labelers on the labeled data. In particular, it is often implicitly assumed
that the labeled data is “gold standard and perfect”. This “gold standard” assumption is unlikely to
hold in reality, where data can have issues such as mislabeling and ambiguity (Sambasivan et al.,
2021; Renggli et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2021a;b; Northcutt et al., 2021a;b). For
example, Northcutt et al. (2021b) quantified the label error rate of widely-used benchmark datasets,
reaching up to 10%, while Wei et al. (2022a) showed this can be as significant as 20-40%. This
issue is critical for pseudo-labeling, as labeled data provides the supervision signal for pseudo-labels.
Hence, issues in the labeled data will affect the pseudo-labels and the predictive model (see Fig. 1).
Mechanisms to address this issue are essential to improve pseudo-labeling. It might appear possible to
manually inspect the data to identify errors in the labeled set. However, this requires domain expertise
and is human-intensive, especially in modalities such as tabular data where inspecting rows in a
spreadsheet can be much more challenging than reviewing an image. In other cases, updating labels
might be infeasible due to rerunning costly experiments in domains such as biology and physics, or
indeed impossible due to lack of access to either the underlying sample or equipment.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                           Class 1   Class 2       Unlabeled     Mislabeled
           Assumption                                              Real-world settings


                         Pseudo-labeling                                                 Pseudo-labeling


Figure 1: (Left) Current pseudo-labeling formulations implicitly assume that the labeled data is
the gold standard. (Right) However, this assumption is violated in real-world settings. Mislabeled
samples lead to error propagation when pseudo-labeling the unlabeled data.

Extending the pseudo-labeling machinery. To solve this fundamental challenge, we propose a novel
framework to extend the pseudo-labeling machinery called Data-centric Insights for Pseudo-labeling
with Selection (DIPS). DIPS focuses on the labeled and pseudo-labeled data to characterize and
select the most useful samples. We instantiate DIPS based on learning dynamics — the behavior of
individual samples during training. We analyze the dynamics by computing two metrics, confidence
and aleatoric (data) uncertainty, which enables the characterization of samples as Useful or Harmful,
guiding sample selection for model training. Sec. 5 empirically shows that this selection improves
pseudo-labeling performance in multiple real-world settings.
Beyond performance, DIPS is also specifically designed to be a flexible solution that easily integrates
with existing pseudo-labeling approaches, having the following desired properties:
    (P1) Plug & Play: applicable on top of any pseudo-labeling method (to improve it).
    (P2) Model-agnostic data characterization: agnostic to any class of supervised backbone
    models trained in an iterative scheme (e.g. neural networks, boosting methods).
    (P3) Computationally cheap: minimal computational overhead to be practically usable.

Contributions: ⃝  1 Conceptually, we propose a rethinking of pseudo-labeling, demonstrating the im-
portance of characterizing and systematically selecting data from both the labeled and pseudo-labeled
datasets, in contrast to the current focus only on the unlabeled data. ⃝2 Technically, we introduce
DIPS, a novel framework to characterize and select the most useful samples for pseudo-labeling.
This extends the pseudo-labeling machinery to address the unrealistic status quo of considering the
labeled data as gold standard. ⃝3 Empirically, we show the value of taking into account labeled data
quality, with DIPS’s selection mechanism improving various pseudo-labeling baselines, both in terms
of performance and data efficiency, which we demonstrate across 18 real-world datasets, spanning
both tabular data and images. This highlights the usefulness and applicability of DIPS.

2    R ELATED WORK
Semi-supervised learning and pseudo-labeling methods. Semi-supervised learning leverages
unlabeled data to combat the scarcity of labeled data (Zhu, 2005; Chapelle et al., 2006; van Engelen
& Hoos, 2019; Iscen et al., 2019; Berthelot et al., 2019). As mentioned in Sec. 1, we focus on pseudo-
labeling approaches, given their applicability across data modalities and competitive performance.
Recent methods have extended pseudo-labeling by modifying the selection mechanism of unlabeled
data (Lee et al., 2013; Rizve et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2022a; Tai et al., 2021), using curriculum
learning (Cascante-Bonilla et al., 2020), or merging pseudo-labeling with consistency loss-focused
regularization (Sohn et al., 2020). A commonality among these works is a focus on ensuring the
correct selection of the unlabeled data, assuming a gold standard labeled data. In contrast, DIPS
addresses the question: “What if the labeled data is not gold standard?”, extending the aforementioned
approaches to be more performant.
Data-centric AI. Data-centric AI has emerged focused on developing systematic methods to improve
the quality of data (Liang et al., 2022). One aspect is to score data samples based on their utility for a
task, or whether samples are easy or hard to learn, then enabling the curation or sculpting of high-
quality datasets for training efficiency purposes (Paul et al., 2021) or improved performance (Liang
et al., 2022). Typically, the goal is to identify mislabeled, hard, or ambiguous examples, with methods
differing based on metrics including uncertainty (Swayamdipta et al., 2020; Seedat et al., 2022), logits


                                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Pleiss et al., 2020), gradient norm (Paul et al., 2021), or variance of gradients (Agarwal et al., 2022).
We note two key aspects: (1) we draw inspiration from their success in the fully supervised setting
(where there are large amounts of labeled data) and bring the idea to the semi-supervised setting where
we have unlabeled data but scarce labeled data; (2) many of the discussed supervised methods are only
applicable to neural networks, relying on gradients or logits. Hence, they are not broadly applicable
to any model class, such as boosting methods which are predominant in tabular settings (Borisov
et al., 2021; Grinsztajn et al., 2022). This violates P2: Model-agnostic data characterization.
Learning with Noisy Labels (LNL). LNL typically operates in the supervised setting and assumes
access to a large amount of labeled data. This contrasts the semi-supervised setting, where labeled
data is scarce, and is used to output pseudo-labels for unlabeled data. Some LNL methods alter a loss
function, e.g. adding a regularization term (Cheng et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022b). Other methods
select samples using a uni-dimensional metric, the most common being the small-loss criterion in the
supervised setting (Xia et al., 2021). DIPS contrasts these approaches by taking into account both
confidence and aleatoric uncertainty in its selection process. While the LNL methods have not been
used in the semi-supervised setting previously, we repurpose them for this setting and experimentally
highlight the value of the curation process of DIPS in Appendix C. Interestingly, pseudo-labeling can
also be used as a tool in the supervised setting to relabel points identified as noisy by treating them as
unlabeled (Li et al., 2019); however, this contrasts DIPS in two key ways: (1) data availability: these
works operate only on large labeled datasets, whereas DIPS operates with a small labeled and large
unlabeled dataset. (2) application: these works use pseudo-labeling as a tool for supervised learning,
whereas DIPS extends the machinery of pseudo-labeling itself.

3     BACKGROUND
We now give a brief overview of pseudo-labeling as a general paradigm of semi-supervised learning.
We then highlight that the current formulation of pseudo-labeling overlooks the key notion of labeled
data quality, which motivates our approach.

3.1   S EMI - SUPERVISED LEARNING VIA PSEUDO - LABELING

Semi-supervised learning addresses the scarcity of labeled data by leveraging unlabeled data. The
natural question it answers is: how can we combine labeled and unlabeled data in order to boost the
performance of a model, in comparison to training on the small labeled data alone?
Notation. Consider a classification setting where we have a labeled dataset Dlab = {(xi , yi )|i ∈
[nlab ]} as well as an unlabeled dataset Dunlab = {x′j |j ∈ [nunlab ]}. We typically assume that
nlab ≪ nunlab . Moreover, the labels take values in {0, 1}C , where C is the number of classes. This
encompasses both binary (C = 2) and multi-label classification. Our goal is to learn a predictive
model f : x → y which leverages Dunlab in addition to Dlab , such that it performs better than a
model trained on the small labeled dataset Dlab alone. For all k ∈ [C], the k-th coordinate of f (x) is
denoted as [f (x)]k . It is assumed to be in [0, 1], which is typically the case after a softmax layer.
Pseudo-labeling. Pseudo-labeling (PL) is a powerful and general-purpose semi-supervised approach
which answers the pressing question of how to incorporate Dunlab in the learning procedure. PL
is an iterative procedure which spans T iterations and constructs a succession of models f (i) , for
i = 1, ..., T . The result of this procedure is the last model f (T ) , which issues predictions at test time.
The idea underpinning PL is to gradually incorporate Dunlab into Dlab to train the classifiers f (i) . At
each iteration i of pseudo-labeling, two steps are conducted in turn. Step 1: The model f (i) is first
trained with supervised learning. Step 2: f (i) then pseudo-labels unlabeled samples, a subset of which
are selected to expand the training set of the next classifier f (i+1) . The key to PL is the construction of
                                                       (i)
these training sets. More precisely, let us denote Dtrain the training set used to train f (i) at iteration i.
  (i)                                          (1)
Dtrain is defined by an initial condition, Dtrain = Dlab , and by the following recursive equation: for
                         (i+1)       (i)
all i = 1, ..., T − 1, Dtrain = Dtrain ∪ s(Dunlab , f (i) ), where s is a selector function. Alternatively
          (i)
stated, f outputs pseudo-labels for Dunlab at iteration i and the selector function s then selects a
                                                                   (i)            (i+1)
subset of these pseudo-labeled samples, which are added to Dtrain to form Dtrain . Common heuristics
define s with metrics of confidence and/or uncertainty (e.g. greedy-PL (Lee et al., 2013), UPS (Rizve
et al., 2021)). More details are given in Appendix A regarding the exact formulation of s in those cases.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   OVERLOOKED ASPECTS IN THE CURRENT FORMULATION OF PSEUDO - LABELING

Having introduced the pseudo-labeling paradigm, we now show that its current formulation overlooks
several key elements which will motivate our approach.
First, the selection mechanism s only focuses on unlabeled data and ignores labeled data. This implies
that the labeled data is considered "perfect". This assumption is not reasonable in many real-world
settings where labeled data is noisy. In such situations, as shown in Fig. 1, noise propagates to the
pseudo-labels, jeopardizing the accuracy of the pseudo-labeling steps (Nguyen et al., 2022a). To see
                                                      (1)
why such propagation of error happens, recall that Dtrain = Dlab . Alternatively stated, Dlab provides
                                                                         (i)
the initial supervision signal for PL and its recursive construction of Dtrain .
Second, PL methods do not update the pseudo-labels of unlabeled samples once they are incorporated
                (i)
in one of the Dtrain . However, the intuition underpinning PL is that the classifiers f (i) progressively
get better over the iterations, meaning that pseudo-labels computed at iteration T are expected to be
more accurate than pseudo-labels computed at iteration 1, since f (T ) is the output of PL.
Taken together, these two observations shed light on an important yet overlooked aspect of current
PL methods: the selection mechanism s ignores labeled and previously pseudo-labeled samples. This
                                                             (i+1)     (i)
naturally manifests in the asymmetry of the update rule Dtrain = Dtrain ∪ s(Dunlab , f (i) ), where
                                                                          (i)
the selection function s is only applied to unlabeled data and ignores Dtrain at iteration i + 1.

4     DIPS: DATA - CENTRIC INSIGHTS FOR IMPROVED PSEUDO - LABELING
In response to these overlooked aspects, we propose a new formulation of pseudo-labeling, DIPS,
with the data-centric aim to characterize the usefulness of both labeled and pseudo-labeled samples.
We then operationalize this framework with the lens of learning dynamics. Our goal is to improve the
performance of any pseudo-labeling algorithm by selecting useful samples to be used for training.

4.1   A DATA - CENTRIC FORMULATION OF PSEUDO - LABELING
                                                        (i)
Motivated by the asymmetry in the update rule of Dtrain , as defined in Sec. 3.1, we propose DIPS, a
novel framework which explicitly focuses on both labeled and pseudo-labeled samples. The key idea
is to introduce a new selection mechanism, called r, while still retaining the benefits of s. For any
dataset D and classifier f , r(D, f ) defines a subset of D to be used for training in the current pseudo-
labeling iteration. More formally, we define the new update rule (Eq. 1) for all i = 1, ..., T − 1 as:
               (
                   D(i+1) = D(i) ∪ s(Dunlab , f (i) ) ▷ Original PL formulation
                    (i+1)                                                                              (1)
                   Dtrain = r(D(i+1) , f (i) )                        ▷ DIPS selection
                    (1)
Then, let D(1) = Dtrain = r(Dlab , f (0) ), where f (0) is a classifier trained on Dlab only. The selector
                                              (i+1)
r selects samples from D(i+1) , producing Dtrain , the training set of f (i+1) .
This new formulation addresses the challenges mentioned in Sec. 3.2, as it considers both labeled and
pseudo-labeled samples. Indeed, r selects samples in Dlab at any iteration i, since r(Dlab , f (0) ) =
D(0) ⊂ D(i) for all i = 0, ..., T . Moreover, at any iteration j = 2, ..., T , r selects samples amongst
those pseudo-labeled at a previous iteration i < j, since s(Dunlab , f (i−1) ) ⊂ D(i) ⊂ D(j) . We show
the value of considering both labeled and pseudo-labeled data for the selection in Appendix C.1.
Finally, notice that DIPS subsumes current pseudo-labeling methods via its selector r. To see that,
we note current pseudo-labeling methods define an identity selector r, selecting all samples, such
that for any D and function f , we have r(D, f ) = D. Hence, DIPS goes beyond this status quo by
permitting a non-identity selector r.

4.2   O PERATIONALIZING DIPS USING LEARNING DYNAMICS

We now explicitly instantiate DIPS by constructing the selector r. Our key idea is to define r using
learning dynamics of samples. Before giving a precise definition, let us detail some context. Prior
works in learning theory have shown that the learning dynamics of samples contain a useful signal
about the nature of samples (and their usefulness) for a specific task (Arpit et al., 2017; Arora et al.,


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Stage 1: Data characterization                                                   Stage 2: Pseudo-labeling


                                              Probability -true label
                                Train model

                                   ⚙️
                                                                                      Epochs


               Uncurated data                                           Learning dynamics          Discard harmful   Improved pseudo-labels
                                                                                                   samples



Figure 2: Stage 1 operationalizes DIPS by leveraging learning dynamics of individual labeled and
pseudo-labeled samples to characterize them as Useful or Harmful. Only Useful samples are then
kept for Stage 2, which consists of pseudo-labeling, using any off-the-shelf method.

2019; Li et al., 2020). Some samples may be easier for a model to learn, whilst for other samples, a
model might take longer to learn (i.e. more variability through training) or these samples might not
be learned correctly during the training process. We build on this insight about learning dynamics,
bringing the idea to the semi-supervised setting.
Our construction of r has three steps. First, we analyze the learning dynamics of labeled and pseudo-
labeled samples to define two metrics: (i) confidence and (ii) aleatoric uncertainty, which captures
the inherent data uncertainty. Second, we use these metrics to characterize the samples as Useful or
Harmful. Third, we select Useful samples for model training, which gives our definition of r.
For any i, we assume that the classifier f (i) at iteration i of PL is trained in an iterative scheme (e.g.
neural networks or XGBoost trained over iterations), which is ubiquitous in practice. This motivates
and makes it possible to analyze the learning dynamics as a way to characterize individual samples.
For clarity of presentation, we consider binary classification (C = 2) and denote f (i) = f .
At any pseudo-labeling iteration, f is trained from scratch and goes through e ∈ [E] different
checkpoints leading to the set F = {f1 , f2 , . . . , fE }, such that fe is the classifier at the e-th
checkpoint. Our goal is to assess the learning dynamics of samples over these E training checkpoints.
For this, we define H, a random variable following a uniform distribution UF over the set of
checkpoints F. Specifically, given H = h and a sample (x, y), where y is either a provided label
(x ∈ Dlab ) or a pseudo-label (x ∈ Dunlab ), we define the correctness in the prediction of H as a
binary random variable ŶF (x, y) with the following conditional: P (ŶF (x, y) = 1|H = h) = [h(x)]y
and P (ŶF (x, y) = 0|H = h) = 1 − P (ŶF (x, y) = 1|H = h).
Equipped with a probabilistic interpretation of the predictions of a model, we now define our
characterization metrics: (i) average confidence and (ii) aleatoric (data) uncertainty, inspired by
(Kwon et al., 2020; Seedat et al., 2022).
Definition 4.1 (Average confidence). For any set of checkpoints F = {f1 , ..., fE }, the average
confidence for a sample (x, y) is defined as the following marginal:
                                                                               E
                                                                            1 X
        P̄F (x, y) := P (ŶF (x, y) = 1) = EH∼UF [P (ŶF (x, y) = 1|H)] =         [fe (x)]y      (2)
                                                                            E e=1
Definition 4.2 (Aleatoric uncertainty). For any set of checkpoints F = {f1 , ..., fE }, the aleatoric
uncertainty for a sample (x, y) is defined as:
                                                             E
                                                          1 X
            val,F (x, y) := EH∼UF [V ar(ŶF (x, y)|H)] =        [fe (x)]y (1 − [fe (x)]y )        (3)
                                                          E e=1
Intuitively, the aleatoric uncertainty for a sample x is maximized when [fe (x)]y = 21 for all check-
points fe , akin to random guessing. Recall aleatoric uncertainty captures the inherent data uncertainty,
hence is a principled way to capture issues such as mislabeling. This contrasts epistemic uncertainty,
which is model-dependent and can be reduced simply by increasing model parameterization (Hüller-
meier & Waegeman, 2021).
We emphasize that this definition of uncertainty is model-agnostic, satisfying P2: Model-agnostic
data characterization, and only relies on having checkpoints through training. Hence, it comes for
free, unlike ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). This fulfills P3: Computationally cheap.
Moreover, it is applicable to any iteratively trained model (e.g. neural networks and XGBoost) unlike
approaches such as MC-dropout or alternative training dynamic metrics using gradients (Paul et al.,
2021) or logits (Pleiss et al., 2020).

                                                                                               5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3    D EFINING THE SELECTOR r: DATA CHARACTERIZATION AND SELECTION

Having defined sample-wise confidence and aleatoric uncertainty, we characterize both labeled and
pseudo-labeled samples into two categories, namely Useful and Harmful. Given a sample (x, y), a
set of training checkpoints F, and two thresholds τconf and τal , we define the category c(x, y, F) as
Useful if P̄F (x, y) ≥ τconf and val,F (x, y) < τal , and Harmful otherwise.
Hence, a Useful sample is one where we are highly confident in predicting its associated label and
for which we also have low inherent data uncertainty. In contrast, a harmful sample would have low
confidence and/or high data uncertainty. Finally, given a function f whose training led to the set of
checkpoints F, we can define r explicitly by r(D, f ) = {(x, y)|(x, y) ∈ D, c(x, y, F) = Useful}.

4.4    C OMBINING DIPS WITH any PSEUDO - LABELING ALGORITHM

We outline the integration of DIPS Algorithm 1 Plug DIPS into any pseudo-labeler
into any pseudo-labeling algorithm as 1: Train a network, f (0) , using the samples from D .
                                                                                              lab
per Algorithm 1 (see Appendix A). A                              (1)       (1)               (0)
fundamental strength of DIPS lies in  2:  Plug-in  DIPS:   set Dtrain =  D     = r(D lab , f     )
its simplicity. Not only is computa- 3: for t = 1..T do
tion almost for free (no extra model 4:      Initialize new network f (t)
                                                                  (t)
training) – i.e. P3: Computationally 5:      Train f (t) using Dtrain .
cheap, but also DIPS is easily inte- 6:      Pseudo-label Dunlab using f (t)
grated into any pseudo-labeling algo- 7:     Define D(t+1) using the PL method’s selector s
rithm – i.e. P1: Plug & Play, making 8:                                  (t+1)
                                              Plug-in DIPS : Define Dtrain = r(D(t+1) , f (t) ) ▷ Data
for easier adoption.
                                                  characterization and selection, Sec. 4.3
                                               9: end for
5     E XPERIMENTS                            10: return fT

We now empirically investigate multiple aspects of DIPS. We discuss the setup of each experiment
at the start of each sub-section, with further experimental details in Appendix B.
1. Characterization: Does it matter? Sec. 5.1 analyzes the effect of not characterizing and
                               (i)
    selecting samples in all Dtrain in a synthetic setup, where noise propagates from Dlab to Dunlab .
                                                                                   (i)
2. Performance: Does it work? Sec. 5.2 shows characterizing Dtrain using DIPS improves
   performance of various state-of-the-art pseudo-labeling baselines across 12 real-world datasets.
3. Narrowing the gap: Can selection reduce performance disparities? Sec. 5.2 shows that DIPS
   also renders the PL methods more comparable to one other.
4. Data efficiency: Can similar performance be achieved with less labeled data? Sec. 5.3 studies
   the efficiency of data usage of vanilla methods vs. DIPS on different proportions of labeled data.
5. Selection across countries: Can selection improve performance when using data from a
   different country? Sec. 5.4 assesses the role of selection of labeled and pseudo-labeled samples
   when Dlab and Dunlab come from different countries in a clinically relevant task.
6. Other modalities: Sec. 5.5 shows the potential to use DIPS in image experiments.

5.1   S YNTHETIC EXAMPLE : DATA CHARACTERIZATION AND UNLABELED DATA IMPROVE TEST
      ACCURACY

Goal. To motivate DIPS, we demonstrate that: (1) label noise in the data harms pseudo-labeling (2)
characterizing and selecting data using DIPS consequently improves pseudo-labeling performance.
Setup. We consider a synthetic setup with two quadrants (Lee et al., 2023), as illustrated in Fig. 3b 1 .
We sample data in each of the two quadrants from a uniform distribution, and each sample is equally
likely to fall in each quadrant. To mimic a real-world scenario of label noise in Dlab , we randomly
flip labels with varying proportions pcorrupt ∈ [0.1, 0.45]
Baselines. We compare DIPS with two baselines (i) Supervised which trains a classifier using the
initial Dlab (ii) Greedy pseudo-labeling (PL) (Lee et al., 2013) which uses both Dlab and Dunlab . We
use an XGBoost backbone for all the methods and we combine DIPS with PL for a fair comparison.
    1
      Notice that the two quadrant setup satisfies the cluster assumption inherent to the success of semi-supervised
learning (Chapelle et al., 2006).


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
                      3/                                3/ ',36
                             8QODEHOHG                                                100
                             &ODVV
                             &ODVV
                                                                                                90


                                                                               Test accuracy
                                                                                                80

                                                                                                70
                                                                                                           Supervised
                                                                                                60         PL
                                                                                                           PL+DIPS (Ours)
                                                                                                     0.0      0.1       0.2      0.3      0.4
                                                                                                            Proportion of corrupted samples
            (a) PL: The inherent                  (b) PL+DIPS: DIPS
            noise in Dlab propa-                  mitigates the issue of           (c) DIPS selection mechanism
            gates when assigning                  noise by selecting use-          significantly improves test perfor-
            pseudo-labels.                        ful samples.                     mance under label noise.

Figure 3: (Left) The colored dots are an illustration of the selected labeled and pseudo-labeled
samples for the last iteration of PL and PL+DIPS, with 30% label noise. Grey dots are unselected
unlabeled samples. (Right) Characterizing and selecting data for the semi-supervised algorithm
yields the best results, as epitomized by PL+DIPS, and makes the use of unlabeled data impactful.

Results. Test performance over 20 random seeds with different data splits and nlab = 100, nunlab =
900 is illustrated in Fig. 3c, for varying pcorrupt . It highlights two key elements. First, PL barely
improves upon the supervised baseline. The noise in the labeled dataset propagates to the unlabeled
dataset, via the pseudo-labels, as shown in Fig. 3a. This consequently negates the benefit of using the
unlabeled data to learn a better classifier, which is the original motivation of semi-supervised learning.
Second, DIPS mitigates this issue via its selection mechanism and improves performance by around
+20% over the two baselines when the amount of label noise is around 30%. We also conduct an
ablation study in Appendix C to understand when in the pseudo-labeling pipeline to apply DIPS.
Takeaway. The results emphasize the key motivation of DIPS: labeled data quality is central to
the performance of the pseudo-labeling algorithms because labeled data drives the learning process
necessary to perform pseudo-labeling. Hence, careful consideration of Dlab is crucial to performance.
5.2   DIPS IMPROVES DIFFERENT PSEUDO - LABELING ALGORITHMS ACROSS 12 REAL - WORLD
      TABULAR DATASETS .

Goal. We evaluate the effectiveness of DIPS on 12 different real-world tabular datasets with diverse
characteristics (sample sizes, number of features, task difficulty). We aim to demonstrate that
DIPS improves the performance of various pseudo-labeling algorithms. We focus on the tabular
setting, as pseudo-labeling plays a crucial role in addressing data scarcity issues in healthcare and
finance, discussed in Sec. 1, where data is predominantly tabular (Borisov et al., 2021; Shwartz-
Ziv & Armon, 2022). Moreover, enhancing our capacity to improve models for tabular data holds
immense significance, given its ubiquity in real-world applications. For perspective, nearly 79%
of data scientists work with tabular data on a daily basis, compared to only 14% who work with
modalities such as images (Kaggle, 2017). This underlines the critical need to advance pseudo-
labeling techniques in the context of impactful real-world tabular data.
Datasets. The tabular datasets are drawn from a variety of domains (e.g. healthcare, finance),
mirroring Sec. 1, where the issue of limited annotated examples is highly prevalent. It is important
to note that the vast majority of the datasets (10/12) are real-world data sets, demonstrating the
applicability of DIPS and its findings in practical scenarios. For example, Covid-19 (Baqui et al.,
2020), MAGGIC (Pocock et al., 2013), SEER (Duggan et al., 2016), and CUTRACT (PCUK, 2019)
are medical datasets. COMPAS (Angwin et al., 2016) is a recidivism dataset. Credit is a financial
default dataset from a Taiwan bank (Yeh & Lien, 2009). Higgs is a physics dataset (Baldi et al., 2014).
The datasets vary significantly in both sample size (from 1k to 41k) and number of features (from 12
to 280). More details on the datasets can be found in Table 1, Appendix B.
Baselines. As baselines, we compare: (i) Supervised training on the small Dlab , (ii) five state-of-the-
art pseudo-labeling methods applicable to tabular data: greedy-PL (Lee et al., 2013), UPS (Rizve
et al., 2021), FlexMatch (Zhang et al., 2021), SLA (Tai et al., 2021), CSA (Nguyen et al., 2022a).
For each of the baselines, we apply DIPS as a plug-in to improve performance.
Results We report results in Fig. 4 across 50 random seeds with different data splits with a fixed
proportion of Dlab : Dunlab of 0.1:0.9. We note several findings from Fig. 4 pertinent to DIPS.
■ DIPS improves the performance of almost all baselines across various real-world datasets.

We showcase the value of data characterization and selection to improve SSL performance. We


                                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       seer                        adult
                                                             Supervised cutract                                                                Vanilla        covid
                                                                                                                                                                        DIPS (Ours)maggic                                                                                compas
                                       83                                                                                                          70                         68                                                                             65.0
           83
                                                                   67.5



Accuracy
                                       82
           82                                                                                                                                      68                                                                                                        62.5
                                       81                          65.0                                                                                                       66
           81                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60.0
                PL UPS Flex SLA CSA          PL UPS Flex SLA CSA 62.5 PL UPS Flex SLA CSA 66 PL UPS Flex SLA CSA                                                                                                                       PL UPS Flex SLA CSA          PL UPS Flex SLA CSA
                   agaricus-lepiota             German-credit               higgs                  drug                                                                                                                                      blog                         credit
           66                                                     82                      78
Accuracy
                                      70.0                                                                                                                                    80
                                                                                                                                                   76                                                                                                         80
           64                                                                             81
                                      67.5                                                                                                                                    79
                                                                                                                                                   74                                                                                                         78
           62 PL UPS Flex SLA CSA            PL UPS Flex SLA CSA                                                             PL UPS Flex SLA CSA        PL UPS Flex SLA CSA                                                            PL UPS Flex SLA CSA          PL UPS Flex SLA CSA


Figure 4: DIPS consistently improves performance of all five pseudo-labeling methods across the 12
real-world datasets. DIPS also reduces the performance gap between the different pseudo-labelers.

demonstrate that DIPS consistently boosts the performance when incorporated with existing pseudo-
labelers. This illustrates the key motivation of our work: labeled data is of critical importance for
pseudo-labeling and calls for curation, in real-world scenarios.
■ DIPS reduces the performance gap between pseudo-labelers.
Fig. 4 shows the reduction in variability of performance across pseudo-labelers by introducing data
characterization. On average, we reduce the average variance across all datasets and algorithms from
0.46 in the vanilla case to 0.14 using DIPS. In particular, we show that the simplest method, namely
greedy pseudo-labeling (Lee et al., 2013), which is often the worst in the vanilla setups, is drastically
improved simply by incorporating DIPS, making it competitive with the more sophisticated alterna-
tive baselines. This result of equalizing performance is important as it directly influences the process
of selecting a pseudo-labeling algorithm. We report additional results in Appendix C.2 where we
replace the selector r with sample selectors from the LNL literature, highlighting the advantage of
using learning dynamics.
Takeaway. We have empirically demonstrated improved performance by DIPS across multiple
pseudo-labeling algorithms and multiple real-world datasets.
5.3                DIPS IMPROVES DATA EFFICIENCY

Goal. In real-world scenar-
                                                                      ,PSURYHG WHVW  Y  YDQLOOD


                                                                                                                                                                                ,PSURYHG WHVW  Y  YDQLOOD



ios, collecting labeled data is
a significant bottleneck, hence
it is traditionally the sole fo-

cus of semi-supervised bench-                                                            3/ ',36  2XUV                                                 836 ',36  2XUV
marks. The goal of this experi-                                                          3/                                                                        836


ment is to demonstrate that data                  3URSRUWLRQ RI ODEHOHG GDWD XVHG                     3URSRUWLRQ RI ODEHOHG GDWD XVHG
quality is an overlooked dimen-
                                          (a) Pseudo-Labeling                                                                                   (b) UPS
sion that has a direct impact
on data quantity requirements Figure 5: DIPS improves data efficiency of vanilla methods,
to achieve a given test perfor- achieving the same level of performance with 60-70% fewer la-
mance for pseudo-labeling.         beled examples, as shown by the vertical dotted lines. The results
                                   are averaged across datasets and show gains in accuracy vs. the
Setup. For clarity, we focus on
                                   maximum performance of the vanilla method.
greedy-PL and UPS as pseudo-
labeling algorithms. To assess data efficiency, we consider subsets of Dlab with size p · |Dlab |, with p
going from 0.1 to 1.
Results. The results in Fig. 5, averaged across datasets, show the performance gain in accuracy for all
p compared to the maximum performance of the vanilla method (i.e. when p = 1). We conclude that
DIPS significantly improves the data efficiency of the vanilla pseudo-labeling baselines, between
60-70% more efficient for UPS and greedy-PL respectively, to reach the same level of performance.
Takeaway. We have demonstrated that data quantity is not the sole determinant of success in pseudo-
labeling. We reduce the amount of data needed to achieve a desired test accuracy by leveraging the
selection mechanism of DIPS. This highlights the significance of a multi-dimensional approach to
pseudo-labeling, where a focus on quality reduces the data quantity requirements.

5.4                DIPS IMPROVES PERFORMANCE OF CROSS - COUNTRY PSEUDO - LABELING

Goal. To further assess the real-world benefit of DIPS, we consider the clinically relevant task of
improving classifier performance using data from hospitals in different countries.


                                                                                                                                               8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Setup. We assess a setup using Prostate cancer data from the UK (CUTRACT (PCUK, 2019)) to
define (Dlab , Dtest ), which is augmented by Dunlab , from US data (SEER (Duggan et al., 2016)).
While coming from different countries, the datasets have interoperable features and the task is to
predict prostate cancer mortality. We leverage the unlabeled data from the US to augment the small
labeled dataset from the UK, to improve the classifier when used in the UK (on Dtest ).
                                                                                                                             Supervised    Vanilla     DIPS (Ours)
Results. Fig. 6 illustrates that greedy-PL and UPS benefit from DIPS’s
selection of labeled and pseudo-labeled samples, resulting in improved                                                      70
test performance. Hence, this result underscores that ignoring the labeled


                                                                                                                 Accuracy
                                                                                                                            68
data whilst also naively selecting pseudo-labeled samples simply using
confidence scores (as in greedy-PL) yields limited benefit. We provide                                                      66
further insights into the selection and gains by DIPS in Appendix C.
                                                                                                                                     Greedy-PL         UPS
Takeaway. DIPS’s selection mechanism improves performance when Figure 6: Curation of Dlab
using semi-supervised approaches across countries.             permits us to better leverage
                                                                                                                 a cross-country Dunlab
5.5 DIPS WORKS WITH OTHER DATA MODALITIES
Goal. While DIPS is mainly geared towards the important problem of pseudo-labeling for tabular
data, we explore an extension of DIPS to images, highlighting its versatility. Future work may
explore other modalities like text or speech.
Setup. We investigate the use of DIPS to improve pseudo-labeling        90
                                                                               FixMatch
for CIFAR-10N (Wei et al., 2022a). With realism in mind, we specif-     85     FixMatch+DIPS
                                                                        80
ically use this dataset as it reflects noise in image data stemming


                                                                                                 Mean Accuracy
                                                                        75
from real-world human annotations on M-Turk, rather than synthetic      70
noise models (Wei et al., 2022a). We evaluate the semi-supervised       65
algorithm FixMatch (Sohn et al., 2020) with a WideResNet-28             60
(Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) for nlab = 1000 over three seeds.         55
FixMatch combines pseudo-labeling with consistency regularization,      50
                                                                              100k 500k 1000k
hence does not apply to the previous tabular data-focused experi-                   Iterations
ments. We incorporate DIPS as a plug-in to the pseudo-labeling Figure 7: DIPS improves Fix-
component of FixMatch.                                              Match on CIFAR-10N

Results. Fig. 7 showcases the improved test accuracy for FixMatch+DIPS of 85.2% over vanilla
FixMatch of 82.6%. A key reason is that DIPS discards harmful mislabeled samples from Dlab ,
with example images shown in Fig. 8b. Furthermore, Table 8a shows the addition of DIPS improves
time efficiency significantly, reducing the final computation time by 8 hours. We show additional
results for CIFAR-100N in Appendix C.4 and for other image datasets in Appendix C.4.4.
Takeaway. DIPS is a versatile framework that can be extended to various data modalities.
(a) DIPS improves the time effi-                  (b) Examples of mislabeled samples in CIFAR-10N discarded by
ciency (hours reported on a v100                  DIPS. We note the incorrect labels and ideal ground-truth labels.
GPU) of FixMatch, by 1.5-4X for
                                                   Noisy label: automobile   Noisy label: deer   Noisy label: dog                         Noisy label: truck
the same performance. ↓ better                     True label: airplane      True label: horse   True label: deer                         True label: automobile
    Test acc (%)   FM + DIPS     FixMatch (FM)
         65          2.3 ± 0.4       8.0 ± 2.0
         70          4.6 ± 0.5      16.4 ± 3.26
         75         10.8 ± 0.7      26.5 ± 1.9
         80         27.8 ± 0.8      35.8 ± 0.9
         85         38.5 ± 0.3        N.A.

    Figure 8: (Left) Time efficiency improvements (Right) Examples of harmful samples discarded
6       D ISCUSSION
We propose DIPS, a plugin designed to improve any pseudo-labeling algorithm. DIPS builds on the
key observation that the quality of labeled data is overlooked in pseudo-labeling approaches, while it
is the core signal which renders pseudo-labeling possible. Motivated by real-world datasets and their
inherent noisiness, we introduce a cleaning mechanism which operates both on labeled and pseudo-
labeled data. We showed the value of taking into account labeled data quality – by characterizing and
selecting data we improve test performance for various pseudo-labelers across 18 real-world datasets
spanning tabular data and images. Future work could explore the impact of such insights for other
modalities, including NLP and speech.


                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS AND R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENTS
Ethics Statement. Improving machine learning with limited labels is a challenge with immense
practical impact. It is especially important in high-stakes domains such as healthcare. We hope our
paper encourages the community to reevaluate the "gold-standard" assumptions on the labeled dataset.
It is unrealistic in reality and neglecting it can jeopardize the accuracy of classifiers trained with
pseudo-labeling, which is highly problematic in settings such as healthcare. Note, in this work, we
evaluate DIPS using multiple real-world datasets. The private datasets are de-identified and used in
accordance with the guidance of the respective data providers.
Reproducibility Statement. Experiments are described in Section 5 with further details of the
method and experimental setup/datasets included in Appendices A and B respectively. Code will be
released upon acceptance.

R EFERENCES
Chirag Agarwal, Daniel D’souza, and Sara Hooker. Estimating example difficulty using variance
  of gradients. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 10368–10378, 2022.
Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Lauren Kirchner, and Surya Mattu. Machine bias. ProPublica:
  https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-ri[REDACTED_API_KEY], May
  2016.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, and Ruosong Wang. Fine-grained analysis of
  optimization and generalization for overparameterized two-layer neural networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 322–332. PMLR, 2019.
Devansh Arpit, Stanisław Jastrz˛ebski, Nicolas Ballas, David Krueger, Emmanuel Bengio, Maxinder S
  Kanwal, Tegan Maharaj, Asja Fischer, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, et al. A closer look at
  memorization in deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 233–242.
  PMLR, 2017.
Arthur Asuncion and David Newman. UCI machine learning repository, 2007.
Pierre Baldi, Peter Sadowski, and Daniel Whiteson. Searching for exotic particles in high-energy
  physics with deep learning. Nature Communications, 5(1):4308, 2014.
Pedro Baqui, Ioana Bica, Valerio Marra, Ari Ercole, and Mihaela van Der Schaar. Ethnic and regional
  variations in hospital mortality from covid-19 in brazil: a cross-sectional observational study. The
  Lancet Global Health, 8(8):e1018–e1026, 2020.
David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ian Goodfellow, Nicolas Papernot, Avital Oliver, and Colin A Raf-
  fel. MixMatch: A holistic approach to semi-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Vadim Borisov, Tobias Leemann, Kathrin Seßler, Johannes Haug, Martin Pawelczyk, and Gjergji
  Kasneci. Deep neural networks and tabular data: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01889, 2021.
Krisztian Buza. Feedback prediction for blogs. In Data analysis, machine learning and knowledge
  discovery, pp. 145–152. Springer, 2013.
Paola Cascante-Bonilla, Fuwen Tan, Yanjun Qi, and Vicente Ordonez. Curriculum labeling: Revisit-
  ing pseudo-labeling for semi-supervised learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  2020.
Olivier Chapelle, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Zien (eds.). Semi-Supervised Learning. The
  MIT Press, 2006. ISBN 9780262033589. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/books/
  collections/CSZ2006.html.
Hao Cheng, Zhaowei Zhu, Xingyu Li, Yifei Gong, Xing Sun, and Yang Liu. Learning with instance-
  dependent label noise: A sample sieve approach. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Máire A Duggan, William F Anderson, Sean Altekruse, Lynne Penberthy, and Mark E Sherman. The
 surveillance, epidemiology and end results (SEER) program and pathology: towards strengthening
 the critical relationship. The American Journal of Surgical Pathology, 40(12):e94, 2016.
Elaine Fehrman, Awaz K Muhammad, Evgeny M Mirkes, Vincent Egan, and Alexander N Gorban.
  The five factor model of personality and evaluation of drug consumption risk. In Data science:
  innovative developments in data analysis and clustering, pp. 231–242. Springer, 2017.
Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis. Unsupervised representation learning by
  predicting image rotations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, pp. 3938–
  3961, 2018.
Leo Grinsztajn, Edouard Oyallon, and Gael Varoquaux. Why do tree-based models still outperform
  deep learning on typical tabular data? In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022.
Nitin Gupta, Shashank Mujumdar, Hima Patel, Satoshi Masuda, Naveen Panwar, Sambaran Bandy-
  opadhyay, Sameep Mehta, Shanmukha Guttula, Shazia Afzal, Ruhi Sharma Mittal, et al. Data
  quality for machine learning tasks. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 4040–4041, 2021a.
Nitin Gupta, Hima Patel, Shazia Afzal, Naveen Panwar, Ruhi Sharma Mittal, Shanmukha Guttula,
  Abhinav Jain, Lokesh Nagalapatti, Sameep Mehta, Sandeep Hans, et al. Data quality toolkit:
  Automatic assessment of data quality and remediation for machine learning datasets. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.05935, 2021b.
Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset
  and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. IEEE Journal of Selected
  Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 12(7):2217–2226, 2019.
Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszár, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Máté Lengyel. Bayesian active learning for
  classification and preference learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.5745, 2011.
Eyke Hüllermeier and Willem Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning:
  An introduction to concepts and methods. Machine Learning, 110:457–506, 2021.
Ahmet Iscen, Giorgos Tolias, Yannis Avrithis, and Ondrej Chum. Label propagation for deep semi-
  supervised learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 5070–5079, 2019.
Abhinav Jain, Hima Patel, Lokesh Nagalapatti, Nitin Gupta, Sameep Mehta, Shanmukha Guttula,
  Shashank Mujumdar, Shazia Afzal, Ruhi Sharma Mittal, and Vitobha Munigala. Overview and
  importance of data quality for machine learning tasks. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD
 International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 3561–3562, 2020.
Kaggle. Kaggle machine learning and data science survey, 2017. URL https://www.kaggle.
  com/datasets/kaggle/kaggle-survey-2017.
Taehyeon Kim, Jongwoo Ko, JinHwan Choi, Se-Young Yun, et al. Fine samples for learning with
  noisy labels. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:24137–24149, 2021.
Andreas Kirsch, Joost Van Amersfoort, and Yarin Gal. Batchbald: Efficient and diverse batch
  acquisition for deep bayesian active learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  32, 2019.
Yongchan Kwon, Joong-Ho Won, Beom Joon Kim, and Myunghee Cho Paik. Uncertainty quantifica-
  tion using bayesian neural networks in classification: Application to biomedical image segmenta-
  tion. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 142:106816, 2020.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  30, 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dong-Hyun Lee et al. Pseudo-label: The simple and efficient semi-supervised learning method for
  deep neural networks. In Workshop on Challenges in Representation Learning, ICML, 2013.
Yoonho Lee, Huaxiu Yao, and Chelsea Finn. Diversify and disambiguate: Out-of-distribution robust-
  ness via disagreement. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
Junnan Li, Richard Socher, and Steven CH Hoi. Dividemix: Learning with noisy labels as semi-
  supervised learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Yuanzhi Li, Tengyu Ma, and Hongyang R Zhang. Learning over-parametrized two-layer neural
  networks beyond ntk. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2613–2682. PMLR, 2020.
Weixin Liang, Girmaw Abebe Tadesse, Daniel Ho, L Fei-Fei, Matei Zaharia, Ce Zhang, and James
 Zou. Advances, challenges and opportunities in creating data for trustworthy AI. Nature Machine
 Intelligence, 4(8):669–677, 2022.
Stephen Mussmann and Percy Liang. On the relationship between data efficiency and error for
  uncertainty sampling. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3674–3682. PMLR,
  2018.
Vu-Linh Nguyen, Sachin Sudhakar Farfade, and Anton van den Hengel. Confident Sinkhorn allocation
  for pseudo-labeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05880, 2022a.
Vu-Linh Nguyen, Mohammad Hossein Shaker, and Eyke Hüllermeier. How to measure uncertainty
  in uncertainty sampling for active learning. Machine Learning, 111(1):89–122, 2022b.
Curtis Northcutt, Lu Jiang, and Isaac Chuang. Confident learning: Estimating uncertainty in dataset
  labels. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 70:1373–1411, 2021a.
Curtis G Northcutt, Anish Athalye, and Jonas Mueller. Pervasive label errors in test sets destabilize
  machine learning benchmarks. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021b.
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet: Finding
 important examples early in training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34,
 2021.
Prostate Cancer PCUK. Cutract. https://prostatecanceruk.org, 2019.
Geoff Pleiss, Tianyi Zhang, Ethan Elenberg, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Identifying mislabeled data
  using the area under the margin ranking. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
 17044–17056, 2020.
Stuart J Pocock, Cono A Ariti, John JV McMurray, Aldo Maggioni, Lars Køber, Iain B Squire, Karl
  Swedberg, Joanna Dobson, Katrina K Poppe, Gillian A Whalley, et al. Predicting survival in heart
  failure: a risk score based on 39 372 patients from 30 studies. European Heart Journal, 34(19):
  1404–1413, 2013.
Cedric Renggli, Luka Rimanic, Nezihe Merve Gürel, Bojan Karlas, Wentao Wu, and Ce Zhang. A
  data quality-driven view of MLOps. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 2021.
Mamshad Nayeem Rizve, Kevin Duarte, Yogesh S Rawat, and Mubarak Shah. In defense of pseudo-
 labeling: An uncertainty-aware pseudo-label selection framework for semi-supervised learning. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Nithya Sambasivan, Shivani Kapania, Hannah Highfill, Diana Akrong, Praveen Paritosh, and Lora M
  Aroyo. “Everyone wants to do the model work, not the data work”: Data cascades in high-stakes
  AI. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp.
  1–15, 2021.
Lars Schmarje, Vasco Grossmann, Claudius Zelenka, Sabine Dippel, Rainer Kiko, Mariusz Oszust,
  Matti Pastell, Jenny Stracke, Anna Valros, Nina Volkmann, et al. Is one annotation enough?-a
  data-centric image classification benchmark for noisy and ambiguous label estimation. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:33215–33232, 2022.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nabeel Seedat, Jonathan Crabbé, Ioana Bica, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Data-iq: Characterizing
  subgroups with heterogeneous outcomes in tabular data. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Amitai Armon. Tabular data: Deep learning is not all you need. Information
  Fusion, 81:84–90, 2022.
Kihyuk Sohn, David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Zizhao Zhang, Han Zhang, Colin A Raffel, Ekin Do-
  gus Cubuk, Alexey Kurakin, and Chun-Liang Li. FixMatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning
  with consistency and confidence. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Swabha Swayamdipta, Roy Schwartz, Nicholas Lourie, Yizhong Wang, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Noah A
  Smith, and Yejin Choi. Dataset cartography: Mapping and diagnosing datasets with training
  dynamics. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 9275–9293, 2020.
Kai Sheng Tai, Peter D Bailis, and Gregory Valiant. Sinkhorn label allocation: Semi-supervised
  classification via annealed self-training. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 10065–10075. PMLR, 2021.
Jesper E. van Engelen and Holger H. Hoos. A survey on semi-supervised learning. Machine Learning,
  109:373–440, 2019.
Yidong Wang, Hao Chen, Yue Fan, Wang Sun, Ran Tao, Wenxin Hou, Renjie Wang, Linyi Yang, Zhi
  Zhou, Lan-Zhe Guo, et al. USB: A unified semi-supervised learning benchmark for classification.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:3938–3961, 2022.
Yidong Wang, Hao Chen, Qiang Heng, Wenxin Hou, Yue Fan, Zhen Wu, Jindong Wang, Marios
  Savvides, Takahiro Shinozaki, Bhiksha Raj, Bernt Schiele, and Xing Xie. Freematch: Self-adaptive
  thresholding for semi-supervised learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PDrUPTXJI_A.
Jiaheng Wei, Zhaowei Zhu, Hao Cheng, Tongliang Liu, Gang Niu, and Yang Liu. Learning with
   noisy labels revisited: A study using real-world human annotations. In International Conference
   on Learning Representations, 2022a.
Qi Wei, Haoliang Sun, Xiankai Lu, and Yilong Yin. Self-filtering: A noise-aware sample selection
  for label noise with confidence penalization. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  516–532. Springer, 2022b.
Xiaobo Xia, Tongliang Liu, Bo Han, Mingming Gong, Jun Yu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama.
  Sample selection with uncertainty of losses for learning with noisy labels. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jiancheng Yang, Rui Shi, and Bingbing Ni. Medmnist classification decathlon: A lightweight automl
   benchmark for medical image analysis. In 2021 IEEE 18th International Symposium on Biomedical
   Imaging (ISBI), pp. 191–195. IEEE, 2021.
I-Cheng Yeh and Che-hui Lien. The comparisons of data mining techniques for the predictive
  accuracy of probability of default of credit card clients. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(2):
  2473–2480, 2009.
Jinsung Yoon, Yao Zhang, James Jordon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. VIME: Extending the success
   of self-and semi-supervised learning to tabular domain. Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 33:11033–11043, 2020.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In British Machine Vision
  Conference 2016. British Machine Vision Association, 2016.
Bowen Zhang, Yidong Wang, Wenxin Hou, Hao Wu, Jindong Wang, Manabu Okumura, and Takahiro
  Shinozaki. FlexMatch: Boosting semi-supervised learning with curriculum pseudo labeling.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Xiaojin Jerry Zhu. Semi-supervised learning literature survey. Technical Report 1530, University of
  Wisconsin-Madison Department of Computer Sciences, 2005.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix: Rethinking pseudo-labeling:
Data-centric insights improve
semi-supervised learning
Table of Contents
     A Additional details on DIPS                                                                   15
       A.1 DIPS algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
       A.2 Overview of pseudo-labeling methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        15
       A.3 Learning dynamics plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
       A.4 Comparison with Schmarje et al. (2022) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
       A.5 Connection to active learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17

     B Experimental details                                                                         18
       B.1 Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18
       B.2 Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
       B.3 Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18

     C Additional experiments                                                                       20
       C.1 Ablation study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
       C.2 Impact of the selector function r . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21
       C.3 Insights into data selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
       C.4 Additional experiments in computer vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        23
       C.5 Dependency between label noise level and amount of labeled data . . . . . . . .          25
       C.6 Ablation on the teacher-student pseudo-labeling framework . . . . . . . . . . .          25
       C.7 Ablation on the window of iterations for learning dynamics . . . . . . . . . . .         26
       C.8 Threshold choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      27
       C.9 Comparison to VIME . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27
       C.10 Importance of aleatoric uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27

     D Broader impact                                                                               29


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL DETAILS ON DIPS

A.1    DIPS ALGORITHM

We summarize how DIPS can be incorporated into any pseudo-labeling algorithm as per Algorithm
1. For clarity, we highlight in red how DIPS extends the current pseudo-labeling formulations.



Algorithm 2 Plug DIPS into any pseudo-labeler
 1: Train a network, f (0) , using the samples from Dlab .
                          (1)
 2: Plug-in DIPS: set Dtrain = D(1) = r(Dlab , f (0) )                       ▷ Initialization of the training set
 3: for t = 1..T do
 4:     Initialize new network f (t)
                           (t)
 5:     Train f (t) using Dtrain .
 6:     Pseudo-label Dunlab using f (t)
 7:     Define D(t+1) using the PL method’s selector s
                                  (t+1)
 8:     Plug-in DIPS : Define Dtrain = r(D(t+1) , f (t) )      ▷ Data characterization and selection, Sec. 4.3
 9: end for
10: return fT



We emphasize a key advantage of DIPS lies in its simplicity. Beyond getting the computation almost
for free (no additional models to train when instantiating DIPS with learning dynamics) - i.e. P3:
Computationally cheap, we can also plug DIPS into and augment any pseudo-labeling algorithm.
(i.e. P1: Plug & Play), which makes for easier adoption.


A.2    OVERVIEW OF PSEUDO - LABELING METHODS

As we described in Sec. 3.1, current pseudo-labeling methods typically differ in the way the selector
function s is defined. Note that s is solely used to select pseudo-labeled samples, among those which
have not already been pseudo-labeled at a previous iteration. The general way to define s for any set
D and function f is s(D, f ) = {(x, [ŷ]k )|x ∈ D, ŷ = f (x), k ∈ [C], [m(x, f )]k = 1}, where m is
such that m(x, f ) ∈ RC . Alternatively stated, a selector m outputs the binary decision of selecting x
and its associated pseudo-labels ŷ. Notice that we allow the multi-label setting, where C > 1, hence
explaining why the selector m’s output is a vector of size C. We now give the intuition of how widely
used PL methods construct the selector m, thus leading to specific definitions of s.
Greedy pseudo-labeling (Lee et al., 2013) The intuition of greedy pseudo-labeling is to select a
pseudo-label if the classifier is sufficiently confident in it. Given two positive thresholds τp and τn
with τn < τp , and a classifier f , m is defined by [m(x, f )]k = 1([f (x)]k ≥ τp ) + 1([f (x)]k ≤ τn )
for k ∈ [C].
UPS (Rizve et al., 2021) In addition to confidence, UPS considers the uncertainty of the predic-
tion when selecting pseudo-labels. Given two thresholds κn < κp , UPS defines [m(x, f )]k =
1(u([f (x)]k ) ≤ κp )1([f (x)]k ≥ τp ) + 1(u([f (x)]k ) ≤ κn )1([f (x)]k ≤ τn ), where u is a proxy
for the uncertainty. One could compute u using MC-Dropout (for neural networks) or ensembles.
Flexmatch (Zhang et al., 2021) FlexMatch dynamically adjusts a class-dependent threshold for the
selection of pseudo-labels. The selection mechanism is defined by: [m(x, f )]k = 1(maxj [f (x)]j >
τt (arg maxi [f (x)]i )), i.e. at iteration t, an unlabeled point is selected if and only if the confidence of
the most probable class is greater than its corresponding dynamic threshold.
SLA (Tai et al., 2021) and CSA (Nguyen et al., 2022a) The fundamental intuition behind SLA and
CSA is to solve a linear program in order to assign pseudo-labels to unlabeled data, based on the
predictions f (x). The allocation of pseudo-labels considers both the rows (the unlabeled samples) and
the columns (the classes), hence contrasts greedy pseudo-labeling, and incorporates linear constraints
in the optimization problem. An approximate solution is found using the Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm.


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3    L EARNING DYNAMICS PLOT

Key to our instantiation of DIPS is the analysis of learning dynamics. We illustrate in Fig. 9 for
a pseudo-labeling run in Sec. 5.5 the learning dynamics of 6 individual samples. DIPS uses these
dynamics to compute the metrics of confidence and aleatoric uncertainty, as explained in Sec. 4.2.
This then characterizes the samples as Useful or Harmful.



                 Probability (true label)   1.00
                                                       Useful             Harmful
                                            0.75
                                            0.50
                                            0.25
                                            0.00
                                                   0   10      20 30 40            50
                                                            Epochs/Iterations
Figure 9: DIPS uses learning dynamics to compute the metrics of confidence and aleatoric uncertainty.
It then characterizes labeled (and pseudo-labeled) samples based on these metrics. The y axis
represents the probability assigned to the true label by the current classifier h, which is P (ŶF (x, y) =
1|H = h).


The intuition is the following: a sample is deemed Useful if the classifiers at each checkpoint are
confident in predicting the associated (pseudo-)label of the sample, and the associated aleatoric
uncertainty is low. Failure to satisfy this criterion leads to a characterization as Harmful.

A.4    C OMPARISON WITH S CHMARJE ET AL . (2022)

In what follows, we compare DIPS with DC3 (Schmarje et al., 2022). While both DIPS and DC3
handle the data-centric issue of issues in data and share similarities in their titles, they tackle different
data-centric problems which might arise in semi-supervised learning. The main differences are along
4 different dimensions:
      1. Problem setup/Type of data-centric issue: DIPS tackles the problems of hard noisy labels
         where each sample has a single label assigned in the labeled set which could be incorrect.
         In contrast, DC3 deals with the problem of soft labeling where each sample might have
         multiple annotations from different annotators which may be variable.
      2. Label noise modeling: DIPS aims to identify the noisy labels, whereas DC3 models the
         inter-annotator variability to estimate label ambiguity.
      3. Integration into SSL: DIPS is a plug-in on top of any pseudo-labeling pipeline, selecting the
         labeled and pseudo-labeled data. DC3 on the otherhand uses its ambiguity model (learned
         on the multiple annotations) to either keep the pseudo-label or use a cluster assignment.
      4. Dataset applicability: DIPS has lower dataset requirements as it can be applied to any
         dataset with labeled and unlabeled samples, even if there is only a single label per sample.
         It does not require multiple annotations. DC3 has higher dataset requirements as it relies
         on having multiple annotations per sample to estimate inter-annotator variability and label
         ambiguity. Without multiple labels per sample, it cannot estimate ambiguity and perform
         joint classification and clustering. Consequently, DIPS is applicable to the standard semi-
         supervised learning setup of limited labeled data and abundant unlabeled data, whereas DC3
         targets the specific problem of ambiguity across multiple annotators.


                                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5    C ONNECTION TO ACTIVE LEARNING

Active learning primarily focuses on the iterative process of selecting data samples that, when labeled,
are expected to most significantly improve the model’s performance. This selection is typically based
on criteria such as uncertainty sampling which focuses on epistemic uncertainty (Mussmann &
Liang, 2018; Houlsby et al., 2011; Kirsch et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2022b). The primary objective
is to minimize labeling effort while maximizing the model’s learning efficiency. In contrast, DIPS
does both labeled and pseudo-labeled selection and employs the term ’useful’ in a different sense.
Here, ’usefulness’ refers to the capacity of a data sample to contribute positively to the learning
process based on its likelihood of being correctly labeled. Our approach, which leverages training
dynamics based on aleatoric uncertainty and confidence, is designed to flag and exclude mislabeled
data. This distinction is critical in our methodology as it directly addresses the challenge of data
quality, particularly in scenarios where large volumes of unlabeled data are integrated into the training
process. In active learning, these metrics are used to identify data points that, if labeled, would yield
the most significant insights for model training. In our approach, they serve to identify and exclude
data points that could potentially deteriorate the model’s performance due to incorrect labeling.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B        E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
B.1       BASELINES

In our experiments, we consider the following baselines for pseudo-labeling: Greedy-PL (Lee et al.,
2013), UPS (Rizve et al., 2021), Flexmatch (Zhang et al., 2021), SLA (Tai et al., 2021) and CSA
(Nguyen et al., 2022a). To assess performance of DIPS for computer vision, we use FixMatch (Sohn
et al., 2020).
Greedy-PL The confidence upper threshold is 0.8
UPS The confidence upper threshold is 0.8 and the threshold on the uncertainty is 0.2. The size of
the ensemble is 10.
FlexMatch The upper threshold is 0.9 (which is then normalized).
CSA and SLA The confidence upper threshold is 0.8. The size of the ensemble is 20.
We use the implementation of these algorithms provided in (Nguyen et al., 2022a).
FixMatch The threshold is set to 0.95 as in (Sohn et al., 2020).

B.2       DATASETS

We summarize the different datasets we use in this paper in Table 1. The datasets vary in number
of samples, number of features and domain. Recall, we use data splits with a proportion of Dlab :
Dunlab of 0.1:0.9.

                                 Table 1: Summary of the datasets used

    Name                                              n samples    n features   Domain
    Adult Income (Asuncion & Newman, 2007)            30k          12           Finance
    Agarius lepiota (Asuncion & Newman, 2007)         8k           22           Agriculture
    Blog (Buza, 2013)                                 10k          280          Social media
    Compas (Angwin et al., 2016)                      5k           13           Criminal justice
    Covid-19 (Baqui et al., 2020)                     7k           29           Healthcare/Medicine
    Credit (Taiwan) (Yeh & Lien, 2009)                30k          23           Finance
    CUTRACT Prostate (PCUK, 2019)                     2k           12           Healthcare/Medicine
    Drug (Fehrman et al., 2017)                       2k           27           Healthcare/Medicine
    German-credit (Asuncion & Newman, 2007)           1k           24           Finance
    Higgs (Baldi et al., 2014)                        25k          23           Physics
    MAGGIC (Pocock et al., 2013)                      41k          29           Healthcare/Medicine
    SEER Prostate (Duggan et al., 2016)               20k          12           Healthcare/Medicine



For computer vision experiments, we use CIFAR-10N (Wei et al., 2022a). The dataset can be accessed
via its official release.2

B.3       I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

The three key design decisions necessary for pseudo-labeling are:

         1. Choice of backbone model (i.e. predictive classifier f )
         2. Number of pseudo-labeling iterations — recall that it is an iterative process by repeatedly
            augmenting the labeled data with selected samples from the unlabeled data.
         3. Compute requirements.
            We describe each in the context of each experiment. For further details on the experimental
            setup and process, see each relevant section of the main paper.
    2
        https://github.com/UCSC-REAL/cifar-10-100n


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


First, let’s detail some general implementation details pertinent to all experiments.
■   Code: We will release code upon acceptance.
■ DIPS thresholds: Recall that DIPS has two thresholds τconf and τal . We set τconf = 0.8, in
order to select high confidence samples based on the mean of the learning dynamic. Note, τal is
bounded between [0,0.25]. We adopt an adaptive threshold for τal based on the dataset, such that
τal = 0.75 · (max(val (Dtrain )) − min(val (Dtrain )))

B.3.1     S YNTHETIC EXAMPLE : DATA CHARACTERIZATION AND UNLABELED DATA IMPROVE
          TEST ACCURACY

        1. Backbone model: We use an XGBoost, with 100 estimators similar to (Nguyen et al., 2022a).
           Note, XGBoost has been shown to often outperform deep learning methods on tabular
           data (Borisov et al., 2021; Shwartz-Ziv & Armon, 2022). That said, our framework is not
           restricted to XGBoost.
        2. Iterations: we use T = 5 pseudo-labeling iterations, as in (Nguyen et al., 2022a).
        3. Compute: CPU on a MacBook Pro with an Intel Core i5 and 16GB RAM.

B.3.2     TABULAR DATA EXPERIMENTS : S EC 5.2, 5.3, 5.4
        1. Backbone model: Some of the datasets have limited numbers, hence we have the backbone
           as XGBoost, with 100 estimators similar to (Nguyen et al., 2022a). Note, XGBoost has
           been shown to often outperform deep learning methods on tabular data (Borisov et al., 2021;
           Shwartz-Ziv & Armon, 2022). That said, our framework is not restricted to XGBoost.
        2. Iterations: we use T=5, pseudo-labeling iterations, as in (Nguyen et al., 2022a).
        3. Compute: CPU on a MacBook Pro with an Intel Core i5 and 16GB RAM.

For the tabular datasets we use splits with a proportion of Dlab : Dunlab of 0.1:0.9.

B.3.3     C OMPUTER VISION EXPERIMENTS : S EC 5.5
        1. Backbone model: we use a WideResnet-18 (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) as in (Sohn
           et al., 2020).
        2. Iterations: with Fixmatch we use T=1024k iterations as in (Sohn et al., 2020).
        3. Data augmentations: Strong augmentation is done with RandAugment with random magni-
           tude. Weak augmentation is done with a random horizontal flip.
        4. Training hyperparameters: we use the same hyperparameters as in the original work (Sohn
           et al., 2020)
        5. Compute: Nvidia V100 GPU, 6-Core Intel Xeon E5-2690 v4 with 16GB RAM.

For the experiments on CIFAR-10N, we use Dlab = 1000 samples.


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
C.1   A BLATION STUDY

Goal. We conduct an ablation study to characterize the importance of the different components of
DIPS
Experiment. These components are:

       • data characterization and selection for the initialisation of D(1) : DIPS defines D(1) =
           (1)
         Dtrain = r(Dlab , f (0) )
       • data characterization and selection at each pseudo-labeling iteration: DIPS defines
           (i+1)
         Dtrain = r(D(i+1) , f (i) )

Each of these two components can be ablated, resulting in four different possible combinations: DIPS
(data selection both at initialization and during the pseudo-labeling iterations), A1 (data selection
only at initialization), A2 (data selection only during the pseudo-labeling iterations), A3 (no data
selection). Note that A3 corresponds to vanilla pseudo-labeling, and not selecting data amounts to
using an identity selector.
We consider the same experimental setup as in Sec. 5.1, generating data in two quadrants with varying
proportions of corrupted samples.
Results. The results are reported in Fig. 10. As we can see, each component in DIPS is important
to improve pseudo-labeling: 1) the initialization of the labeled data D(1) drives the pseudo-labeling
process 2) data characterization of both labeled and pseudo-labeled samples is important.


             $FFXUDF\


                                                    $
                                                    $
                                                  $
                                                    ',36  RXUV

                                                               3URSRUWLRQ RI FRUUXSWHG VDPSOHV
Figure 10: Ablation study: data characterization and selection is important both for the initialization
of the labeled data and during the pseudo-labeling iterations, which forms the basis of DIPS.


Takeaway. It is important to characterize and select data both for the initialization of the labeled data
and during the pseudo-labeling iterations.


                                                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2   I MPACT OF THE SELECTOR FUNCTION r

Goal. We investigate variants of DIPS where we replace the selector function r with heuristics
used in the LNL literature. The most commonly used is the small-loss criterion (Xia et al., 2021).
Additionally, we assess Fluctuation (Wei et al., 2022b) and FINE (Kim et al., 2021) as alternative
sample selection approaches.
Experiments. We use the vanilla PL algorithm as the semi-supervised backbone. We consider three
different selectors in addition to the one presented in the main paper:

      • Small-loss criterion (Xia et al., 2021): the quantity of interest is µ(x, y) =
         1
           PE
        E    e=1 l(x, y, fe ) where l is a loss function and f1 , ..., fE are the classifiers at the differ-
        ent checkpoints. Intuitively, a sample with a high loss is more likely to present mislabeling
        issues, since it is harder to learn.
      • Fluctuation criterion (Wei et al., 2022b): the quantity of interest, for two checkpoints
        e1 < e2 is β(x, y, e1 , e2 ) = 1([fe1 (x)]y > 12 )1([fe2 (x)]y < 12 ), which is equal to one if the
        sample is correctly classified at the checkpoint e1 and wrongly classified at e2 , 0 otherwise.
        Following (Wei et al., 2022b), we smooth this score with the confidence.
      • FINE criterion (Kim et al., 2021): FINE creates a gram matrix of the representations in the
        noisy training dataset for each class. Then, FINE computes an alignment using the square of
        the inner product values between the representations and the first eigenvector of each gram
        matrix. A Gaussian mixture model is then fit on these alignment values to find clean and
        noisy instances.

The scores obtained by each approach are then used for sample selection, hence defining variants of
the selector r.
Results. We report the results for 12 different datasets in Table 2. As we can see, the DIPS approach
using learning dynamics outperforms the alternative LNL methods. This highlights the importance of
a multi-dimensional data characterization, where both confidence and aleatoric uncertainty are taken
into account to select samples. Moreover, the LNL methods typically operate under the assumption
of a large number of labeled samples, highlighting that our DIPS approach tailored for the pseudo-
labeling setting should indeed be preferred.

Table 2: DIPS outperforms heuristics used in the LNL setting by leveraging learning dynamics. Best
performing method in bold, statistically equivalent performance underlined.

                         DIPS            Small-Loss             Fluctuation               FINE
                        (OURS)         (Xia et al., 2021)    (Wei et al., 2022b)     (Kim et al., 2021)
  adult              82.66 ± 0.10        79.52 ± 0.26           80.81 ± 0.20           24.22 ± 0.35
  agaricus-lepiota   65.03 ± 0.25        64.45 ± 0.28           49.21 ± 1.48           35.96 ± 3.65
  blog               80.58 ± 0.10        79.90 ± 0.28           80.05 ± 0.27           73.41 ± 1.66
  credit             81.39 ± 0.07        78.46 ± 0.34           79.38 ± 0.29           64.58 ± 3.30
  covid              69.97 ± 0.30        70.09 ± 0.36           69.03 ± 0.53           67.70 ± 0.84
  compas             65.34 ± 0.25        62.76 ± 0.60           61.31 ± 0.64           60.20 ± 1.29
  cutract            68.60 ± 0.31        66.33 ± 1.09           64.35 ± 1.49           61.98 ± 2.27
  drug               78.16 ± 0.26        76.84 ± 0.61           75.66 ± 0.72           74.63 ± 1.98
  German-credit      69.40 ± 0.46        69.80 ± 1.00           69.60 ± 1.19           69.70 ± 1.19
  higgs              81.99 ± 0.07        81.08 ± 0.12           81.50 ± 0.09           73.82 ± 0.51
  maggic             67.60 ± 0.08        65.57 ± 0.20           65.94 ± 0.20           62.28 ± 0.42
  seer               82.74 ± 0.08        80.74 ± 0.26           82.28 ± 0.20           77.10 ± 0.76

Takeaway. A key component of DIPS is its sample selector based on learning dynamics, which
outperforms methods designed for the LNL setting.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3    I NSIGHTS INTO DATA SELECTION

Goal. We wish to gain additional insight into the performance improvements provided by DIPS when
added to the vanilla pseudo-labeling method. In particular, we examine the significant performance
gain attained by DIPS for cross-country augmentation, shown in Section 5.4.
Experiment. The DIPS selector mechanism is the key differentiator as compared to the vanilla
methods. Hence, we examine the samples selected samples from DIPS and vanilla. We then compare
the samples to Dtest . Recall, we select samples from Dunlab which come from US patients, whereas
Dlab and Dtest are from the UK. We posit that “matching” the test distribution as closely as possible
would lead to the best performance.
Results. We examine the most important features as determined by the XGBoost and compare their
distributions. We find that the following 4 features in order are the most important: (1) Treatment:
Primary hormone therapy, (2) PSA score, (3) Age, (4) Comorbidities. This is expected where the
treatment and PSA blood scores are important predictors of prostate cancer mortality. We then
compare these features in Dtest vs the final Dtrain when using DIPS selection and using vanilla
selection.
Fig. 11 shows that especially on the two most important features (1) Treatment: Primary hormone
therapy and (2) PSA score; that DIPS’s selection better matches Dtest — which explains the improved
performance.


           DIPS
                                                            Vanilla does
           matches
                                                            not match
           Test well
                                                            Test well


                           DIPS                                              Vanilla


Figure 11: DIPS improves performance as its selection for Dtrain better matches Dtest on the most
important features, whereas vanilla selects samples which are different to Dtest

Quantitatively, we then compute the Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence between the data selected by
DIPS and vanilla as compared to Dtest . We find DIPS has a lower JSD of 0.0296 compared to vanilla
of 0.0317, highlighting we better match the target domain’s features through selection.
This behavior is reasonable, as samples that are very different will be filtered out by virtue of their
learning dynamics being more uncertain.
For completeness, we also include a radar chart with vanilla PL but without any data selection in Fig.
12.
Takeaway. A significant source of DIPS’s gain is that its selection mechanism selects samples that
closely approximate the distribution of Dtest . In particular, we see this holds true for the features which
are considered most important to the classifier — hence accounting for the improved downstream
model performance observed when using DIPS.


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Figure 12: DIPS is closer to the test data than vanilla PL.


C.4     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS IN COMPUTER VISION

Goal. The goal of this experiment is to assess the benefit of DIPS in additional computer vision
settings, namely:
(i) when increasing the number of classes to 100 (CIFAR-100N), with FixMatch
(ii) when the size of Dlab (nlab ) is small, with FixMatch and
(iii) when using a different pseudo-labeling algorithm — FreeMatch (Wang et al., 2023).

C.4.1       DIPS IMPROVES THE PERFORMANCE OF F IX M ATCH ON CIFAR-100N
Goal. The goal of this experiment is to further demonstrate DIPS’s utility in a setting with an
increased number of classes.
Setup. We adopt the same setup as in Section 5.5, using the dataset CIFAR-100N (Wei et al., 2022a),
which has 100 classes.

                               60                                                                    80
                                                 FixMatch                                                    FixMatch
                               55                FixMatch+DIPS                                       75      FixMatch+DIPS
         Mean Top 1 Accuracy


                               50
                                                                               Mean Top 5 Accuracy


                               45                                                                    70
                               40                                                                    65
                               35                                                                    60
                               30
                               25                                                                    55
                               20                                                                    50
                                      100k      500k 1000k                                                  100k      500k 1000k
                                             Iterations                                                            Iterations
                                    (a) Top-1 accuracy                                                    (b) Top-5 accuracy

      Figure 13: DIPS improves FixMatch on CIFAR-100N. We report both top-1 and top-5 accuracies.
Results. We show both top-1 and top-5 accuracies in Figure 13, for three different numbers of
iterations and 3 different seeds, which highlight the performance gains obtained by using DIPS with
FixMatch.
Takeaway. DIPS improves the performance of FixMatch on CIFAR-100N.

C.4.2       DIPS IMPROVES F IX M ATCH FOR SMALLER nlab
Setup. We consider nlab = 200, and use the same setup as in Section 5.5, considering the dataset
CIFAR-10N.


                                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         90
                                                               FixMatch
                                                         85    FixMatch+DIPS
                                                         80


                                         Mean Accuracy
                                                         75
                                                         70
                                                         65
                                                         60
                                                         55
                                                         50
                                                              100k      500k 1000k
                                                                     Iterations

                 Figure 14: DIPS improves FixMatch with nlab = 200 on CIFAR-10N

Results. We report the test accuracy in Figure 14 for three different numbers of iterations over 3
different seeds, highlighting the performance gains with DIPS.
Takeaway. DIPS improves performance of FixMatch for different sizes of Dlab


C.4.3   DIPS IMPROVES THE PERFORMANCE OF F REE M ATCH

Goal. The goal of this experiment is to further demonstrate DIPS’s utility in computer vision with
an alternative pseudo-labeling method, namely FreeMatch (Wang et al., 2023).
Setup. We adopt the same setup as in Section 5.5, using the dataset CIFAR-10N.


                                               90
                                                               FreeMatch
                                               85              FreeMatch+DIPS
                                               80
                               Test accuracy


                                               75
                                               70
                                               65
                                               60
                                               55
                                               50
                                                              100k      500k 1000k
                                                                     Iterations

                         Figure 15: DIPS improves FreeMatch on CIFAR-10N

Results. We show the test accuracy in Figure 15, for three different numbers of iterations and
highlight the performance gains by combining DIPS with FreeMatch to improve performance.
Takeaway. DIPS is versatile to other data modalities, improving the performance of FreeMatch on
CIFAR-10N with the inclusion of DIPS.


C.4.4   A DDITIONAL DATASETS

We present in Figure 16 results for 4 additional image datasets : satellite images from Eurosat Helber
et al. (2019) and medical images from TissueMNIST which form part of the USB benchmark Wang
et al. (2022). Additionally, we include the related OrganAMNIST, and PathMNIST, which are part of
the MedMNIST collection Yang et al. (2021). Given that these datasets are well-curated, we consider
a proportion of 0.2 of symmetric label noise added to these datasets. As is shown, DIPS consistently
improves the FixMatch baseline, demonstrating its generalizability.


                                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               70
                                                              EuroSAT               48.0
                                                                                                                 TissueMNIST            74.0
                                                                                                                                                         OrganAMNIST                               78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PathMNIST
                                                                                    47.5                                                73.5
                                               68                                                                                                                                                  77
                                                                                    47.0                                                73.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   76
                                                                                    46.5                                                72.5


                               Test accuracy
                                               66
                                                                                    46.0                                                72.0                                                       75
                                               64                                   45.5                                                71.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   74
                                                                                    45.0                                                71.0
                                               62                                                                                                                                                  73
                                                                                    44.5                                                70.5
                                               60                                   44.0                                                70.0                                                       72
                                                    DIPS+FixMatch       FixMatch             DIPS+FixMatch                FixMatch              DIPS+FixMatch         FixMatch                            DIPS+FixMatch       FixMatch


                                                                    Figure 16: DIPS improves FixMatch on images datasets


C.5                         D EPENDENCY BETWEEN LABEL NOISE LEVEL AND AMOUNT OF LABELED DATA

We conduct a synthetic experiment following a similar setup as in Section 5.1 in our manuscript
to investigate the dependency between label noise level and amount of labeled data. Note that the
experiment is synthetic in order to be able to control the amount of label noise. We considered
the same list of label noise proportions, ranging from 0. to 0.45. For each label noise proportion,
we consider nlab ∈ {50, 100, 1000}, and fix nunlab = 1000. For each configuration we conduct
the experiment 40 times. We report the results in Fig. 17. As we can see on the plots, PL+DIPS
consistently outperforms the supervised baselines in almost all the configurations. When the amount
of labeled data is low (nlab = 50) and the proportion of corrupted samples is high (0.45), PL is on
par with the supervised baseline. Hence pseudo-labeling is more difficult with a very low amount
of labeled samples (and a high level of noise). We note, though, that DIPS consistently improves
the PL baseline for reasonable amounts of label noise which we could expect in real-world settings
(e.g. 0.1). The performance gap between DIPS and PL is remarkably noticeable for nlab = 1000, i.e.
when the amount of labeled samples is high.

                                                     n_lab = 50                                                                      n_lab = 100                                                                          n_lab = 1000
                100                                                                                        100                                                                               100


                90                                                                                         90                                                                                90
Test accuracy


                                                                                           Test accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                             Test accuracy


                80                                                                                         80                                                                                80


                70                                                                                         70                                                                                70


                60           Supervised                                                                    60          Supervised                                                            60              Supervised
                             PL+DIPS                                                                                   PL+DIPS                                                                               PL+DIPS
                             PL                                                                                        PL                                                                                    PL
                50                                                                                         50                                                                                50
                      0.0         0.1          0.2           0.3              0.4                                0.0      0.1          0.2           0.3        0.4                                 0.0          0.1          0.2           0.3      0.4
                                    Proportion of corrupted samples                                                         Proportion of corrupted samples                                                        Proportion of corrupted samples


Figure 17: DIPS consistently improves upon the PL and supervised baselines, across the different
label noise levels and amounts of labeled data.


C.6                         A BLATION ON THE TEACHER - STUDENT PSEUDO - LABELING FRAMEWORK

In Section 3.1, we decided to describe the common teacher-student pseudo-labeling methodology
adopted in the tabular setting. As a consequence, we used the implementation provided by Nguyen
et al. (2022a), which grows the training set with pseudo-labels generated at the current iteration, thus
keeping old pseudo-labels in the training dataset in subsequent iterations. In addition to adopting
this practice, we investigated this choice experimentally, by comparing between two versions of
confidence-based pseudo-labeling:

                            • Version 1): with a growing set of pseudo-labels (as followed by the implementation of
                              Nguyen et al. (2022a) and our paper)
                            • Version 2): without keeping old pseudo-labels.

We evaluate these two methods in the synthetic setup described in Section 5.2, and report the test
accuracy in Fig. 18. The red line corresponds to Version 1) (the implementation we used in the
manuscript), while the green line corresponds to Version 2). As we can see, in this tabular setting,


                                                                                                                                      25
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 growing a training set by keeping the pseudo-labels generated at each iteration leads to the best
 results, motivating our adoption of this pseudo-labeling methodology used in the tabular setting.


                90
Test accuracy


                80
                                                                              Implementation
                70                                                          With old pseudo-labels
                                                                            Without old pseudo-labels
                60

                     0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45
                             Proportion of corrupted samples
 Figure 18: Growing the training set with the pseudo-labels generated at every iteration yields the best
 results



  C.7                A BLATION ON THE WINDOW OF ITERATIONS FOR LEARNING DYNAMICS

 We conduct an experiment to investigate the choice of the range of iterations used to compute the
 learning dynamics. We consider ignoring the first 25%/50%/75% iterations, and use the remaining
 iterations to compute the learning dynamics. Figure 19 shows the mean performance difference by
 using the truncated iteration windows versus using all the iterations, and averages the results over
 the 12 datasets used in Section 5.2. As we can see, it is better to use all the iterations window, as the
 initial iterations carry some informative signal about the hardness of samples. This motivates our
 choice of computing the learning dynamics over the whole optimization trajectory, a choice which
 we adopt for all of our experiments.


 Figure 19: Computing the learning dynamics over the whole window of iterations yields the best
 results



                                                        26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.8    T HRESHOLD CHOICES

We conduct an experiment in the synthetic setup where we vary the thresholds used for both the
confidence and the aleatoric uncertainty. In addition to our choice used in our manuscript (confidence
threshold = 0.8, and adaptive threshold on the aleatoric uncertainty), we consider two baselines:

       • confidence threshold = 0.9 and uncertainty threshold = 0.1 (aggressive filtering)
       • confidence threshold = 0.5 and uncertainty threshold = 0.2 (permissive filtering)

We show the test accuracy for these baselines in Figure 20. As we can see, our configuration achieves
a good trade-off between an aggressive filtering configuration (red line) and a permissive one (blue
line), which is why we adopt it for the rest of the experiments. We empirically notice in Section 5.2
that it performs well on the 12 real-world datasets we used.

                               100

                                90
               Test accuracy


                                80

                                70                                                               Thresholds
                                                                                  conf. threshold: 0.9, uncert. threshold: 0.1
                                                                                  conf. threshold: 0.8, uncert. threshold: adaptive
                                60                                                conf. threshold: 0.5, uncert. threshold: 0.2

                                50
                                     0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45
                                           Proportion of corrupted samples

  Figure 20: Our choice of thresholds performs better than an aggressive or a permissive filtering


C.9    C OMPARISON TO VIME

We compare DIPS with VIME (Yoon et al., 2020), by evaluating the two methods in the same setting
as in Section 5.2. We report the results in Table 3. These results demonstrate that DIPS outperforms
VIME across multiple real-world tabular datasets.

Table 3: DIPS outperforms VIME. Best performing method in bold, statistically equivalent perfor-
mance underlined.

                                                                       DIPS            VIME
                                                                      (OURS)      (Yoon et al., 2020)
                                      adult                       82.66 ± 0.10         67.69 ± 0.10
                                      agaricus-lepiota            65.03 ± 0.25         66.13 ± 0.01
                                      blog                        80.58 ± 0.10         73.52 ± 0.01
                                      credit                      81.39 ± 0.07         66.91 ± 0.02
                                      covid                       69.97 ± 0.30         68.28 ± 0.03
                                      compas                      65.34 ± 0.25         63.41 ± 0.02
                                      cutract                     68.60 ± 0.31         60.36 ± 0.04
                                      drug                        78.16 ± 0.26         74.47 ± 0.03
                                      German-credit               69.40 ± 0.46         62.65 ± 0.05
                                      higgs                       81.99 ± 0.07         71.34 ± 0.03
                                      maggic                      67.60 ± 0.08         64.98 ± 0.01
                                      seer                        82.74 ± 0.08         80.12 ± 0.01



C.10    I MPORTANCE OF ALEATORIC UNCERTAINTY

We conduct an ablation study where we remove the aleatoric uncertainty in DIPS and only keep a
confidence-based selection (with threshold = 0.8). We term this confidence ablation to highlight if
there is indeed value to the aleatoric uncertainty component of DIPS. We report results in Table 4, for


                                                                             27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the 12 tabular datasets used in Section 5.2, which shows the benefit of the two-dimensional selection
criterion of DIPS. Of course, in some cases there might not be a large difference with respect to our
confidence ablation — however we see that DIPS provides a statistically significant improvement
in most of the datasets. Hence, since the computation is negligible, it is reasonable to use the 2-D
approach given the benefit obtained on the noisier datasets.

                    Table 4: Aleatoric uncertainty is a key component of DIPS

                                             DIPS        Confidence Ablation
                      adult              82.66 ± 0.10        82.13 ± 0.16
                      agaricus-lepiota   65.03 ± 0.25        64.38 ± 0.23
                      blog               80.58 ± 0.10        80.22 ± 0.33
                      credit             81.39 ± 0.07        79.76 ± 0.15
                      covid              69.97 ± 0.30        69.28 ± 0.40
                      compas             65.34 ± 0.25        64.69 ± 0.25
                      cutract            68.60 ± 0.31        66.32 ± 0.12
                      drug               78.16 ± 0.26        75.37 ± 0.71
                      higgs              81.99 ± 0.07        81.42 ± 0.16
                      maggic             67.60 ± 0.08        66.26 ± 0.18
                      seer               82.74 ± 0.08        82.02 ± 0.15


                                                 28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    B ROADER IMPACT
In this work, we delve into the essential yet often neglected aspect of labeled data quality in the appli-
cation of pseudo-labeling, a semi-supervised learning technique. Our key insights stem from a data-
centric approach that underscores the role of ’labeled data quality’ - a facet typically overlooked due
to the default assumption of labeled data being ’perfect’. In stark contrast to the traditional, algorithm-
centric pseudo-labeling literature which largely focuses on refining pseudo-labeling methods, we
accentuate the critical influence of the quality of labeled data on the effectiveness of pseudo-labeling.
By way of introducing the DIPS framework, our work emphasizes the value of characterization and
selection of labeled data, consequently improving any pseudo-labeling method. Moreover, akin to
traditional machine learning problems, focusing on labeled data quality in the context of pseudo-
labeling promises to lessen risks, costs, and potentially detrimental consequences of algorithm
deployment. This perspective opens up many avenues for applications in areas where labeled data is
scarce or expensive to acquire, including but not limited to healthcare, social sciences, autonomous
vehicles, wildlife conservation, and climate modeling scenarios. Our work underscores the need for a
data-centric paradigm shift in the pseudo-labeling landscape.


                                                   29
