Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ONG -T ERM I MPACTS OF M ODEL R ETRAINING WITH
S TRATEGIC F EEDBACK
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         When machine learning (ML) models need to be frequently retrained, it is often
         too expensive to obtain human-annotated samples, so recent ML models have
         started to label samples by themselves. This paper studies a setting where an ML
         model is retrained (with human and model-annotated samples) over time to make
         decisions about a sequence of strategic human agents who can adapt their behaviors
         in response to the most recent ML model. We aim to investigate what happens
         when model-annotated data are generated under the agents’ strategic feedback and
         how the models retrained with such data can be affected. Specifically, we first
         formalize the interactions between agents and the ML system and then analyze
         how the agents and ML models evolve under such dynamic interactions. We find
         that as the model gets retrained, agents are increasingly likely to receive positive
         decisions, whereas the proportion of agents with positive labels may decrease over
         time. We thus propose an approach to stabilize the dynamics and show how this
         method can further be leveraged to enhance algorithmic fairness when agents come
         from multiple social groups. Experiments on synthetic/semi-synthetic and real data
         validate the theoretical findings.


1   I NTRODUCTION

As machine learning (ML) is widely used to automate
human-related decisions (e.g., in lending, hiring, col-                                                 Train
                                                                                     Model Annotation      Training data at   Human Annotation
lege admission), there is a growing concern that these
decisions are vulnerable to human strategic behav-
iors. With the knowledge of decision policy, humans
                                                                  Best respond
may adapt their behavior strategically in response to
ML models, e.g., by changing their features at costs
to receive favorable outcomes. A line of research            Strategic agents arriving at
                                                                                                         Training data at
called Strategic Classification studies such problems
by formulating mathematical models to characterize Figure 1: Illustration of model retraining with
strategic interactions and developing algorithms ro- strategic feedback from t to t ` 1
bust to strategic behavior (Hardt et al., 2016; Levanon
& Rosenfeld, 2022). Among the existing works, most studies focus on one-time deployment where
an ML model is trained and applied to a fixed population once.
However, practical ML systems often need to be retrained periodically to ensure high performance
on the current population. As the ML model gets updated, human behaviors also change accordingly.
To prevent the potential adverse outcomes, it is critical to understand how the strategic population is
affected by the model retraining process. Traditionally, the training data used for retraining models
can be constructed manually from human-annotated dataset (e.g., ImageNet). However, acquiring
a large amount of human-annotated training samples can be highly difficult and even infeasible,
especially in human-related applications (e.g., in automated hiring where an ML model is used to
identify qualified applicants, even an experienced interviewer needs time to label an applicant).
Motivated by a recent practice of automating data annotation for retraining large-scale ML models
(Taori & Hashimoto, 2023; Adam et al., 2022), we study strategic classification in a sequential
framework where an ML model is periodically retrained by a decision-maker with both human and
model-annotated samples. The updated models are deployed sequentially on agents who may change


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      3.0                                                     4
             2.5                                                                                         qualified                                            qualified
                                                                      2.5                                unqualified                                          unqualified
             2.0                                                                                         true classifier      3                               true classifier
                                                                      2.0                                learned classifier                                   learned classifier
             1.5
                                                                      1.5                                                     2
             1.0                                                      1.0
             0.5                                                                                                              1
                                                                      0.5
             0.0                                                      0.0                                                     0
                         qualified
             0.5         unqualified                                  0.5
                         true classifier                                                                                      1
             1.0         learned classifier                           1.0
                   1.0     0.5 0.0      0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5         1.0   0.5 0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5           1.0   0.5 0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5    2.0    2.5


Figure 2: Evolution of the student distribution and ML model at t “ 0 (left), t “ 5 (middle), and
t “ 14 (right): each student has two features. At each time, a classifier is retrained with both human
and model-annotated samples, and students best respond to be admitted as illustrated in Fig. 1. Over
time, the learned classifier (black lines) deviates from ground truth (green lines).
their features to receive favorable outcomes. Specifically, we consider practical settings where: (i)
the decision-maker can only label a limited number of human-annotated samples by itself, and has to
use the current classifier to produce model-annotated samples for future retraining; (ii) the strategic
agents need time to adapt their behaviors (Zrnic et al., 2021) and they best respond based on the
previous model; (iii) feature changes caused by agents’ best responses can genuinely change their
underlying labels (Kleinberg & Raghavan, 2020), and feature-label relationship is fixed over time.
Because the ML model affects agent behavior and such strategic feedback is further captured when
retraining the future model, both the model and agents change over time. However, it remains unclear
how the two evolve under such dynamics and what long-term effects one may have on the other.
In this paper, we examine the evolution of the ML model and the agent data distribution after they
best respond. In particular, we ask: 1) How is the agent population reshaped over time when the
model is retrained with strategic feedback? 2) How is the ML system affected by the agent’s strategic
response? 3) If agents come from multiple social groups, how can model retraining further impact
algorithmic fairness? 4) What happens if the human-annotated samples have a systematic bias?
To further illustrate our problem, consider an example of college admission where new students from
a population apply each year. In the t-th year, an ML model ft is learned from a training dataset
St and used to make admission decisions. For students who apply in the pt ` 1q-th year, they will
best respond to the model ft in the previous year (e.g., preparing the application package in a way
that maximizes the chance of getting admitted). Meanwhile, the college retrains the classifier ft`1
using a new training dataset St`1 , which consists of previous training data St , new human-annotated
samples, and new model-annotated samples (i.e., previous applicants annotated by the most recent
model ft ). This retrained model ft`1 is then used to make admission decisions in the pt ` 1q-th year.
This process continues over time and we demonstrate how the training dataset St is updated in Fig. 1.
Under such dynamics, both the ML system and the strategic population change over time and may
lead to unexpected long-term consequences. An illustrating example is given in Fig. 2.
Compared to prior studies on strategic classification, we go beyond one-shot settings to study the
long-term impacts of retraining in a sequential framework. Instead of assuming labels are available
while retraining, we consider more practical scenarios with model-annotated samples. Although the
risk of using model-annotated samples to retrain models has been highlighted in some existing works
(Taori & Hashimoto, 2023), ours is the first to incorporate strategic feedback from human agents.
More related works are discussed in App. C. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
1. We formulate the problem of model retraining with strategic feedback and qualitatively analyze
   the sources influencing the system dynamics (Sec. 2).
2. We theoretically characterize the evolution of the expectation of acceptance rate (i.e., the propor-
   tion of agents receiving positive classifications), qualification rate (i.e., the proportion of agents
   with positive labels), and the classifier bias (i.e., the discrepancy between acceptance rate and
   qualification rate) under the retraining process. We show that the acceptance rate increases over
   time under the retraining process, while the actual qualification rate may decrease under certain
   conditions. The dynamics of classifier bias are more complex depending on the systematic bias of
   human-annotated samples. Finally, we propose an approach to stabilize the dynamics (Sec. 3).
3. We consider settings where agents come from multiple social groups and investigate how inter-
   group fairness can be affected by the model retraining process; we also propose an early stopping
   mechanism to promote fairness (Sec. 4).
4. We conduct experiments on synthetic/semi-synthetic and real data to verify the theoretical results
   and test their robustness (Sec. 5, App. E, App. F).


                                                                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Consider a population of agents who are subject to certain machine learning decisions (e.g., admis-
sion/hiring decisions) and join the decision-making system in sequence. Each agent has observable
continuous features X P Rd and a hidden binary label Y P t0, 1u indicating its qualification state ("1"
being qualified and "0" being unqualified). Let PXY be the joint distribution of pX, Y q which is fixed
over time, and PX , PY |X be the corresponding marginal and conditional distributions. PX , PY |X
are continuous with non-zero probability mass everywhere in their domain. For agents who join the
system at time t, the decision-maker makes decisions about them using a classifier ft : Rd Ñ t0, 1u.
In this paper, we consider practical settings that the decision-maker does not know PXY and can only
learn ft from the training dataset at t (Guldogan et al., 2022).
The agent’s best response. Agents who join the system at time t can adapt their behaviors based
on the latest classifier ft´1 and change their features X strategically. We denote the resulting data
                   t
distribution as PXY   . Specifically, given original features X “ x, agents have incentives to change
their features at costs to receive positive classification outcomes, i.e., by maximizing utility
                                xt “ maxz tft´1 pzq ´ cpx, zqu                                      (1)
where distance function cpx, zq ě 0 measures the cost for an agent to change features from x to z.
In this paper, we consider cpx, zq “ pz ´ xqT Bpz ´ xq for some d ˆ d positive semidefinite matrix
B, allowing heterogeneous costs for different features. After agents best respond, the agent data
                                       t
distribution changes from PXY to PXY      . In this paper, we term PXY agents’ prior-best-response
                   t
distribution and PXY   agents’ post-best-response distribution. We consider natural settings that (i)
the agents’ responses are delayed: they act based on the latest classifier ft´1 they are aware of, not
the one they receive; (ii) agents’ behaviors are benign and cause the actual labels to change, so the
relationship between features and label PYt |X “ PY |X does not change (Guldogan et al., 2022).
Human-annotated samples and systematic bias. At each round t, we assume the decision-maker
can draw a limited number of unlabeled samples from the prior-best-response distribution PX . Note
that the human annotation process is independent of the decision-making process. At t, each agent is
classified by the model ft and best responds to ft´1 , the decision-maker never confuses the agents
by simultaneously using human experts to label agents. Instead, human experts never participate in
the interaction and human annotation is another process for the decision-maker to obtain additional
information about the whole population (e.g., by first acquiring data from public datasets or third
parties, and then labeling them to recover the population distribution). We may also consider the
                                                                                                    t
situation where human-annotated samples at t are drawn from post-best-response distribution PX        ,
the discussion is in App. D.1. With some prior knowledge (possibly biased), the decision-maker
can annotate these features and generate human-annotated samples So,t . We assume the quality of
                                                                                                  o
human annotations is consistent, so So,t at any t is drawn from a fixed probability distribution DXY
                              o
with marginal distribution DX “ PX . Because human annotations may not be the same as true
labels, DYo |X can be biased compared to PY |X . We define such difference as the decision-maker’s
systematic bias, formally stated below.
Definition 2.1 (Systematic bias). Let µpDo , P q “ Ex„PX rDYo |X p1|xq ´ PY |X p1|xqs. The decision-
maker has a systematic bias if µpDo , P q ą 0 (overestimation) or µpDo , P q ă 0 (underestimation).

Def. 2.1 implies that the decision-maker has a systematic bias when it labels a larger (or smaller)
proportion of agents as qualified compared to the ground truth. Depending on the applications, the
systematic bias may or may not exist and we study both scenarios in the paper.
Model-annotated samples. In addition to human-annotated samples, the decision-maker at each
round t can also leverage the most recent classifier ft´1 to generate model-annotated samples for
training the classifier ft . Specifically, let txit´1 uN
                                                       i“1 be N post-best-response features (equation 1)
acquired from agents coming at t´1, the decision-maker uses ft´1 to annotate the samples and obtain
model-annotated samples Sm,t´1 “ txit´1 , ft´1 pxit´1 quN       i“1 . Both human and model-annotated
samples can be used to retrain the classifier at t.
Classifier’s retraining process. With the human and model-annotated samples introduced above, we
next introduce how the model is retrained by the decision-maker over time. Denote the training set at
t as St . Initially, the decision-maker trains f0 with a human-annotated training dataset S0 “ So,0 .
Then the decision-maker updates ft every round to make decisions about agents. The decision-maker


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


learns ft P F using empirical risk minimization (ERM) with training dataset St . Similar to studies
in strategic classification (Eilat et al., 2022), we consider linear hypothesis class F. At each round
t ě 1, St consists of three components: existing training samples St´1 , N new model-annotated and
K new human-annotated samples, i.e.,
                             St “ St´1 Y Sm,t´1 Y So,t´1 , @t ě 1                                   (2)
Since annotating agents is usually time-consuming and expensive, we have N " K in practice. The
complete retraining process is shown in Alg. 1 (App. A).
                                                                             t
Given the training dataset St and the post-best-response distribution PXY        , we can define their
associated qualification rates as the proportion/probability of agents that are qualified, i.e.,
                       QpSt q “ Epx,yqPSt rys ;    QpP t q “ Epx,yq„PXYt   rys ,
                                                                     t
For the classifier ft deployed on marginal feature distribution PX     , we define acceptance rate as the
probability that agents are classified as positive, i.e.,
                                      Apft , P t q “ Ex„PXt rft pxqs.
Since St is related to random sampling at all t, the resulting classifier ft and agents’ best responses
                                t
are also random. Denote DXY          as the probability distribution of sampling from St and recall
       o
that DXY is the distribution for human-annotated So,t , we can further define the expectations of
qualification/acceptance rate QpSt q, QpP t q, Apft , P t q over the training dataset:
              q t :“ ESt rQpSt qs;       qt :“ ESt´1 rQpP t qs;       at :“ ESt rApft , P t qs
where q t is the expected qualification rate of agents in the training set; qt is the expected actual
qualification rate of agents after they best respond, note that the expectation is taken with respect to
                                   t
St´1 because the distribution PXY      is the result of agents best responding to ft´1 which is trained
with St´1 ; at is the expected acceptance rate of agents at time t.
Dynamics of qualification rate & acceptance rate. Under the model retraining process, both the
                                      t
model ft and agents’ distribution PXY    change over time. One goal of this paper is to understand
how the agents and the ML model interact and impact each other in the long run. Specifically, we are
interested in the dynamics of the following variables:
1. Qualification rate qt : it measures the qualification of agents and indicates the social welfare.
2. Acceptance rate at : it measures the likelihood that an agent can receive positive outcomes and
   indicates the applicant welfare.
3. Classifier bias ∆t “ |at ´ qt |: it is the discrepancy between the acceptance rate and the
   true qualification rate, measuring how well the decision-maker can approximate agents’ actual
   qualification rate and can be interpreted as decision-maker welfare.
While it is difficult to derive the dynamics of at and qt explicitly, we can first work out the dynamics
of q t using the law of total probability (details in App. G.1), i.e.,
                   q t “ tN `pt´1qK                N                  K
                         pt`1qN `tK ¨ q t´1 ` pt`1qN `tK ¨ at´1 ` pt`1qN `tK ¨ q 0                    (3)
Then, we explore relations between q t and at (or qt ). By leveraging such relations and equation 3,
we can further study the dynamics of at (or qt ).
Objectives. This paper studies the above dynamics and we aim to answer the following questions: 1)
How do the qualification rate qt , acceptance rate at , and classifier bias ∆t evolve under the dynamics?
2) How can the evolution of the system be affected by the decision-maker’s retraining process? 3)
What are the impacts of the decision-maker’s systematic bias? 4) If we further consider agents from
multiple social groups, how can the retraining process affect inter-group fairness?

3    DYNAMICS OF THE AGENTS AND M ODEL
In this section, we examine the evolution of qualification rate qt , acceptance rate at , and classifier
bias ∆t . We aim to understand how applicant welfare (Sec. 3.1), social welfare (Sec. 3.2), and
decision-maker welfare (Sec. 3.3) are affected by the retraining process in the long run.
Because the acceptance rate at :“ ESt rApft , P t qs and qualification rate qt :“ ESt´1 rQpP t qs depend
                                             t
on agent post-best-response distribution PXY     and the classifiers, we can indeed identify all sources
that affect the evolution of these quantifies (details are in App. G.2):


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 • q t : Expected qualification rate of agents in training set.
 • δpDt , Fq : Algorithmic bias that measures how well hypothesis class F can approximate the
   training data distribution DYt |X . It universally exists in the PAC learning framework.
    t
 • δBR : Strategic shift caused by agents’ best responses to ft´1 at t.
           t
Note that δBR  and q t closely affect each other and cannot be decoupled quantitatively. Meanwhile,
δpDt , Fq only depends on how well the hypothesis class F fits PYt |X . Since F is pre-determined,
we ignore δpDt , Fq in our theoretical analysis (Assumption 3.1). However, all experiments in Sec. 5
and Appendix naturally capture δpDt , Fq and the results are consistent with theorems.
Assumption 3.1. Under the retraining process, algorithmic bias δpDt , Fq is negligible.
                                                                             o
Finally, we further assume the monotone likelihood ratio property holds for DXY and PXY .
Assumption 3.2. Let xrms be m-dimension of x P Rd , then DYo |X p1|xq and PY |X p1|xq is continuous
and monotonically increasing in xrms, @m “ 1, ¨ ¨ ¨ , d.

Note that the Assumption 3.2 is mild and widely used in previous literature (Zhang et al., 2022).
It can be satisfied by many distributional families such as exponential, Gaussian, and mixtures of
exponential/Gaussian. It implies that agents are more likely to be qualified as feature value increases.

3.1   A PPLICANT WELFARE : THE DYNAMICS OF ACCEPTANCE RATE

We first examine the dynamics of at “ ESt rApft , P t qs. Intuitively, when δpDt , Fq is negligible
(Assumption 3.1), all classifiers can fit the training data well. Then the model-annotated samples
Sm,t´1 generated from post-best-response agents would have a higher qualification rate than the
qualification rate of St´1 (i.e., q t´1 ). As a result, the training data St augmented with Sm,t´1 has a
higher proportion of qualified agents q t than q t´1 , thereby producing a more "generous" classifier ft
with a larger at . This reinforcing process can be formally stated in Thm. 3.3.
Theorem 3.3 (Evolution of at ). Under the retraining process, the acceptance rate of the agents that
join the system increases over time, i.e., at ą at´1 , @t ě 1.

We prove Thm. 3.3 by
mathematical induction in
App. G.3. Fig. 3 below illus-
trates Thm. 3.3 by showing
how agents’ best responses
can reshape training data
St and classifier ft . When
agents best respond, the
decision-maker tends to ac-     Figure 3: Illustration of increased acceptance rate at . The left plot
cept more and more agents.      shows the training dataset St contains 2 unqualified (red circle) and 2
Indeed, we can further show     qualified agents (blue square) and at is 0.5. The middle plot shows the
that when the number of         new agents coming at t best respond to ft´1 . After the best responses,
model-annotated samples         3 of 4 agents are qualified (blue square) and 1 is still unqualified (blue
N is sufficiently large com-    circle). However, all 4 agents are annotated as "qualified" (blue). The
pared to the number of          right plot shows the training dataset St`1 contains all points of the left
human-annotated samples         and middle plot, plus two new human-annotated points (points with
K, the classifier will accept   dashed edges). All blue points are labeled as 1 and the red points are
all agents in the long run      labeled as 0. So the qualification rate qst`1 of St`1 becomes larger and
(Prop. 3.4).                    ft`1 accepts a higher proportion of agents (at`1 is 0.58).
Proposition 3.4. For any set of PXY , Do , B, there exists a threshold λ ą 0 such that limtÑ8 at “ 1
whenever KN ă λ.

The specific value of λ in Prop. 3.4 depends on PXY , Do , B, which is difficult to find analytically.
Nonetheless, we can demonstrate in Sec. 5 that when K      N “ 0.05, at tends to approach 1 in various
datasets. Since the human-annotated samples are often difficult to attain (due to time and labeling
costs), the condition in Prop. 3.4 is easy to satisfy in practice.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   S OCIAL WELFARE : THE DYNAMICS OF QUALIFICATION RATE

Next, we study the dynamics of qualification rate qt “ ESt´1 rQpP t qs. Unlike at which always
increases during the retraining process, the evolution of qt is more complicated and depends on
agents’ prior-best-response distribution PXY .
Specifically, let q0 “ QpP q “ Epx,yq„PXY rys be the initial qualification rate, then the difference
between qt and q0 can be interpreted as the amount of improvement (i.e., increase in label) agents gain
from their best responses at t. This is determined by (i) the proportion of agents that decide to change
their features at costs (depends on PX ), and (ii) the improvement agents can expect upon changing
features (depends on PY |X ). Thus, the dynamics of qt depend on PXY . Despite the intricate nature
of dynamics, we can still derive a sufficient condition under which qt decreases monotonically.
Theorem 3.5 (Evolution of qt ). Let FX pxq be the cumulative density function corresponding to PX .
Denote J “ tx|f0 pxq “ 0u as the half-space in Rd determined by the classifier f0 trained with So,0 .
Under the retraining process, if FX and PY |X p1|xq are convex on J , then qt`1 ă qt , @t ě 1.

Note that qt`1 ă qt in Thm. 3.5 holds only for t ě 1. Because agents can only improve their
labels from their best responses, prior-best-response q0 always serves as the lower bound of qt . The
half-space J in Thm. 3.5 specifies the region in feature space where agents have incentives to change
their features. The convexity of FX and PY |X p1|xq ensure that as ft evolves from t “ 1: (i) fewer
agents choose to improve their features, and (ii) agents expect less improvement from feature changes.
Thus, qt decreases over time. The proof and a more general analysis are shown in App. G.5.
Indeed, the condition in Thm. 3.5 can be satisfied by common distributions PX (e.g., Uniform, Beta
when α ą β) and labeling functions PY |X p1|xq (e.g., linear function, quadratic functions with degree
greater than 1). Other distributions (e.g., Gaussian) and labeling functions (e.g., logistic function) can
also satisfy the condition if FX and PY |X p1|xq are convex on x P J . We also show that Thm. 3.5 is
valid under diverse experimental settings (Sec. 5, App. E, App. F).

3.3   D ECISION - MAKER WELFARE : THE DYNAMICS OF CLASSIFIER BIAS

Sec. 3.1 and 3.2 show that as the classifier ft gets updated over time, agents are more likely to get
accepted (at increases). However, their true qualification rate qt (after the best response) may actually
decrease. It indicates that the decision-maker’s misperception about agents varies over time. Thus,
this section studies the dynamics of classifier bias ∆t “ |at ´ qt |. Our results show that the evolution
of ∆t is largely affected by the systematic bias and its magnitude µpDo , P q (Def. 2.1).
Theorem 3.6 (Evolution of ∆t ). Under the retraining process and the conditions in Thm. 3.5:
1. If systematic bias does not exist (i.e., µpDo , P q “ 0), then ∆t increases over time.
2. If the decision-maker overestimates agent qualification (µpDo , P q ą 0), then ∆t increases.
3. If the decision-maker underestimates agent qualification ( µpDo , P q ă 0), then ∆t either mono-
   tonically decreases or first decreases but then increases.

Thm. 3.6 highlights the potential risks of the model retraining process and is proved in App. G.6.
Originally, the purpose of retraining the classifier was to ensure accurate decisions on the targeted
population. However, in the presence of strategic agents, the retraining may lead to adverse outcomes
by amplifying the classifier bias. Meanwhile, though systematic bias is usually an undesirable
factor to eliminate when learning ML models, it may help mitigate classifier bias to improve the
decision-maker welfare in the retraining process, i.e., ∆t decreases when µpDo , P q ă 0.

3.4   I NTERVENTION TO STABILIZE THE DYNAMICS

Sec. 3.1- 3.3 show that as the model is retrained from strategic agents, at , qt , ∆t are unstable and may
change monotonically over time. Next, we introduce an effective approach to stabilize the system.
From the above analysis, we know that one reason that makes qt , at , ∆t evolve is agent’s best
response, i.e., agents improve their features strategically to be accepted by the most recent model,
which leads to a higher qualification rate of model-annotated samples (and the resulting training
data), eventually causing at to deviate from qt . Thus, to mitigate such deviation, we can improve the


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


quality of model annotation. Our method is proposed based on this idea, which uses a probabilistic
sampler (Taori & Hashimoto, 2023) when producing model-annotated samples.
Specifically, at each time t, instead of adding Sm´1,o “ txit´1 , ft´1 pxit´1 quN i“1 (samples annotated
by ft´1 ) to training data St (equation 2), we use a probabilistic model Φt´1 : Rd Ñ r0, 1s to annotate
each sample according to the following: for each sample x, we label it as 1 with probability Φt´1 pxq,
and as 0 otherwise. Here Φt´1 pxq « DYt´1    |X p1|xq is the estimated posterior probability learned from
St´1 (e.g., logistic model). We call the procedure refined retraining process if model-annotated
samples are generated in this way based on a probabilistic sampler.
Fig. 3 also illustrates the idea: after agents best respond to ft´1 (middle plot), their features improve
and ft will label both as 1. By contrast, a probabilistic sampler Φt only labels a fraction of them
as 1 to produce a smaller q t`1 . This alleviates the influence of agents’ best responses to stabilize
the dynamics of at , qt , ∆t . In App. F.3, we also compare the evolution of at , qt , ∆t under refined
retraining process with that under the original retraining process, and the results validate our approach.

4    L ONG - TERM FAIRNESS DYNAMICS UNDER S TRATEGIC R ETRAINING
Dynamics without fairness interventions. In this section, we focus on the long-term fairness
dynamics of the retraining process. We first state that the decision-maker easily has systematic bias
(Adebayo et al., 2022; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2012; Alvero et al., 2020) (see App. B for motivating
examples). In this section, we consider scenarios where agents come from two groups i, j with
different sensitive attributes, and the decision-maker, uses group-dependent classifiers to make
decisions about two groups of agents. We assume the initial qualification q0i ě q0j and both groups
have the same cost matrix B to change features. Denote the systematic bias to i, j as µi , µj where
µi ě µj . This is reasonable because the group with lower qualifications is usually under-represented.
To measure the unfairness, we consider the metric demographic parity (DP) (Feldman et al., 2015),
which measures the unfairness between two groups i, j as the discrepancy in their acceptance rates
|ait ´ ajt |. The extension to other commonly used fairness metrics is discussed in App. D.2.
First, if applying the original retraining process for both 1.0                          1.0
                                                                                         0.8
groups, then the decision-maker is expected to admit all 0.8                                           at for i
                                                               0.6                       0.6
agents in the long run and it ultimately preserves fairness, 0.4                         0.4
                                                                                                       at for j
                                                                             at for i                  Unfairness
but the classifier bias will be maximized. However, the 0.2                  at for j    0.2
                                                                             Unfairness
dynamics in the middle of the retraining cannot be deter- 0.0                            0.0
                                                                   0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16     0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
mined without knowing the feature distributions of both                    t                         t
groups. By contrast, applying refined retraining process Figure 4: Comparison of unfairness (DP)
on both groups can stabilize the dynamics, but it cannot when refined retraining process is applied
mitigate the systematic bias of the decision-maker. In the to both groups (left) and when it is only
left plot of Fig. 4, we see that under the refined retraining applied to group i (right) under dataset 2.
process, the unfairness between groups is always around
0.2. Instead, if the decision-maker only applies the refined retraining process on i while keeping the
original retraining process on j, then perfect fairness will be achieved in the middle of the retraining
process, but the model becomes unfair again as the retraining goes on.
Theorem 4.1 (Promote fairness through the early stopping mechanism). When q0i ě q0j and µi ě µj ,
if the decision-maker applies the refined retraining process to group i while applying the original
retraining process to group j, then |ait ´ ajt | will first decrease to be close to 0, and then increase.

Thm. 4.1 implies that the decision-maker can monitor the unfairness at each round, and executes the
early stopping mechanism to attain almost perfect DP fairness. As shown in the right plot of Fig. 4,
the unfairness is minimized at t “ 5 under the proposed method.
Fairness interventions at each round. Since both the original retraining process and the refined
retraining process are unable to maintain demographic parity among groups. We consider fairness
interventions at each round to ensure the deployment of fair models in App. D.2. Specifically, we
examine the dynamics of the qualification rate and acceptance rate for both groups under fairness
interventions. The results show that fairness interventions under the original retraining process still
cause the qualification rate and acceptance rate to change monotonically, but the intervention on the
refined retraining process can produce stable and fair classifiers.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5    E XPERIMENTS

We conduct experiments on two synthetic datasets (Uniform, Gaussian), one semi-synthetic dataset
(German Credit (Hofmann, 1994)), and one real dataset (Credit Approval (Quinlan, 2017)) to validate
the theorems and proposed methods. Note that only the Uniform dataset satisfies all assumptions
and the conditions in the above theoretical analysis, while the Gaussian dataset and German Credit
dataset violate the conditions in Thm. 3.5. The Credit Approval dataset violates all assumptions
and conditions of the main paper. The decision-maker trains logistic regression models for all
experiments using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) over T steps. We present the experimental
results of the Gaussian and German Credit datasets in this section, while the results for Uniform and
Credit Approval data are similar and shown in App. E.
Gaussian data. We consider a synthetic dataset with               Table 1: Gaussian Dataset Setting
Gaussian distributed PX . PY |X is logistic and satisfies
                                                                 PX k pxk q        PY |X p1|xq        n, r, T, q0
Assumption 3.2 but not the conditions of Thm. 3.5. We
                                                                N p0, 0.52 q p1 ` exppx1 ` x2 qq´1 100, 0.05, 15, 0.5
assume agents have two independent features X1 , X2 and
are from two groups„i, j with
                           ȷ different sensitive attributes but identical joint distribution PXY . Their
                      5 0
cost matrix is B “            and the initial qualification rate is q0 “ 0.5. We assume the decision-
                      0 5
maker has a systematic bias by overestimating (resp. underestimating) the qualification of agents in
the advantaged group i (resp. disadvantaged group j), which is modeled as increasing DYo |X p1|xq to
be 0.1 larger (resp. smaller) than PY |X p1|xq for group i (resp. group j). For the retraining process,
we let r “ KN “ 0.05 (i.e., the number of model-annotated samples N “ 2000, which is sufficiently
large compared to the number of human-annotated samples K “ 100). Table 1 summarizes the
dataset information, and the joint distributions are visualized in App. F.1.
We first verify the results in Sec. 3 by illustrating the dynamics of at , qt , ∆t for both groups (Fig. 5a).
Since our analysis neglects the algorithmic bias and the evolution results are in expectation, we
perform n “ 100 independent runs of experiments for every parameter configuration and show the
averaged outcomes. The results are consistent with Thm. 3.3, 3.5 and 3.6: (i) acceptance rate at (red
curves) increases monotonically; (ii) qualification rate qt decreases monotonically starting from t “ 1
(since strategic agents only best respond from t “ 1); (iii) classifier bias ∆t evolves differently for
different groups and it may reach the minimum after a few rounds of retraining. Next, we verify
whether the early stopping mechanism of the retraining process proposed in Thm. 4.1 can promote
fairness. Fig. 5b shows that the decision-maker attains almost perfect fairness at t “ 5. However, as
discussed in Sec. 4, although fairness can be enhanced, it only ensures both groups have a similar
classifier bias ∆t but cannot reduce such bias.
Besides, while we assume agents at round t have perfect knowledge of the classifier ft´1 , Jagadeesan
et al. (2021) pointed out agents may have a noisy knowledge in practice. To test the robustness of our
theoretical results against agent noisy response, we assume agents estimate their classification result
as fpt pxq “ ft pxq ` ϵ where ϵ „ N p0, 0.1q. We present the dynamics of at , qt , ∆t for both groups in
Fig. 7a which are quite similar to Fig. 5a, demonstrating the robustness of our theorems.
German Credit dataset (Hofmann, 1994). This dataset includes features for predicting individuals’
credit risks. It has 1000 samples and 19 numeric features, which are used to construct a larger-scaled
dataset. Specifically, we fit a kernel density estimator for all 19 features to generate 19-dimensional
features, the corresponding labels are sampled from the distribution PY |X which is estimated from
data by fitting a logistic classifier with 19 features. Given this dataset, the first 10 features are used to
train the classifiers. The attribute "sex" is regarded as the sensitive attribute. The systematic bias is
created by increasing/decreasing PY |X by 0.05. Other parameters n, r, T, q0 are the same as Table 1.
Since PY |X is a logistic function, Assumption 3.2 can be satisfied easily as illustrated in App. F.1.
We first verify the results in Sec. 3 by illustrating the dynamics of at , qt , ∆t for both groups. The
results are shown in Fig. 6a and are consistent with Thm. 3.3, 3.5 and 3.6: (i) acceptance rate at (red
curves) always increases; (ii) qualification rate qt (blue curves) decreases starting from t “ 1 (since
strategic agents only best respond from t “ 1); (iii) classifier bias ∆t (black curves) evolve differently
for different groups. In the right plot of Fig. 6a, ∆jt reaches the minimum at t “ 2, suggesting the
best time for the decision-maker to stop retraining to maximize its welfare. We also evaluate the early
stopping mechanism of the retraining and verify Thm. 4.1. Fig. 6b shows the unfairness decreases


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


first and is minimized at t “ 9. Finally, similar to Fig. 7a, Fig. 7b demonstrates the results are still
robust under the noisy setting.

1.0                                      1.0
                                                   at
                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                                               0.25           t for i
                                         0.8
                                                   qt
                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                              t for j
0.8
                                                   Δt
                                                                                                                               0.20
                                         0.6                                          0.6                        at for i
0.6
                                                                                                                 at for j      0.15
0.4                                      0.4                                          0.4                        Unfairness    0.10
                                  at
0.2                               qt     0.2                                          0.2                                      0.05
                                                                                      0.0                                      0.00
                                  Δt
                                         0.0
0.0
      0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                       t                                        t                                    t                                        t
          (a) at , qt , ∆t for group i (left) and j (right)                                 (b) unfairness (left) and classifier bias ∆t (right)

                   Figure 5: Dynamics of at , qt , ∆t and unfairness |ait ´ ajt | on Gaussian dataset.


1.0
                                         1.0                                          1.0                                      0.35
0.8
                                         0.8                                          0.8                                      0.30
                                                                                                                 at for i      0.25
                                         0.6                                          0.6                                      0.20
                                                                                                                 at for j
0.6


0.4
                                         0.4                                          0.4                        Unfairness    0.15
                                  at
                                         0.2
                                                                           at
                                                                                      0.2                                      0.10                             t for i
                                                                           qt
0.2                               qt
                                                                                                                               0.05                             t for j
0.0
                                  Δt
                                         0.0
                                                                           Δt
                                                                                      0.0                                      0.00
      0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                       t                                        t                                    t                                        t
          (a) at , qt , ∆t for group i (left) and j (right)                                 (b) unfairness (left) and classifier bias ∆t (right)

               Figure 6: Dynamics of at , qt , ∆t and unfairness |ait ´ ajt | on German Credit dataset.

1.0                                      1.0                                                                                   1.0
                                                   at                                 1.0

                                                   qt
0.8                                      0.8                                                                                   0.8
                                                   Δt                                 0.8


0.6                                      0.6                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                      0.6


                                         0.4                                                                                   0.4
0.4                                                                                   0.4
                                  at                                                                                      at                                         at
                                                                                                                               0.2
0.2                               qt     0.2                                          0.2                                 qt                                         qt
                                  Δt                                                                                      Δt                                         Δt
                                                                                                                               0.0
0.0                                      0.0                                          0.0
      0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16              0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16          0   2    4    6   8   10 12 14 16
                       t                                        t                                            t                                          t
(a) Gaussian: at , qt , ∆t for group i (left) and j (right)                           (b) German: at , qt , ∆t for group i (left) and j (right)

                                   Figure 7: Dynamics of at , qt , ∆t under the noisy setting.

More comprehensive experiments in App. F. App. F.1 describes experimental setups. App. F.2
demonstrates the additional results to verify Thm. 3.3 and Thm. 3.6 under different r “ K     N , where we
observe the same trends under different r, but at , qt change with different rates. It also provides results
on how at , qt , ∆t change under the following situations: (i) the longer-term dynamics when T is very
large; (ii) no systematic bias; (iii) all training examples are human-annotated or model-annotated;
(iv) agents have different costs of changing different features. App. F.3 presents more dynamics
under refined retraining process to illustrate how it stabilizes the retraining; App. F.4 illustrates the
evolution of unfairness under various r; App. F.5 presents more experiments under the noisy setting,
while App. F.6 compares the situations when agents are non-strategic with the ones when they are
strategic, revealing that the strategic feedback of agents causes at , qt to diverge.

6         C ONCLUSION & L IMITATIONS

This paper studies the dynamics where strategic agents interact with an ML system retrained over
time with model-annotated and human-annotated samples. We rigorously studied the evolution of
applicant welfare, decision-maker welfare, and social welfare. Such results highlight the potential
risks of retraining classifiers when agents are strategic. The paper also proposed solutions to stabilizing
dynamics and improving fairness. However, our theoretical results rely on certain assumptions and we
should first verify these conditions before adopting the results of this paper, which may be challenging
in real-world applications. Finally, though early stopping is a simple yet powerful mechanism to
promote fairness, it remains an interesting problem to ensure fairness during endless retraining.


                                                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
George Alexandru Adam, Chun-Hao Kingsley Chang, Benjamin Haibe-Kains, and Anna Goldenberg.
  Hidden risks of machine learning applied to healthcare: Unintended feedback loops between
  models and future data causing model degradation. In Proceedings of the 5th Machine Learning for
  Healthcare Conference, volume 126 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 710–731.
  PMLR, 2020.
George Alexandru Adam, Chun-Hao Kingsley Chang, Benjamin Haibe-Kains, and Anna Goldenberg.
  Error amplification when updating deployed machine learning models. In Proceedings of the
  Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, Durham, NC, USA, pp. 5–6, 2022.
Julius Adebayo, Melissa Hall, Bowen Yu, and Bobbie Chern. Quantifying and mitigating the impact
  of label errors on model disparity metrics. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Saba Ahmadi, Hedyeh Beyhaghi, Avrim Blum, and Keziah Naggita. The strategic perceptron. In
  Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, pp. 6–25, 2021.
Tal Alon, Magdalen Dobson, Ariel Procaccia, Inbal Talgam-Cohen, and Jamie Tucker-Foltz. Multia-
  gent evaluation mechanisms. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34:
  1774–1781, 2020.
AJ Alvero, Noah Arthurs, Anthony Lising Antonio, Benjamin W Domingue, Ben Gebre-Medhin,
  Sonia Giebel, and Mitchell L Stevens. Ai and holistic review: informing human reading in college
  admissions. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 200–206,
  2020.
Elias Bareinboim and Judea Pearl. Controlling selection bias in causal inference. In Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 100–108, 2012.
Yahav Bechavod, Katrina Ligett, Steven Wu, and Juba Ziani. Gaming helps! learning from strategic
  interactions in natural dynamics. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 1234–1242, 2021.
Yahav Bechavod, Chara Podimata, Steven Wu, and Juba Ziani. Information discrepancy in strategic
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1691–1715, 2022.
Omer Ben-Porat and Moshe Tennenholtz. Best response regression. In Advances in Neural Informa-
 tion Processing Systems, 2017.
Mark Braverman and Sumegha Garg. The role of randomness and noise in strategic classification.
 CoRR, abs/2005.08377, 2020.
J Michelle Brock and Ralph De Haas. Discriminatory lending: Evidence from bankers in the lab.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 15(2):31–68, 2023.
Quinn Capers IV, Daniel Clinchot, Leon McDougle, and Anthony G Greenwald. Implicit racial bias
  in medical school admissions. Academic Medicine, 92(3):365–369, 2017.
Yatong Chen, Jialu Wang, and Yang Liu. Strategic recourse in linear classification. CoRR,
  abs/2011.00355, 2020a.
Yiling Chen, Yang Liu, and Chara Podimata. Learning strategy-aware linear classifiers. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:15265–15276, 2020b.
Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Adina Williams, Jack Urbanek, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. Queens
  are powerful too: Mitigating gender bias in dialogue generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03842,
  2019.
Jinshuo Dong, Aaron Roth, Zachary Schutzman, Bo Waggoner, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Strategic clas-
   sification from revealed preferences. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Economics
   and Computation, pp. 55–70, 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL https://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/credit+approval.
Itay Eilat, Ben Finkelshtein, Chaim Baskin, and Nir Rosenfeld. Strategic classification with graph
   neural networks, 2022.
Danielle Ensign, Sorelle A Friedler, Scott Neville, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubrama-
  nian. Runaway feedback loops in predictive policing. In Conference on fairness, accountability
  and transparency, pp. 160–171. PMLR, 2018.
Michael Feldman, Sorelle A Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubra-
 manian. Certifying and removing disparate impact. In proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
 international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 259–268, 2015.
Ozgur Guldogan, Yuchen Zeng, Jy-yong Sohn, Ramtin Pedarsani, and Kangwook Lee. Equal improv-
  ability: A new fairness notion considering the long-term impact. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Vivek Gupta, Pegah Nokhiz, Chitradeep Dutta Roy, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. Equalizing
  recourse across groups, 2019.
Nika Haghtalab, Nicole Immorlica, Brendan Lucier, and Jack Z Wang. Maximizing welfare with
  incentive-aware evaluation mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01956, 2020.
Melissa Hall, Laurens van der Maaten, Laura Gustafson, and Aaron Adcock. A systematic study of
 bias amplification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11706, 2022.
Moritz Hardt, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters. Strategic classification.
 In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, pp.
 111–122, 2016.
Moritz Hardt, Meena Jagadeesan, and Celestine Mendler-Dünner. Performative power. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Keegan Harris, Hoda Heidari, and Steven Z Wu. Stateful strategic regression. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 28728–28741, 2021.
Keegan Harris, Dung Daniel T Ngo, Logan Stapleton, Hoda Heidari, and Steven Wu. Strategic
  instrumental variable regression: Recovering causal relationships from strategic responses. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8502–8522, 2022.
Hans Hofmann. Statlog (German Credit Data). UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1994. DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5NC77.
Guy Horowitz and Nir Rosenfeld. Causal strategic classification: A tale of two shifts, 2023.
Zachary Izzo, Lexing Ying, and James Zou. How to learn when data reacts to your model: Performa-
  tive gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 4641–4650, 2021.
Meena Jagadeesan, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Alternative microfoundations for
 strategic classification. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 4687–4697, 2021.
Ray Jiang, Silvia Chiappa, Tor Lattimore, András György, and Pushmeet Kohli. Degenerate feedback
  loops in recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
  and Society, pp. 383–390, 2019.
Kun Jin, Xueru Zhang, Mohammad Mahdi Khalili, Parinaz Naghizadeh, and Mingyan Liu. Incentive
  mechanisms for strategic classification and regression problems. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
  Conference on Economics and Computation, pp. 760–790, 2022.
Jon Kleinberg and Manish Raghavan. How do classifiers induce agents to invest effort strategically?
  pp. 1–23, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tosca Lechner and Ruth Urner.       Learning losses for strategic classification.    arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.13421, 2022.
Klas Leino, Emily Black, Matt Fredrikson, Shayak Sen, and Anupam Datta. Feature-wise bias
  amplification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08999, 2018.
Sagi Levanon and Nir Rosenfeld. Generalized strategic classification and the case of aligned
  incentives. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022,
  Baltimore, Maryland, USA, pp. 12593–12618, 2022.
Lydia T. Liu, Sarah Dean, Esther Rolf, Max Simchowitz, and Moritz Hardt. Delayed impact of fair
  machine learning. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, IJCAI-19, pp. 6196–6200, 2019.
Lydia T Liu, Ashia Wilson, Nika Haghtalab, Adam Tauman Kalai, Christian Borgs, and Jennifer
  Chayes. The disparate equilibria of algorithmic decision making when individuals invest rationally.
  In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 381–
  391, 2020.
Lydia T. Liu, Nikhil Garg, and Christian Borgs. Strategic ranking. In Proceedings of The 25th
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2489–2518, 2022.
Masoud Mansoury, Himan Abdollahpouri, Mykola Pechenizkiy, Bamshad Mobasher, and Robin
 Burke. Feedback loop and bias amplification in recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 29th
 ACM international conference on information & knowledge management, pp. 2145–2148, 2020.
John Miller, Smitha Milli, and Moritz Hardt. Strategic classification is causal modeling in disguise.
  In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Performative prediction.
  In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7599–7609, 2020.
Quinlan Quinlan.       Credit Approval.     UCI Machine Learning Repository, 2017.             DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5FS30.
Reilly Raab and Yang Liu. Unintended selection: Persistent qualification rate disparities and
  interventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 26053–26065, 2021.
Nir Rosenfeld, Anna Hilgard, Sai Srivatsa Ravindranath, and David C Parkes. From predictions to
  decisions: Using lookahead regularization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 4115–4126, 2020.
Sven Schmit and Carlos Riquelme. Human interaction with recommendation systems. In International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 862–870, 2018.
David Sculley, Gary Holt, Daniel Golovin, Eugene Davydov, Todd Phillips, Dietmar Ebner, Vinay
  Chaudhary, Michael Young, Jean-Francois Crespo, and Dan Dennison. Hidden technical debt in
  machine learning systems. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to
  Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2014. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107298019.
Yonadav Shavit, Benjamin L. Edelman, and Brian Axelrod. Causal strategic linear regression. In
  Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’20, 2020.
Ayan Sinha, David F Gleich, and Karthik Ramani. Deconvolving feedback loops in recommender
  systems. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Wei Tang, Chien-Ju Ho, and Yang Liu. Linear models are robust optimal under strategic behavior. In
 Proceedings of The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume
 130 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2584–2592, 13–15 Apr 2021.
Rohan Taori and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Data feedback loops: Model-driven amplification of dataset
  biases. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 33883–33920, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tianlu Wang, Jieyu Zhao, Mark Yatskar, Kai-Wei Chang, and Vicente Ordonez. Balanced datasets are
  not enough: Estimating and mitigating gender bias in deep image representations. pp. 5310–5319,
  2019.
Tom Yan, Shantanu Gupta, and Zachary Lipton. Discovering optimal scoring mechanisms in causal
  strategic prediction, 2023.
Xueru Zhang, Ruibo Tu, Yang Liu, Mingyan Liu, Hedvig Kjellstrom, Kun Zhang, and Cheng
  Zhang. How do fair decisions fare in long-term qualification? In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, pp. 18457–18469, 2020.
Xueru Zhang, Mohammad Mahdi Khalili, Kun Jin, Parinaz Naghizadeh, and Mingyan Liu. Fairness
  interventions as (Dis)Incentives for strategic manipulation. In Proceedings of the 39th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 26239–26264, 2022.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. Men also like
   shopping: Reducing gender bias amplification using corpus-level constraints. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1707.09457, 2017.
Tijana Zrnic, Eric Mazumdar, Shankar Sastry, and Michael Jordan. Who leads and who follows in
  strategic classification? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 15257–15269,
  2021.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    T HE RETRAINING PROCESS

Algorithm 1 retraining process
                                  o
Require: Joint distribution DXY        for any So,t , Hypothesis class F, the number of the initial training
    samples and agents coming per round N , the number of decision-maker-labeled samples per
    round K.
Ensure: Model deployments over time f0 , f1 , f2 , . . .
                       o
 1: S0 “ So,0 „ DXY         “ txi0 uN
                                    i“1
 2: At t “ 0, deploy f0 „ FpS0 q
 3: for t P t1, . . . 8u do
 4:     N agents gain knowledge of ft´1 and best respond to it, resulting in txit uN    i“1
 5:     Sm,t “ txit´1 , ft´1 pxit´1 quN  i“1 consists of the model-labeled samples from round t ´ 1.
                    o
 6:     So,t „ DXY       consists of the new K decision-maker-labeled samples.
 7:     St “ St´1 Y Sm,t Y So,t
 8:     Deploy ft „ FpSt q on the incoming N agents who best respond to ft´1 with the resulting
                           t
    joint distribution PXY    .
 9: end for


B    M OTIVATING EXAMPLES OF THE SYSTEMATIC BIAS

Def. 2.1 highlights the systematic nature of the decision-maker’s bias. This bias is quite ubiquitous
when labeling is not a trivial task. It almost always the case when the decision-maker needs to make
human-related decisions. We provide the following motivating examples of systematic bias with
supporting literature in social science:
1. College admissions: consider experts in the admission committee of a college that obtains a set of
   student data and wants to label all students as "qualified" or "unqualified". The labeling task is
   much more complex and subjective than the ones in computer vision/natural language processing
   which have some "correct" answers. Therefore, the experts in the committee are prone to bring
   their "biases" towards a specific population sharing the same sensitive attribute into the labeling
   process including:

    (a) Implicit bias: the experts may have an implicit bias they are unaware of to favor/discriminate
        against students from certain groups. For instance, a famous study (Capers IV et al., 2017)
        reveals admission committee members at the medical school of the Ohio State University
        unconsciously have a "better impression" towards white students; Alvero et al. (2020) finds
        out that even when members in an admission committee do not access the sensitive attributes
        of students, they unconsciously infer them and discriminate against students from the minority
        group.
    (b) Selection bias: the experts may have insufficient knowledge of the under-represented pop-
        ulation due to the selection bias (Bareinboim & Pearl, 2012) because only a small portion
        of them were admitted before. Thus, experts may expect a lower qualification rate from
        this population, resulting in more conservative labeling practices. The historical stereotypes
        created by selection bias are difficult to erase.
2. Loan applications: consider experts in a big bank that obtains data samples from some potential
   applicants and wants to label them as "qualified" or "unqualified". Similarly, the experts are likely
   to have systematic bias including:
    (a) Implicit bias: similarly, Brock & De Haas (2023) conduct a lab-in-the-field experiment with
        over 300 Turkish loan officers to show that they bias against female applicants even if they
        have identical profiles as male applicants.
    (b) Selection bias: when fewer female applicants are approved historically, the experts have less
        knowledge on females (i.e., whether they will actually default or repay), thereby tending to
        stay conservative.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     R ELATED W ORK
C.1   S TRATEGIC C LASSIFICATION

Strategic classification without label changes. Our work is mainly based on an extensive line of
literature on strategic classification (Hardt et al., 2016; Ben-Porat & Tennenholtz, 2017; Dong et al.,
2018; Jagadeesan et al., 2021; Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2022; Braverman & Garg, 2020; Izzo et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2020b; Ahmadi et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020; 2022; Eilat
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Lechner & Urner, 2022; Horowitz & Rosenfeld, 2023). These works
assume the agents are able to best respond to the policies of the decision-maker to maximize their
utilities. Most works modeled the strategic interactions between agents and the decision-maker as a
repeated Stackelberg game where the decision-maker leads by publishing a classifier and the agents
immediately best respond to it. The earliest line of works focused on the performance of regular
linear classifiers when strategic behaviors never incur label changes (Hardt et al., 2016; Ben-Porat &
Tennenholtz, 2017; Dong et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020b), while the later literature added noise to the
agents’ best responses (Jagadeesan et al., 2021), randomized the classifiers (Braverman & Garg, 2020)
and limited the knowledge of the decision-maker (Tang et al., 2021). Levanon & Rosenfeld (2022)
proposed a generalized framework for strategic classification and a strategic hinge loss to better train
strategic classifiers, but the strategic behaviors are still not assumed to cause label changes.
Strategic classification with label changes. Several other lines of literature enable strategic behaviors
to cause label changes. The first line of literature mainly focuses on incentivizing improvement
actions where agents have budgets to invest in different actions and only some of them cause the label
change (improvement) (Kleinberg & Raghavan, 2020; Harris et al., 2021; Bechavod et al., 2022; Jin
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2020a; Haghtalab et al., 2020; Alon et al., 2020; Bechavod et al., 2021; Raab
& Liu, 2021). The other line of literature focuses on causal strategic learning (Miller et al., 2020;
Shavit et al., 2020; Horowitz & Rosenfeld, 2023; Harris et al., 2022; Yan et al., 2023). These works
argue that every strategic learning problem has a non-trivial causal structure which can be explained
by a structural causal model, where intervening on causal nodes causes improvement and intervening
on non-causal nodes means manipulation.
Performative prediction. Several works consider performative prediction as a more general setting
where the feature distribution of agents is a function of the classifier parameters. Perdomo et al. (2020)
first formulated the prediction problem and provided iterative algorithms to find the stable points
of the model parameters. Izzo et al. (2021) modified the gradient-based methods and proposed the
Perfgrad algorithm. Hardt et al. (2022) elaborated the model by proposing performative power.
Retraining under strategic settings
Most works on learning algorithms under strategic settings consider developing robust algorithms
that the decision-maker only trains the classifier once (Hardt et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2021; Lev-
anon & Rosenfeld, 2022; Jagadeesan et al., 2021), while Performative prediction(Perdomo et al.,
2020) focuses on developing online learning algorithms for strategic agents. There are only a few
works (Horowitz & Rosenfeld, 2023; Rosenfeld et al., 2020) which permit retraining the Strategic
classification models. However, all these algorithms assume that the decision-maker has access to
a new training dataset containing both agents’ features and labels at each round. There is no work
considering the dynamics under the retraining process with model-annotated samples.

C.2   B IAS AMPLIFICATION DURING RETRAINING

There has been an extensive line of study on the computer vision field about how machine learning
models amplify the dataset bias, while most works only focus on the one-shot setting where the
machine learning model itself amplifies the bias between different groups in one training/testing
round (Hall et al., 2022; Adebayo et al., 2022). In recent years, another line of research focuses on
the amplification of dataset bias under model-annotated data where ML models label new samples
on their own and add them back to retrain themselves(Leino et al., 2018; Dinan et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2017; Adam et al., 2022; Sculley et al., 2015; Ensign et al., 2018; Mansoury
et al., 2020; Adam et al., 2020). These works study the bias amplification in different practical fields
including resource allocation (Ensign et al., 2018), computer vision (Wang et al., 2019), natural
language processing (Zhao et al., 2017) and clinical trials (Adam et al., 2020). The most related work
is (Taori & Hashimoto, 2023) which studied the influence of retraining in the non-strategic setting.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Also, there is a work (Adam et al., 2022) touching on the data feedback loop under performative
setting, but it focused on empirical experiments under medical settings where the feature distribution
shifts are mainly caused by treatment and the true labels in historical data are highly accessible.
Besides, the data feedback loop is also related to recommendation systems. where extensive works
have studied how the system can shape users’ preferences and disengage the minority population
(Schmit & Riquelme, 2018; Sinha et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2019; Mansoury et al., 2020). However,
previous literature did not touch on the retraining process.

C.3    M ACHINE LEARNING FAIRNESS IN STRATEGIC CLASSIFICATION

Several works have considered how different fairness metrics (Feldman et al., 2015; Hardt et al.,
2016; Gupta et al., 2019; Guldogan et al., 2022) are influenced in strategic classification (Liu et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022). The most related works (Liu et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2022) studied how strategic behaviors and the decision-maker’s awareness can
shape long-term fairness. They deviated from our paper since they never considered retraining and
the strategic behaviors never incurred label changes.

D     A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSIONS
                                              t
D.1    H UMAN - ANNOTATED SAMPLES DRAWN FROM PX

In this section, we consider the situation where all human-annotated samples at t are drawn from the
                                    t
post-best-response distribution PX    . This will change equation 3 to the following:
                          tN `pt´1qK                N        1         K         ˚
                  q 1 t “ pt`1qN        1
                                 `tK ¨ q t´1 ` pt`1qN `tK ¨ at´1 ` pt`1qN `tK ¨ qt´1                        (4)
                                                                                  ˚
where q 1 and a1 denote the new qualification rate and acceptance rate, and qt´1       stands for the
                                                                            t´1
qualification rate of the human annotations on features drawn from PX . Note that the only
                                                                           ˚
difference lies in the third term of the RHS which changes from q 0 to qt´1   . Our first observation
         ˚
is that qt´1 is never smaller than q 0 because the best response will not harm agents’ qualifications.
With this observation, we can derive Prop. D.1.
Proposition D.1. a1t ě at holds for any t ě 1. If Prop. 3.4 further holds, we also have a1t Ñ 1.

Prop. D.1 can be proved easily by applying the observation stated above. However, note that unlike
at , a1t is not necessarily monotonically increasing.

D.2    A DDITIONAL DISCUSSIONS ON FAIRNESS

Other fairness metrics. It is difficult to derive concise results considering other fairness metrics
including equal opportunity and equal improvability because the data distributions play a role in
determining these metrics. However, Theorem 3.5 states the true qualification rate of the agent
population is likely to decrease, suggesting the retraining process may do harm to improvability.
Meanwhile, when the acceptance rate at increases for the disadvantageous group, the acceptance
rate of the qualified individuals will be likely to be better, but it is not guaranteed because the feature
distribution of the qualified individuals also changes because we assume the strategic behaviors are
causal which may incur label changes.
Fairness intervention at each round with original retraining process. In Sec. 4, we show that even
if the retraining process promotes intergroup fairness, fairness is likely to be achieved only when the
decision-maker overestimates the qualification of both groups. In this section, we consider another
approach by applying a "hard fairness intervention" on both groups after retraining the classifier
at each round. Specifically, let fti “ 1phit pxq ě θti q, ftj “ 1phjt pxq ě θtj q be the original optimal
classifiers for two groups without fairness constraints. Here h is used to predict the conditional
probability of an agent having label 1 given their feature x. Note that fti , ftj are trained from Sti , Stj
which do not include agents coming at t. Thus, to ensure DP fairness on the agents coming at t
                                 jt
                           it
with joint distributions PXY  , PXY , the decision-maker needs to post-process fti , ftj to further satisfy
fairness constraint. Specifically, let the fair-optimal models for two groups be frti , frtj ,the decision-
maker obtains them by adjusting the thresholds θti , θtj to θrti , θrtj . Denote the loss of the classifier with


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


threshold θ on the training set S as ℓpθ, Sq, the acceptance rate of group s at t under threshold θ as
Ast                                                                               ri rj
  θ , and the proportion of agents in group s as ps . The decision-maker selects θt , θt that satisfy the
following constrained optimization:

                                                  min pi ℓpθi , Sti q ` pj ℓpθj , Stj q
                                                 tθ i ,θ j u
                                                                        jt
                                                           s.t. Ait
                                                                 θ i “ Aθ j

To summarize, at t, we first train fti , ftj with Sti , Stj , then tune the thresholds to ensure the new
classifiers are fair on the new agents coming at t while optimizing the training loss. WLOG, we
assume i is the advantaged group and j is the disadvantaged group, where Ait      θti
                                                                                      ą Ajt
                                                                                         θtj
                                                                                             . We can have
the relationships between the fair optimal thresholds and the original optimal thresholds as follows.
Proposition D.2. If P ti , P tj are continuous, then θri ě θi and θrj ď θj .
                       XY           XY                                                    t          t               t       t

                                                             ti    tj
We prove Prop. D.2 in App. G.9. Note that since we need PXY     , PXY to be continuous, Prop. D.2 is
only compatible with the noisy best response (Jagadeesan et al., 2021). The noisy best response can
follow the setting specified in App. F.5 where the agents only know a noisy version of classification
outcomes: fpt pxq “ ft pxq ` ϵ and ϵ is a Gaussian noise.
With Prop. D.2, we now consider the new dynamics under the fairness interventions (i.e., applying
frts instead of fts ), where we can define the qualification rates of group i and group j, and acceptance
rate of both groups at time t as qri,t , qrj,t , r
                                                 at accordingly.
We first show that under the conditions of Thm. 3.5, compared to the case without fairness interven-
tion, enforcing fairness constraint at each round will cause the advantaged group to improve their
qualifications while harming the qualifications of the disadvantaged group.
Proposition D.3. Under the conditions in Thm. 3.5, the fairness intervention at round t can harm
the qualification rate for the disadvantaged group j while benefiting the qualification rate for the
                                            1
advantaged group i. Specifically, denote qs,t`1  as the qualification rate of group s at t ` 1 if the
                             s                                     1                   1
original optimal threshold θt is applied. Then we have qri,t`1 ą qi,t`1 but qrj,t`1 ă qj,t`1 .

Prop. D.3 can be proved by combining Prop. D.2 with the two convexity conditions in Thm. 3.5.
                                             at , qri,t , qrj,t as follows.
Moreover, we can also derive the dynamics of r
Proposition D.4. Under fairness intervention, the acceptance rates of both groups increase over
            at ă r
time, i.e., r    at`1 . Moreover, under the conditions of Thm. 3.5, qrs,t ă qrs,t`1 for any group s.

These results show that although we can maintain equal acceptance rates among different groups
throughout the retraining process, the dynamics of acceptance rates and qualification rates for both
groups cannot be stabilized under fairness interventions. However, if applying fairness intervention
on the refined retraining process, we can obtain stable and fair dynamics.
Fairness intervention at each round with refined retraining process. In Prop. D.6, we already
prove that the refined retraining process will not break the conditional probability DYo |X . Therefore,
the optimal classifiers (without fairness interventions) are always stable regardless of the best response
of strategic agents, making the fair classifiers frts also stable as illustrated in Prop. D.5.
                                                                                                  at
Proposition D.5. If applying fairness intervention at each round with refined retraining process, r
will stay stable.

Prop. D.5 provides a solution to produce fair models with stable dynamics.

                              1.0                                                             qualified
                                                                                              unqualified
                              0.8                                                     2
                              0.6
                                                                                      1
                                                                                 X2
                         X2


                              0.4
                                                                                      0
                              0.2
                                          qualified
                              0.0         unqualified                                 1
                                    0.0    0.2      0.4        0.6   0.8   1.0            1          0           1       2
                                                          X1                                                X1
        Figure 8: Visualization of distribution: Uniform data (left) and Gaussian data (right)

                                                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3   A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSIONS ON refined retraining process

We provide the following proposition to illustrate how the refined retraining process leverages a
probabilistic sampler to stabilize the dynamics.
Proposition D.6. If the decision-maker uses a probabilistic sampler Φt pxq “ DYt´1
                                                                                 |X p1|xq to produce
                             t        o
model-annotated samples, DY |X “ DY |X .

The proof details are in App. G.8. Prop. D.6 illustrates the underlying conditional distribution DYt |X
is expected to be the same as DYo |X , meaning that the classifier ft always learns the distribution of
human-annotated data, thereby only preserving the systematic bias. However, there is no way to deal
with the systematic bias in refined retraining process.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E         M AIN E XPERIMENTS FOR OTHER DATASETS


We provide results on a Uniform dataset and a real dataset (Quinlan, 2017) with settings similar to
Sec. 5.
Uniform data. All settings are similar to the Gaussian dataset except that PX and PY |X p1|xq change
as shown in Table 2.
We first verify the results in Sec. 3 by illustrating the dynam- Table 2: Gaussian Dataset Setting
ics of at , qt , ∆t for both groups (Fig. 9a). Since our analysis  PX k pxk q   PY |X p1|xq       n, r, T, q0
neglects the algorithmic bias and the evolution results are
                                                                    Up0, 1q   0.5 ¨ px1 ` x2 q 100, 0.05, 15, 0.5
in expectation, we perform n “ 100 independent runs of
experiments for every parameter configuration and show the averaged outcomes. The results are
consistent with Thm. 3.3, 3.5 and 3.6: (i) acceptance rate at (red curves) increases monotonically;
(ii) qualification rate qt decreases monotonically starting from t “ 1 (since strategic agents only
best respond from t “ 1); (iii) classifier bias ∆t evolves differently for different groups and it may
reach the minimum after a few rounds of retraining. Next, we verify whether the early stopping
mechanism of the retraining process proposed in Thm. 4.1 can promote fairness. Fig. 9b shows that
the decision-maker attains almost perfect fairness at t “ 7. However, as discussed in Sec. 4, although
fairness can be enhanced, it only ensures both groups have a similar classifier bias ∆t but cannot
reduce such bias.
1.0
                                         1.0                                               1.0
                                         0.8                                               0.8                              0.25
0.8

                                                                                                               at for i     0.20
                                         0.6                       at                      0.6
0.6
                                                                   qt                                          at for j     0.15
0.4
                                         0.4                       Δt                      0.4                 Unfairness   0.10
                                                                                                                                                  t for i
                                  at
0.2                               qt     0.2                                               0.2                              0.05
                                                                                                                                                  t for j
                                                                                           0.0                              0.00
                                  Δt
                                         0.0
0.0
      0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16               0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16            0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                       t                                       t                                          t                                t
          (a) at , qt , ∆t for group i (left) and j (right)                                      (b) unfairness (left) and classifier bias ∆t (right)

                   Figure 9: Dynamics of at , qt , ∆t and unfairness |ait ´ ajt | on Gaussian dataset.

Next, we present the results of a set of complementary Table 3: Description of credit approval
experiments on real data (Quinlan, 2017) where we dataset
directly fit PX|Y with Beta distributions. The fitting
                                                  o       Settings          Group i           Group j
results slightly violate Assumption 3.2. Also DX     is
not equal to PX . More importantly, logistic models     PX |Y px1 |1q Betap1.37, 3.23q Betap1.73, 3.84q  1

cannot fit these distributions well and produce non- PX |Y px1 |0q Betap1.50, 4.94q Betap1.59, 4.67q     1

negligible algorithmic bias, thereby violating Assump- PX |Y px2 |1q Betap0.83, 2.83q Betap0.66, 2.50q   2

tion 3.1. The following experiments demonstrate how     PX |Y px2 |0q Betap0.84, 5.56q Betap0.69, 3.86q  2

the dynamics change when situations are not ideal.       n, r, T, q0  50, 0.05, 15, 0.473 50, 0.05, 15, 10

Credit approval dataset (Quinlan, 2017). We consider credit card applications and adopt the
data in UCI Machine Learning Repository processed by Dua & Graff (2017). The dataset includes
features of agents from two social groups i, j and their labels indicate whether the credit application is
successful. We first preprocess the dataset by normalizing and only keeping a subset of features (two
continuous X1 , X2 ) and labels, then we fit conditional distributions PXk |Y for each group using Beta
distributions (Fig. 10) and calculate prior-best-response qualification rates q0i , q0j from the dataset.
The details are summarized in Table 3. All other parameter settings are the same as the ones of
synthetic datasets in Sec. 5.
We first illustrate the dynamics of at , qt , ∆t for both groups under different r. The results are shown
in Fig. 11 and are approximately aligned with Thm. 3.3, 3.5 and 3.6: (i) acceptance rate at (red
curves) has increasing trends; (ii) qualification rate qt (blue curves) decreases starting from t “ 1
(since strategic agents only best respond from t “ 1); (iii) classifier bias ∆t (black curves) evolve
differently for different groups. Next, we show the evolutions of unfairness and ∆t in Fig. 12. Though
the dynamics are still approximately aligned with the theoretical results, the changes are not smooth.
However, this is not surprising because several assumptions are violated, and the overall trends still
stay the same.


                                                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Group i                                     Group i                                           Group j                                  Group j
    10                 unqualified           10                          unqualified        10                          unqualified         10                unqualified
                       qualified                                         qualified                                      qualified                             qualified
    8                                            8                                              8                                           8
    6                                            6                                              6                                           6
    4                                            4                                              4                                           4
    2                                            2                                              2                                           2

     0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                X1                      X2                      X1                      X2

                      Figure 10: Visualization of distribution for Credit Approval dataset.

                     1.0                                           1.0                                            1.0
                                at
                                qt
                     0.8                                           0.8                                            0.8
                                Δt


                     0.6                                           0.6                                            0.6


                     0.4                                           0.4                                            0.4

                                                                                                           at                                       at
                     0.2                                                                                                                            qt
                                                                   0.2                                     qt     0.2
                                                                                                           Δt                                       Δt
                     0.0
                                                                   0.0                                            0.0
                           0     2   4   6    8      10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8    10 12 14 16
                                             t                                             t                                            t
                    (a) Group i in Credit Approval data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
                     1.0                                           1.0                                            1.0
                                at
                                qt
                     0.8                                           0.8                                            0.8
                                Δt


                     0.6                                           0.6        at                                  0.6
                                                                              qt
                     0.4                                           0.4        Δt
                                                                                                                  0.4

                                                                                                                                                    at
                     0.2                                           0.2                                            0.2                               qt
                                                                                                                                                    Δt
                     0.0                                           0.0                                            0.0
                           0     2   4   6    8      10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8    10 12 14 16
                                             t                                             t                                            t
                    (b) Group j in Credit Approval data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)

                               Figure 11: Dynamics of at , qt , ∆t for Credit Approval dataset

            1.0                                               1.0                                                   1.0
            0.8                                               0.8                                                   0.8
            0.6                              at for i         0.6                                   at for i        0.6                          at for i
                                             at for j                                               at for j                                     at for j
            0.4                              Unfairness       0.4                                   Unfairness      0.4                          Unfairness
            0.2                                               0.2                                                   0.2
            0.0                                               0.0                                                   0.0
                 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16       0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16        0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                             t                        t                                t
            (a) Dynamics of unfairness in Credit Approval data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0
            (right)
                     t for i
                                        0.30                         0.45      t for i
            0.25                                                     0.40
                     t for j            0.25                                   t for j
            0.20                        0.20                         0.35
            0.15                        0.15                         0.30
            0.10                                                     0.25
                                        0.10
                                                             t for i 0.20
            0.05                        0.05                 t for j 0.15
            0.00                        0.00
                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16       0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16        0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                              t                        t                                t
             (b) Dynamics of ∆t in Credit Approval data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)

                    Figure 12: Dynamics of unfairness and ∆t for Credit Approval dataset


F        A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON S YNTHETIC /S EMI - SYNTHETIC DATASETS

In this section, we provide comprehensive experimental results conducted on two synthetic datasets
and one semi-synthetic dataset mentioned in Sec. 5 of the main paper. Specifically, App. F.1 gives
the details of experimental setups; App. F.2 demonstrates additional results to verify Theorem 3.3
to Theorem 3.6 under different r (i.e., ratios of human-annotated examples available at each round).


                                                                                           20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The section also gives results on how at , qt , ∆t change under a long time horizon or when there is
no systematic bias; App. F.3 further demonstrates the results under refined retraining process; App.
F.4 provides fairness dynamics under various values of r on different datasets; App. F.5 illustrates
how the results in the main paper still hold when strategic agents have noisy best responses; App.
F.6 compares the situations when agents are non-strategic with the ones when they are strategic,
demonstrating how agents’ strategic behaviors produce more extreme dynamics of at , qt , ∆t .

F.1   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS

Generally, we run all experiments on a MacBook Pro with Apple M1 Pro chips, memory of 16GB
and Python 3.9.13. All experiments are randomized with seed 42 to run n rounds. Error bars are
provided in App. H. All experiments train ft with a logistic classifier using SGD as its optimizer.
Specifically, we use SGDClassifier with logloss to fit models.
Synthetic datasets. The basic description of synthetic datasets 1 and 2 is shown in Sec. 5 and App.
E. We further provide the visualizations of their distributions in Fig. 8.
German Credit dataset. There are 2 versions of the German Credit dataset according to UCI
Machine Learning Database (Hofmann, 1994), and we are using the one where all features are
numeric. Firstly, we produce the sensitive features by ignoring the marital status while only focusing
on sex. Secondly, we use MinMaxScaler to normalize all features. The logistic model itself can
satisfy Assumption 3.2 with minimal operations: if feature i has coefficients smaller than 0, then just
negate it and the coefficients will be larger than 0 and satisfy the assumption.

F.2   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS TO V ERIFY T HM . 3.3 TO T HM . 3.6

Dynamics under different r. Although experiments in Sec. 5 and App. E already demonstrate the
validity of Thm. 3.3, Prop. 3.4 and Thm. 3.6, the ratio r of human-annotated examples is subject
to change in reality. Therefore, we first provide results for r P t0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.3u in all 3 datasets. r
only has small values since human-annotated examples are likely to be expensive to acquire. Fig. 15
shows all results under different r values. Specifically, Fig. 15a and 15b show results for synthetic
dataset 1, Fig. 15c and 15d show results for synthetic dataset 2, while Fig. 15e and 15f show results
for German Credit data. On every row, r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the left to the right. All figures
demonstrate the robustness of the theoretical results, where at always increases and qt decreases
starting from t “ 1. ∆t also has different dynamics as specified in Thm. 3.6.
Dynamics under a long time horizon to verify Prop. 3.4. Prop. 3.4 demonstrates that when r is
small enough, at will increase towards 1. Therefore, we provide results in all 3 datasets when r “ 0
to see whether at increases to be close to 1. As Fig. 13 shows, at is close to 1 after tens of rounds,
validating Prop. 3.4.
Dynamics under a different B. Moreover, individuals may incur different costs to„alter different
                                                                                              ȷ
                                                                                         3 0
features, so we also provide the dynamics of at , qt , ∆t when the cost matrix B “              in two
                                                                                         0 6
synthetic datasets. Fig. 14 shows the differences in costs of changing different features do not affect
the theoretical results.
Dynamics when all samples are human-annotated. Though this is unlikely to happen under the
Strategic Classification setting as justified in the main paper, we provide an illustration when all
training examples are human-annotated (i.e., r “ 1) when humans systematically overestimate the
qualification in both synthetic datasets. Theoretically, the difference between at and qt should be
relatively consistent, which means ∆t is only due to the systematic bias. Fig. 13d verifies this.

F.3   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON refined retraining process

In this section, we provide more experimental results demonstrating how refined retraining process
stabilizes the dynamics of at , qt , ∆t but still preserves the systematic bias. Specifically, we produce
plots similar to Fig. 15 in Fig. 16, but the only difference is that we use probabilistic samplers for
model-annotated examples. From Fig. 16, it is obvious the deviations of at from qt have the same
directions and approximately the same magnitudes as the systematic bias.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.4       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON FAIRNESS

In this section, we provide additional results on the dynamics of unfairness and classifier bias under
different r (the same settings in App. F.2). From Fig. 17a, 17c and 17e, we can see unfairness reaches
a minimum in the middle of the retraining process, suggesting the earlier stopping of retraining
brings benefits. From Fig. 17b, 17d and 17f, we can see ∆t for the disadvantaged group j reaches a
minimum in the middle of the retraining process, but generally not at the same time when unfairness
reaches a minimum.

F.5       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON N OISY B EST R ESPONSES

Following the discussion in Sec. 5, we provide dynamics of at , qt , ∆t of both groups under different
r similar to App. F.2 but when the agents have noisy knowledge. The only difference is that the
agents’ best responses are noisy in that they only know a noisy version of classification outcomes:
fpt pxq “ ft pxq ` ϵ, where ϵ is a Gaussian noise with mean 0 and standard deviation 0.1. Fig.18 shows
that Thm. 3.3 to Thm. 3.6 are still valid.

F.6       C OMPARISONS BETWEEN S TRATEGIC AND N ON - STRATEGIC S ITUATIONS

In this section, we show the absence of strategic behaviors may result in much more consistent
dynamics of at , qt , ∆t as illustrated in Fig. 19. Thereby demonstrating the importance of studying
the retraining process when strategic behaviors are present.
1.0
                                                        1.0
                                                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                                                            1.0
0.8
                                                        0.8
                                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                            0.8
0.6
                                                        0.6
                                                                                                               0.6                                                          0.6
0.4
                                                        0.4
                                                                                                               0.4                                                          0.4
                                              at                                                         at                                                            at                                                at
0.2                                           qt
                                                        0.2
                                                                                                         qt    0.2                                                     qt   0.2                                          qt
                                                                                                         Δt
                                              Δt                                                                                                                       Δt                                                 t
0.0
      0   2       4    6   8       10 12 14 16
                                                        0.0

                                                              0   2   4       6    8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                                                         0        8       16       24       32   40    48
                                                                                                                                                                            0.0 0           8       16 24 32 40 48
               t                       t                           t                        t
(a) Uniform data when r “ 0 and T is large: Group i (b) Gaussian data when r “ 0 and T is large: Group i
(left), Group j (right)                             (left), Group j (right)
1.0                                                     1.0                                                    1.0                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                             at                                                        at
                                                                                                                             qt                                                        qt
0.8                                                     0.8                                                    0.8                                                          0.8
                                                                                                                             Δt                                                        Δt



0.6                                                     0.6                                                    0.6                                                          0.6


0.4                                                     0.4                                                    0.4                                                          0.4

                                                   at                                                    at
0.2                                                qt   0.2                                              qt    0.2                                                          0.2
                                                   Δt                                                    Δt

0.0                                                     0.0                                                    0.0                                                          0.0
      0       8       16   24       32   40        48         0       8       16      24       32   40   48              0    2       4    6       8       10 12 14 16             0    2       4    6   8       10 12 14 16
                               t                                                      t                                                            t                                                     t
(c) German Credit data when r “ 0 and T is large: (d) Dynamics when all data is human-annotated (i.e,
Group i (left), Group j (right)                   r “ 1): Uniform data (left), Gaussian data (right).

Figure 13: Dynamics of at , qt , ∆t on all datasets when r “ 0 and T is large or when all examples
are annotated by humans.
                                                        1.0
1.0                                                                                                                1.0                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                        at
0.8
                                                        0.8                                                                                                                             qt
                                                                                                                   0.8                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                        Δt


0.6
                                                        0.6                               at
                                                                                                                   0.6                                                       0.6
                                                                                          qt
                                                        0.4                               Δt
0.4                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                   0.4
                                              at
                                                        0.2                                                                                                           at
0.2                                           qt                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                   0.2                                                qt
                                              Δt
                                                                                                                                                                      Δt
                                                        0.0
0.0                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                              0   2       4       6   8        10 12 14 16         0.0
      0   2       4    6   8       10 12 14 16
                                                                                                                         0        2   4        6       8   10 12 14 16             0        2   4    6       8   10 12 14 16
                           t                                                          t                                                            t                                                         t


(a) Uniform data with a different B : Group i (left),                                                              (b) Gaussian data with a different B : Group i (left),
Group j (right)                                                                                                    Group j (right)

Figure 14: Dynamics of at , qt , ∆t on synthetic datasets. Except B, all other settings are the same as
the main experiments in Sec. 5.


                                                                                                              22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.0                            1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0


0.8                            0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8


0.6                            0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6


0.4                            0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4
                          at                                          at                                            at                                            at
0.2                       qt   0.2                                    qt     0.2                                    qt     0.2                                    qt
                           t                                          Δt                                            Δt                                            Δt

0.0                            0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16

              t                                       t                                             t                                             t
               (a) Group i in Uniform data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost
1.0                            1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0
0.8                            0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8
0.6               at           0.6                        at                 0.6                        at                 0.6                        at
                  qt                                      qt                                            qt                                            qt
0.4                t           0.4                        Δt                 0.4                        Δt                 0.4                         t

0.2                            0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2
0.0                            0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
              t                                       t                                             t                                    t
              (b) Group j in Uniform data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost
1.0                            1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0



0.8                            0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8



0.6                            0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6



0.4                            0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4

                          at                                          at                                            at                                            at
0.2                       qt   0.2                                    qt     0.2                                    qt     0.2                                    qt
                           t                                          Δt                                            Δt                                            Δt

0.0                            0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16

              t                                       t                                             t                                             t
              (c) Group i in Gaussian data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost
1.0    at
                               1.0
                                         at
                                                                             1.0
                                                                                       at
                                                                                                                           1.0
                                                                                                                                     at
0.8    qt                      0.8
                                         qt
                                                                             0.8
                                                                                       qt
                                                                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                     qt
        t                                Δt                                            Δt                                            Δt


0.6                            0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6


0.4                            0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4


0.2                            0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2


0.0                            0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16

              t                                       t                                             t                                             t
              (d) Group j in Gaussian data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost
1.0                            1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0


0.8                            0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8


0.6                       at   0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6
                          qt
0.4                        t   0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4
                                                                      at                                            at                                            at
0.2                            0.2                                    qt     0.2                                    qt     0.2                                    qt
                                                                      Δt                                            Δt                                            Δt

0.0                            0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16

              t                                       t                                             t                                             t
            (e) Group i in German Credit data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost
1.0                            1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0


0.8                            0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8


0.6                       at   0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6
                          qt
0.4                        t   0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4

                                                                      at                                            at                                            at
0.2                            0.2
                                                                      qt     0.2
                                                                                                                    qt     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                  qt

0.0
                                                                      Δt                                            Δt                                            Δt
                               0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0

      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16

              t                                       t                                             t                                             t
            (f) Group j in German Credit data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost

                               Figure 15: Dynamics of at , qt , ∆t on all datasets.


                                                                             23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0
                   at                                            at                                            at
                   qt                                            qt                                            qt
         0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8
                   Δt                                            Δt                                            Δt


         0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6


         0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4


         0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2


         0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (a) refined retraining process for Group i in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0


         0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8


         0.6                        at                 0.6                        at                 0.6                        at
                                    qt                                            qt                                            qt
         0.4                        Δt
                                                       0.4                        Δt                 0.4                        Δt


         0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2


         0.0                                                                                         0.0
                                                       0.0
               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (b) refined retraining process for Group j in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0
                   at                                            at                                            at
                   qt                                            qt                                            qt
         0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8
                   Δt                                            Δt                                            Δt


         0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6


         0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4


         0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2


         0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (c) refined retraining process for Group i in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0
                                                at                                            at
                                                qt                                            qt
         0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8
                                                Δt                                            Δt


         0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6                        at
                                                                                                                                qt
         0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4                        Δt


         0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2


         0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (d) refined retraining process for Group j in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0


         0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8


         0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6


         0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4

                                    at                                            at                                            at
         0.2                        qt                 0.2                        qt                 0.2                        qt
                                    Δt                                            Δt                                            Δt

         0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (e) refined retraining process for Group i in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0


         0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8


         0.6                                    at     0.6                        at                 0.6                        at
                                                qt                                qt                                            qt
                                                Δt                                Δt                                            Δt
         0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4


         0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2


         0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (f) refined retraining process for Group j in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right).

                   Figure 16: Illustrations of refined retraining process on all 3 datasets.

                                                                              24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    1.0                               1.0                               1.0
    0.8                               0.8                               0.8
    0.6                  at for i     0.6                  at for i     0.6                  at for i
                         at for j                          at for j                          at for j
    0.4                  Unfairness   0.4                  Unfairness   0.4                  Unfairness
    0.2                               0.2                               0.2
    0.0                               0.0                               0.0
         0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                         t                                  t                                  t
            (a) Dynamics of unfairness in Uniform data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
    0.25                                                                      0.35
                                           0.25                                        t for i
                                                                              0.30
    0.20                                   0.20                                        t for j
                                                                              0.25
    0.15                                   0.15                               0.20
                                           0.10                               0.15
    0.10                                                                      0.10
                                   t for i 0.05                       t for i
    0.05                           t for j                            t for j
                                                                              0.05
                                           0.00                               0.00
          0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                          t                                  t                                  t
                 (b) Dynamics of ∆t in Uniform data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
    1.0                                    1.0                                1.0
    0.8                                    0.8                                0.8
    0.6                     at for i       0.6                 at for i       0.6                 at for i
                            at for j                           at for j                           at for j
    0.4                     Unfairness 0.4                     Unfairness 0.4                     Unfairness
    0.2                                    0.2                                0.2
    0.0                                    0.0                                0.0
         0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                         t                                  t                                  t
           (c) Dynamics of unfairness in Gaussian data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
                 t for i                   0.25     t for i                   0.25     t for i
    0.20         t for j                   0.20     t for j                            t for j
                                                                              0.20
    0.15                                   0.15                               0.15
    0.10                                   0.10                               0.10
    0.05                                   0.05                               0.05
                                           0.00
          0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                          t                                  t                                  t
                (d) Dynamics of ∆t in Gaussian data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
    1.0                                    1.0                                1.0
    0.8                                    0.8                                0.8
    0.6                     at for i       0.6                 at for i       0.6                 at for i
                            at for j                           at for j                           at for j
    0.4                     Unfairness     0.4                 Unfairness     0.4                 Unfairness
    0.2                                    0.2                                0.2
    0.0                                    0.0                                0.0
         0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                         t                                  t                                  t
        (e) Dynamics of unfairness in German Credit data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
                                           0.35                               0.35
    0.30                                   0.30
    0.25                                                                      0.30
                                           0.25                               0.25
    0.20                                   0.20                               0.20
    0.15                                   0.15                               0.15
    0.10                                   0.10                               0.10
                                   t for i                            t for i                            t for i
    0.05                           t for j 0.05                       t for j 0.05                       t for j
    0.00                                   0.00                               0.00
          0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                          t                                  t                                  t
             (f) Dynamics of ∆t in German Credit data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)

                       Figure 17: Dynamics of unfairness and ∆t of all datasets.


                                                         25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         1.0                                      1.0                                       1.0


         0.8                                      0.8                                       0.8


         0.6                                      0.6                                       0.6


         0.4                                      0.4                                       0.4
                                           at                                        at                                       at
         0.2                               qt     0.2                                qt     0.2                               qt
                                           Δt                                        Δt                                       Δt

         0.0                                      0.0                                       0.0
               0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                                t                                        t                                         t
         (a) Noisy retraining process for Group i in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                      1.0                                       1.0


         0.8                                      0.8                                       0.8


         0.6                                      0.6                                       0.6


         0.4                                      0.4                                       0.4

                                           at                                        at                                       at
         0.2                               qt     0.2                                qt     0.2                               qt
                                           Δt                                        Δt                                       Δt

         0.0                                      0.0                                       0.0
               0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                                t                                        t                                         t
         (b) Noisy retraining process for Group j in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                      1.0                                       1.0


         0.8                                      0.8                                       0.8


         0.6                                      0.6                                       0.6


         0.4                                      0.4                                       0.4

                                           at                                        at                                       at
         0.2                               qt     0.2                                qt     0.2                               qt
                                           Δt                                        Δt                                       Δt

         0.0                                      0.0                                       0.0
               0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                                t                                        t                                         t
         (c) Noisy retraining process for Group i in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                      1.0                                       1.0
                   at                                       at                                        at
                   qt                                       qt                                        qt
         0.8                                      0.8                                       0.8
                   Δt                                       Δt                                        Δt


         0.6                                      0.6                                       0.6


         0.4                                      0.4                                       0.4


         0.2                                      0.2                                       0.2


         0.0                                      0.0                                       0.0
               0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                                t                                        t                                         t
         (d) Noisy retraining process for Group j in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                      1.0                                       1.0


         0.8                                      0.8                                       0.8


         0.6                                      0.6                                       0.6


         0.4                                      0.4                                       0.4
                                           at                                        at                                       at
         0.2                               qt     0.2                                qt     0.2                               qt
                                           Δt                                        Δt                                       Δt

         0.0                                      0.0                                       0.0
               0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                                t                                        t                                         t
         (e) Noisy retraining process for Group i in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                      1.0                                       1.0


         0.8                                      0.8                                       0.8


         0.6                               at     0.6                                       0.6
                                           qt
         0.4                               Δt     0.4                                       0.4

                                                                                     at                                       at
         0.2                                      0.2                                       0.2
                                                                                     qt                                       qt
                                                                                     Δt                                       Δt
         0.0                                      0.0                                       0.0

               0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                                t                                        t                                         t
         (f) Noisy retraining process for Group j in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)

                   Figure 18: Illustrations of noisy retraining process on all 3 datasets.

                                                                         26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         1.0                                          1.0                               at
                                                                                               1.0                              at
         0.8                                          0.8                               qt     0.8                              qt
                                                                                         t                                       t

         0.6                                          0.6                                      0.6
         0.4                                          0.4                                      0.4
                                   at
         0.2                       qt                 0.2                                      0.2
                                   Δt

         0.0                                          0.0                                      0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                                        10 12 14 16                 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                               t                  t                          t
         (a) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group i in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0
                                 a
                                    1.0                     at
                                                                1.0                      at
                                                t

         0.8
                                 q
                                    0.8         t           qt  0.8                      qt
                                               Δt            t                            t

         0.6                        0.6                         0.6
         0.4                        0.4                         0.4
         0.2                        0.2                         0.2
         0.0                        0.0                         0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                                        10 12 14 16                 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                       t                          t                          t
         (b) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group j in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                          1.0                                      1.0
                                               at                                       at                                      at
                                               qt                                       qt                                      qt
         0.8                                          0.8                                      0.8
                                               Δt                                       Δt                                      Δt


         0.6                                          0.6                                      0.6


         0.4                                          0.4                                      0.4


         0.2                                          0.2                                      0.2


         0.0                                          0.0                                      0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                               t                                            t                                        t
         (c) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group i in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                          1.0                                      1.0
                                               at                                       at                                      at
                                               qt                                       qt                                      qt
         0.8                                          0.8                                      0.8
                                               Δt                                       Δt                                      Δt


         0.6                                          0.6                                      0.6


         0.4                                          0.4                                      0.4


         0.2                                          0.2                                      0.2


         0.0                                          0.0                                      0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                               t                                            t                                        t
         (d) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group j in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                          1.0                                      1.0


         0.8                                          0.8                                      0.8


         0.6                                   at     0.6                               at     0.6                              at
                                               qt                                       qt                                      qt
                                               Δt                                       Δt                                      Δt
         0.4                                          0.4                                      0.4


         0.2                                          0.2                                      0.2


         0.0                                          0.0                                      0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                               t                                            t                                        t
         (e) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group i in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left),
         0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                          1.0                                      1.0
                                               at                                       at                                      at
                                               qt                                       qt                                      qt
         0.8                                          0.8                                      0.8
                                               Δt                                       Δt                                      Δt


         0.6                                          0.6                                      0.6


         0.4                                          0.4                                      0.4


         0.2                                          0.2                                      0.2


         0.0                                          0.0                                      0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                               t                                            t                                        t
         (f) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group j in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left),
         0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)

          Figure 19: Illustrations of nonstrategic retraining process on all 3 datasets.

                                                                            27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     D ERIVATIONS AND P ROOFS
G.1     D ERIVATION OF EQUATION 3

To derive q t :“ ESt rQpSt qs, we first refer to equation 2 to get |St | “ pt ` 1qN ` tK. Then, by
the law of total probability, the expected qualification rate of St equals to the weighted sum of the
expected qualification rate of St´1 , So,t´1 and the expectation of ft´1 pxq over Sm,t´1 as follows:


    tN `pt´1qK                         N                         t´1         K
    pt`1qN `tK ESt´1 rQpSt´1 qs ` pt`1qN `tK ` ESt´1 rApft´1 , P     s ` pt`1qN `tK ESo,t´1 rQpSo,t´1 qs


The second expectation is exactly the definition of at´1 . Moreover, note that QpSo,t´1 q “ QpSo,0 q “
QpS0 q “ q 0 for any t ą 0, the third expectation is exactly q 0 , so the above equation is exactly
equation 3.

G.2     D ERIVATION OF FACTORS INFLUENCING at , qt

As stated in Sec.2, we can get the factors influencing the evolution of at , qt by finding all sources
            t                                      t
affecting PXY  and the expectation of ft pxq over PX .
We first work out the sources influencing ft and the expectation of ft pxq over P t pXq:
 • q t : since ft is trained with St , q t is a key factor influencing the classifier.
 • δpDt , Fq : note that as retaining goes on, |St | is large enough. Thus, if ft fits St well with a low
                                                 t
   error, the expectation of ft pxq over DX         should be close to q t , and all the difference is due to
   the algorithmic bias. This claim is supported by Chapter 5.2 of Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David
   (2014), where the error of an ERM predictor is decomposed into the approximation error and
   the estimation error. When the sample size is large and |F | is finite, the estimation error will be
   arbitrarily small, leaving only the approximation error. The approximation error measures how
   well F can approximate Dt , which is exactly the algorithmic bias δpDt , Fq.
     t                                                                            t
 • δBR    : we now know factors influencing the expectation of ft pxq over DX        , then the only left factor
                                                               t       t
   is the ones accounting for the difference between DX and PX . Note that only the best responses
                                                                                        t
   of agents can change the marginal distribution PX . We then denote it as δBR            .
                               t
Then, with PXY known, PXY          is only influenced by ft´1 (i.e., the agents’ best responses to the
classifier at t ´ 1). ft´1 is also dependent on the above factors. So we get all factors.

G.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.3

Let us begin by proving the following lemma:
Lemma G.1. Assume t ě 2 and the following conditions hold: (i) q t ą q t´1 ě q t´2 ; (ii) @x P X,
DYt |X p1|xq ě DYt´1  |X p1|xq; (iii) @x, ft´1 pxq ě ft´2 pxq. Let ft´1 “ ESt´1 „DXY rft´1 s, ft “
                                          s          s             s              t´1
                                                                                              s
ESt „DXYt  rft s, we have the following results:
1. @x, fst pxq ě fst´1 pxq.
2. There exists a non-zero measure subset of x values that satisfies the strict inequality.

Proof. We first prove (i). Note that we ignore the algorithm bias in Assumption 3.1, so ft , ft´1
are expected to model the conditional distributions DYt |X , DYt´1
                                                                 |X well. Therefore, ft´1 (resp. ft )
                                                                                      s           s
               t´1                 t
outputs 1 if DY |X p1|xq (resp. DY |X p1|xq) is larger than some threshold θ. Then, according to the
above condition (ii), @θ, if DYt´1                t            t´1
                                 |X p1|xq ą θ, DY |X p1|xq ě DY |X p1|xq ą θ. This demonstrates that
fst´1 pxq “ 1 implies fst pxq “ 1 and (i) is proved.
Next, according to equation 2, if q t ą q t´1 , this means Ey„DYt rys ą Ey„DYt rys. Since
DYt “ DX  t
            ¨ DYt |X , either there exists at least one non-zero measure subset of x values satisfying
DYt |X p1|xq ą DYt´1               t
                    |X p1|xq or DX is more "skewed" to the larger values of x (because of monotonic
likelihood assumption 3.2). For the second possibility, note that the only possible cause for the


                                                      28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              t
feature distribution in the training dataset DX to gain such a skewness is agents’ strategic behaviors.
However, since ft´1 pxq ě ft´2 pxq always holds, fst´1 sets a lower admission standard where some
                  s           s
x values that are able to best respond to fst´2 and improve will not best respond to fst´1 , thereby
impossible to result in a feature distribution shift to larger x values while keeping the conditional
distribution unchanged. Thus, only the first possibility holds, and the lemma is proved.

Then we prove Theorem 3.3 using mathematical induction to prove a stronger version:
Lemma G.2. When t ą 1, q t ą q t´1 , DYt |X p1|xq ě DYt´1
                                                        |X p1|xq, ft pxq ě ft´1 pxq, and finally
                                                                  s         s
at ą at´1 .

Proof. t starts from 2, but we need to prove the following claim: q 1 is "almost equal" to q 0 , so are
DY1 |X and DY0 |X .
Firstly, according to the law of total probability, we can derive q 1 as follows:


                               N             N             K
                      q1 “          ¨ q0 `        ¨ a0 `       ¨q                                      (5)
                             2N ` K        2N ` K        2N ` K 0
                                                                                       o
The first and the third element are already multiples of q 0 . Also, we know DX             “ PX . Then,
           o
since δpD , F is negligible and agents at t “ 0 have no chance to best respond, we have a0 “
EX„PX rDYo |X p1|xqs “ q 0 . Thus, a0 is also equal to q 0 , and the claim is proved. Still, as δpDo , F is
negligible, fs1 is the same as fs0 .
Next, we can prove the lemma by induction:
1. Base case: Similar to Eq.5, we are able to derive q 2 as follows:

                             2N ` K       N              K
                      q2 “          ¨q `       ¨ a1 `        ¨q                                        (6)
                             3N ` 2K 1 3N ` 2K        3N ` 2K 0
   Based on the claim above, we can just regard q 0 as q 1 . Then we may only focus on the second
   term. Since q 1 and q 0 are "almost equal" and both distributions should satisfy the monotonic
   likelihood assumption 3.2, we can conclude fs0 , fs1 are "almost identical". Then the best responses
   of agents to fs0 will also make them be classified as 1 by fs1 , and this will directly ensure the
   second term to be Apf1 , P 1 q ą Apf 1 , P q “ Apf 0 , P q. The "larger than" relationship is because
   strategic best responses at the first round will only enable more agents to be admitted. Thus,
   the first and the third term stay the same as q 1 while the second is larger, so we can claim
                                                       2          1
   q 2 ą q 1 . Moreover, the difference between DXY         and DXY    are purely produced by the best
   responses at t “ 1, which will never decrease the conditional probability of y “ 1. Thus,
   DY2 |X p1|xq ě DY1 |X p1|xq. Together with fs1 “ fs0 , all three conditions in Lemma G.1 are
   satisfied. we thereby claim that for every x admitted by fs1 , fs2 pxq ě fs1 pxq and there exists some
   x satisfying the strict inequality. Note that P 1 is expected to be the same as P 2 since f1 “ f0 .
   Thus, Apf2 , P 2 q ą Apf1 , P 2 q “ Apf1 , P 1 q, which is a2 ą a1 . The base case is proved.
2. Induction step: To simplify the notion, we can write:

                  tN ` pt ´ 1qK                     N                 K
           qt   “                   ¨q    `           ¨ at´1 `              ¨q
                  pt ` 1qN ` tK t´1 pt ` 1qN ` tK              pt ` 1qN ` tK 0
                “ At ¨ q t´1 ` Bt ¨ at´1 ` Ct ¨ q 0

   Note that q t´1 can also be decomposed into three terms:

                    pt ´ 1qN ` pt ´ 2qK                     N                    K
      q t´1     “                          ¨ q t´2 `               ¨ at´2 `              ¨q
                       tN ` pt ´ 1qK                 tN ` pt ´ 1qK          tN ` pt ´ 1qK 0
                “   At´1 ¨ q t´1 ` Bt´1 ¨ at´2 ` Ct´1 ¨ q 0


                                                    29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Since the expectation in the second term is just at´1 , and we already know at´1 ą at´2 , we
   know Bt ¨ at´1 ` Ct ¨ q 0 ą Bt ¨ at´2 ` Ct ¨ q 0 . Note that BBt´1  t
                                                                           “ CCt´1
                                                                                t
                                                                                   , we let the ratio be
   m ă 1. Then since Bt´1 ¨ at´2 ` Ct´1 ¨ q 0 ą pBt´1 ` Ct´1 q ¨ q t´1 due to q t´1 ą q t´2 ,
   we can derive Bt ¨ at´1 ` Ct ¨ q 0 ą m ¨ pBt´1 ` Ct´1 q ¨ q t´1 “ pBt ` Ct q ¨ q t´1 . Then
   q t ą pAt ` Bt ` Ct q ¨ q t´1 “ q t´1 . The first claim is proved. As at´1 ą at´2 and Do stays the
   same, any agent will not have a less probability of being qualified in St compared to in St´1 ,
   demonstrating DYt |X p1|xq ě DYt´1 |X p1|xq still holds. And similarly, we can apply Lemma G.1 to
   get ft pxq ě ft´1 pxq and at ą at´1 .
        s       s

   Now we already prove Lemma G.2, which already includes Theorem 3.3. We also want to note
   here, the proof of Theorem 3.3 does not rely on the initial q 0 which means it holds regardless of
   the systematic bias.

G.4    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3.4

We prove the proposition by considering two extreme cases:
(i) When K N Ñ 0, this means we have no decision-maker annotated sample coming in each round and
all new samples come from the deployed model. We prove limtÑ8 at “ 1 by contradiction: firstly,
by Monotone Convergence Theorem, the limit must exist because at ą at´1 and at ă 1. Let us
assume the limit is a ă 1. Then, since K “ 0, when t Ñ 8, q t will also approach a, this means the
                 t
strategic shift δBR approaches 0. However, this shift only approaches 0 when all agents are accepted
by ft´1 because otherwise there will be a proportion of agents benefiting from best responding to
ft´1 and result in a larger q t`1 Thus, the classifier at t ` 1 will admit more people and the stability is
broken. This means the only possibility is limtÑ8 at´1 “ 1 and produces a conflict.
(ii) When K                                                            o
          N Ñ 8, the problem shrinks to retrain the classifier to fit DXY , this will make at “ a0 .

Thus, there exists some threshold λ, when K
                                          N ă λ, limtÑ8 at “ 1. In practice, the λ could be very
small.

G.5    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.5
                t
Firstly, since PXY  differs from PXY only because agents’ best respond to ft , we can write qt “ q0 `rt
where rt is the difference of qualification rate caused by agents’ best responses to ft . Qualitatively, rt
is completely determined by two sources: (i) the proportion of agents who move their features when
they best respond; (ii) the increase in the probability of being qualified for each agent. Specifically,
each agent that moves its features increases its probability of being qualified from its initial point to a
point at the decision boundary of ft . For an agent with initial feature x and improved feature x˚ , its
improvement can be expressed as U pxq “ PY |X p1|x˚ q ´ PY |X p1|xq.
Next, denote the Euclidean distance between x and the decision boundary of ft as dx,t . Noticing
that the agents who will choose to move their features to best respond should have distances within
a threshold C to the decision boundary no matter where the boundary is (Lemma 2 in Levanon &
Rosenfeld (2022)), we can express the total improvement at t as follows:

                                            ż
                                   Iptq “              PX pxq ¨ U pxq dx                               (7)
                                             dx,t ďC


According to the proof of Theorem 3.3, all agents with feature vector x who are admitted by f0 will
be admitted by ft (t ą 0), making all agents who possibly improve must belong to J . Since FX and
PY |X p1|xq are both convex and non-decreasing in J , PX pxq, U pxq are non-decreasing in J . Then
note that ft always lies below ft´1 , therefore, for each agent who improves at t having feature vector
xi,t , we can find an agent at t ´ 1 with corresponding xi,t´1 such that both PX pxi,t´1 q ą PX pxi,t q
and U pxi,t´1 q ą U pxi,t q. This will ensure Iptq ă Ipt ´ 1q. Thus, qt decreases starting from 1.
Generally, equation 7 reveals that if PX pxq ¨ U pxq is convex in J ,qt decreases. This illustrates Prop.
3.5 gives a sufficient condition which is much easier to verify.


                                                       30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.6    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.6

 • µpDo , P q ě 0: according to Def. 2.1, a0 “ EPX rDYo |X p1|xqs ą EPX rPY |X p1|xqs “ QpP q “
   q0 . Now that a0 ´ q0 ě 0. Based on Thm. 3.3 and Thm. 3.5, at is increasing, while q0 is
   decreasing, so ∆t is always increasing.
 • µpDo , P q ă 0: similarly we can derive a0 ´ q0 ă 0, so ∆0 “ |a0 ´ q0 | “ q0 ´ a0 . So while
   a0 ´ q0 is still increasing, ∆t will first decrease. Moreover, according to Prop. 3.4, if K
                                                                                             N is small
   enough, ∆t will eventually exceed 0 and become larger again. Thus, ∆t either decreases or first
   decreases and then increases.

G.7    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1

Assume the acceptance rate of group i and group j at time t are ait , ajt , and the unfairness measured
by DP is just |ait ´ ajt | at time t. Since the conditions in Prop. 3.4 and Thm. 3.5 are satisfied for both
groups, ait , ajt will both approach 1 if applying the original retraining process.
At first, ait ă ajt . If the decision-maker applies refined retraining process on group i, ait will be
relatively consistent since the first round of training. But ajt keeps increasing. So after some rounds
of training, ait will be approximately equal to ajt . However, if the decision maker keeps retraining, ait
will be larger than ajt and approach 1, resulting in the unfairness first decreasing and then increasing.
Though this implicitly assumes the changes are continuous, the experiments in Sec. 5 verify that the
discrete situations indeed display the same nature.

G.8    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION D.6
                                                                                             o
Firstly, S0 “ So,0 and S1 “ S0 Y So,1 Y Sm,0 . Obviously, the first two sets are drawn from DXY .
                                                                            o         o
Consider Sm,0 , since it is now produced by labeling features from PX “ DX with DY |X , Sm,0 is
                   o
also drawn from DXY    . Thus, DY1 |X “ DYo |X .
Then we prove the cases when t ą 1 using mathematical induction as follows:
                                                                                                  o
1. Base case: We know S2 “ S1 Y So,2 Y Sm,1 . The first two sets on rhs are drawn from DXY            .
                                                         1       o
   The labeing in the third set is produced by Φ1 pxq “ DY |X “ DY |X . Thus, the base case is proved.
2. Induction step: St “ St´1 Y So,t Y Sm,t´1 . Similarly, we only need to consider the third set. But
   Note that Φt pxq “ DYt´1     o
                          |X “ DY |X , the induction step is easily completed.


G.9    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION D.2

At round t, we know Ait
                     θi
                        ą Ajt
                           θj
                              . To reach demographic parity, the acceptance rates need to be the
                            t       t

same, so at least one of the following situations must happen: (i) θrti ą θti and θrtj ą θtj ; (ii) θrti ă θti
and θrtj ă θtj ; (iii) θrti ă θti and θrtj ă θtj . Next we prove that (i) and (ii) cannot be true by contradiction.
                                                    j                       j
Suppose (i) holds, then we can find θt ă θtj such that ℓpθt , Stj q P ℓpθtj , Stj q, ℓpθrtj , Stj q and
                                                                                       `                    ˘
                                                       j
Ajtj P Ajt
        `              ˘
           θtj
               , Ait
                   θti
                         . We can indeed find this θt because ℓ, A are continuous w.r.t. θ. Now noticing that
  θt
                                                                              i
      “ Ajt            jt        jt        jt                                     ` i i˘
Ait
  θri     rj ą Aθ j but A j ă Aθ j , we will know we can find θ t P θt , θt to satisfy demographic
                                                                                      r
   t      θt        t            θt       t
                              j
parity together with θt . Since PY |X p1|xq satisfies monotonic likelihood and θti is the optimal point,
      i                                            i j
ℓpθt , Sti q ă ℓpθrti , Sti q must hold. Thus, pθt , θt q satisfy demographic parity and have a lower loss than
pθrti , θrtj q. Moreover, the pair satisfies (iii), which produces a conflict.
Similarly, we can prove (ii) cannot hold by contradiction, thereby proving (iii) must hold.


                                                       31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H          A LL PLOTS WITH ERROR BARS


                                                   at                                                                             1.0
1.0                                                                                     1.0
                                         1.0       qt
                                                                                                                                  0.8
                                                   Δt
0.8                                      0.8                                            0.8
                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                         0.6
0.6                                                                                     0.6
                                         0.4                                                                                      0.4

0.4                                      0.2                                            0.4
                                  at                                                                                              0.2
                                         0.0                                                                               at                                            at
0.2                               qt                                                    0.2                                qt     0.0                                    qt
                                  Δt
                                                                                                                           Δt                                            Δt
0.0                                                                                     0.0
      0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2    4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                                                                                               0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                       t                                         t                                              t                                       t


(a) Uniform data with a different B : Group i (left),                                   (b) Gaussian data with a different B : Group i (left),
Group j (right)                                                                         Group j (right)

                                                        Figure 20: Error bar version of Fig. 14.

Although all our theoretical results are expressed in terms of expectation, we provide error bars for all
plots in the main paper, App. E and F if randomness is applicable. All following figures demonstrate
expectations as well as error bars (˘ 1 standard deviation). Overall, the experiments have reasonable
standard errors. However, experiments in the Credit Approval dataset Quinlan (2017) (Fig. 33)
incur larger standard errors, which is not surprising because the dataset violates several assumptions.
Finally, note that we conduct 50-100 randomized trials for every experiment and we should expect
much lower standard errors if the numbers of trials become large.


                   0.8                                                                    1.0
                                                                                          0.8
                   0.6                         at for i                                   0.6                                     at for i
                   0.4                         at for j                                   0.4                                     at for j
                                               Unfairness                                                                         Unfairness
                   0.2                                                                    0.2
                   0.0                                                                    0.0
                                                                                          0.2
                            0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                                                    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                                    t                                                                        t
                                                        Figure 21: Error bar version of Fig. 4

                                         1.0
1.0

                                         0.8
                                                                                         1.5                                      1.0                          t for i
0.8
                                                                                         1.0                                                                   t for j
                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                  0.5
0.6
                                         0.4
                                                                                         0.5
0.4
                                                                                         0.0          at for i           0.0
                                         0.2
                                   at                                        at
0.2
                                   qt                                        qt          0.5          at for j           0.5
                                   Δt
                                         0.0
                                                                             Δt
                                                                                         1.0          Unfairness
0.0
                                                                                                                         1.0
      0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2    4   6   8   10 12 14 16                   0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16     0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                       t                                         t                                              t                    t
          (a) at , qt , ∆t for group i (left) and j (right)                                   (b) unfairness (left) and classifier bias ∆t (right)

                                                        Figure 22: Error bar version of Fig. 5
1.0
                                         1.0
                                                                                         2.0                                      1.5
                                         0.8                                             1.5                                                                   t for i
0.8                                                                                                                               1.0                          t for j
                                         0.6
                                                                                         1.0
0.6
                                                                                         0.5                                      0.5
                                                                                         0.0
                                         0.4
0.4
                                                                                                      at for i                    0.0
0.2
                                   at
                                   qt
                                         0.2
                                                                             at
                                                                             qt
                                                                                         0.5          at for j                    0.5
                                   Δt                                        Δt          1.0          Unfairness
                                                                                                                                  1.0
                                         0.0
0.0
      0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2    4   6   8   10 12 14 16                   0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                       t                                         t                                              t                               t
          (a) at , qt , ∆t for group i (left) and j (right)                                   (b) unfairness (left) and classifier bias ∆t (right)

                                                        Figure 23: Error bar version of Fig. 6

                                                                                   32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            at
                                                                                                                                            1.5                                                                                                   t for i
1.0
                                                              1.0           qt
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.0
0.8                                                           0.8           Δt
                                                                                                                                            1.0                                                                                                   t for j
0.6
                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                                            0.5                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                                              0.4

0.4                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                            0.0          at for i
0.2
                                                    at
                                                    qt        0.0                                                                           0.5          at for j                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                            1.0          Unfairness
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.0
                                                    Δt

0.0
      0    2       4    6   8       10 12 14 16                         0    2       4       6    8        10 12 14 16                                0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16                                            0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                            t                                                                     t                                                                t                                                           t
          (a) at , qt , ∆t for group i (left) and j (right)                                                                                     (b) unfairness (left) and classifier bias ∆t (right)

                                                                                 Figure 24: Error bar version of Fig. 9
                                                              1.0                                                                                                                                          1.0
1.0                                                                                                                                       1.0

                                                              0.8                                                                                                                                          0.8
0.8                                                                                                                                       0.8

                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
0.6                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.4
0.4                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                    at        0.2                                                      at                                                                            at    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       at
0.2                                                 qt                                                                 qt                                                                            qt                                                qt
                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                    Δt
                                                              0.0                                                      Δt                                                                            Δt                                                Δt
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.0
0.0
                                                                                                                                          0.0
      0    2       4    6   8       10 12 14 16                         0    2       4       6    8        10 12 14 16                            0        2        4    6        8   10 12 14 16                  0     2       4    6   8   10 12 14 16
                            t                                                                     t                                                                           t                                                           t
(a) Gaussian: at , qt , ∆t for group i (left) and j (right)                                                                               (b) German: at , qt , ∆t for group i (left) and j (right)

                                                                                 Figure 25: Error bar version of Fig. 7
1.0                                                           1.0
                                                                                                                                          1.0                                                              1.0
0.8
                                                              0.8                                                                         0.8                                                              0.8
                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                                          0.6                                                              0.6
0.6
                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.4
0.4                                                           0.2
                                                     at                                                                     at                                                                        at   0.2                                              at
0.2                                                  qt       0.0                                                           qt            0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qt                                                    qt
                                                     Δt                                                                     Δt
                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Δt   0.0                                               t
0.0
      0    2       4    6       8   10 12 14 16                         0    2    4      6       8 10 12 14 16 18 20                            0          8            16    24       32       40    48           0         8       16 24 32 40 48
               t                       t                           t                        t
(a) Uniform data when r “ 0 and T is large: Group i (b) Gaussian data when r “ 0 and T is large: Group i
(left), Group j (right)                             (left), Group j (right)
1.0                                                           1.0                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                          1.0         at                                                                at
                                                                                                                                                      qt                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qt
0.8                                                           0.8                                                                         0.8         Δt                                                                Δt


                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
0.6                                                           0.6                                                                         0.6


                                                                                                                                          0.4                                                              0.4
0.4                                                           0.4

                                                         at                                                                 at            0.2                                                              0.2
0.2                                                      qt   0.2                                                           qt
                                                         Δt                                                                 Δt            0.0                                                              0.0
0.0                                                           0.0
      0        8       16   24       32       40         48             0        8       16           24     32   40        48                  0      2            4    6    8       10 12 14 16                  0     2       4    6   8   10 12 14 16
                                t                                                                     t                                                                       t                                                           t
(c) German Credit data when r “ 0 and T is large: (d) Dynamics when all data is human-annotated (i.e,
Group i (left), Group j (right)                   r “ 1) on synthetic datasets.

                                                                                 Figure 26: Error bar version of Fig. 13

                                               at
                                    1.0        qt                                                      1.0                                                              1.0
                                               Δt
                                    0.8                                                                0.8                                                              0.8
                                    0.6
                                                                                                       0.6                                                              0.6
                                    0.4

                                    0.2                                                                0.4                                                              0.4

                                    0.0                                                                                                                        at                                                       at
                                                                                                       0.2                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                                                               qt                                                       qt
                                                                                                                                                               Δt                                                       Δt
                                                                                                       0.0                                                              0.0

                                          0     2         4   6     8       10 12 14 16                      0    2     4        6    8    10 12 14 16                        0       2     4    6    8    10 12 14 16
                                                                    t                                                                t                                                               t
                                    (a) Group i in Credit Approval data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
                                               at                                                                                                                       1.0
                                    1.0        qt                                                      1.0
                                               Δt                                                                                                                       0.8
                                    0.8                                                                0.8

                                    0.6                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                                    0.4                                                                0.4

                                    0.2                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                       0.2
                                    0.0                                                                                                                        at                                                       at
                                                                                                       0.0                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                                                               qt                                                       qt
                                                                                                                                                               Δt                                                       Δt
                                                                                                                                                                        0.0

                                          0     2         4   6     8       10 12 14 16                      0    2     4        6    8    10 12 14 16                        0       2     4    6    8    10 12 14 16
                                                                    t                                                                t                                                               t
                                    (b) Group j in Credit Approval data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)

                                                                                 Figure 27: Error bar version of Fig. 11


                                                                                                                                     33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.0                            1.0                                      1.0                                      1.0


0.8                            0.8                                      0.8                                      0.8


0.6                            0.6                                      0.6                                      0.6


0.4                            0.4                                      0.4                                      0.4
                          at                                     at                                       at                                       at
0.2                       qt   0.2                               qt     0.2                               qt     0.2                               qt
                           t                                     Δt                                       Δt                                       Δt

0.0                            0.0                                      0.0                                      0.0
      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16

              t                                       t                                        t                                        t
               (a) Group i in Uniform data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost
                                         at                                       at
1.0                            1.0       qt                             1.0       qt                             1.0
0.8                            0.8
                                         Δt
                                                                        0.8       Δt                             0.8
0.6                            0.6                                      0.6                                      0.6
0.4                            0.4                                      0.4                                      0.4
0.2                            0.2                                      0.2                                      0.2
0.0                       at
                          qt   0.0                                      0.0                                      0.0
                                                                                                                                                   at
                                                                                                                                                   qt
                           t                                                                                                                        t

      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
              t                                       t                                        t                               t
              (b) Group j in Uniform data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost
1.0                            1.0                                      1.0                                      1.0


0.8                            0.8                                      0.8                                      0.8


0.6                            0.6                                      0.6                                      0.6


0.4                            0.4                                      0.4                                      0.4

                          at                                     at                                       at                                       at
0.2                       qt   0.2
                                                                 qt     0.2
                                                                                                          qt     0.2                               qt
                           t                                     Δt                                       Δt                                       Δt

0.0
                               0.0                                      0.0                                      0.0

      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16

              t                                       t                                        t                                        t
              (c) Group i in Gaussian data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost
1.0    at
                               1.0                                      1.0                                      1.0       at
       qt
0.8     t
                               0.8                                      0.8                                      0.8
                                                                                                                           qt
                                                                                                                           Δt

0.6                            0.6                                      0.6                                      0.6

0.4                            0.4                                      0.4                                      0.4

0.2                            0.2                                      0.2                                      0.2
                                                                 at                                       at
0.0                            0.0                               qt     0.0
                                                                                                          qt     0.0
                                                                 Δt                                       Δt



      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16

              t                                       t                                        t                                        t
              (d) Group j in Gaussian data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost
1.0                            1.0                                      1.0                                      1.0

0.8                            0.8                                      0.8                                      0.8


0.6                       at   0.6                                      0.6                                      0.6
                          qt
0.4                        t   0.4                                      0.4                                      0.4
                                                                 at                                       at                                       at
0.2                            0.2                               qt     0.2                               qt     0.2                               qt
                                                                 Δt                                       Δt                                       Δt

0.0                            0.0                                      0.0                                      0.0
      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16

              t                                       t                                        t                                        t
            (e) Group i in German Credit data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost
1.0                            1.0                                      1.0                                      1.0


0.8                            0.8                                      0.8                                      0.8


0.6                       at   0.6                                      0.6                                      0.6

                          qt
0.4                        t
                               0.4                                      0.4                                      0.4


0.2                            0.2                               at
                                                                 qt
                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                          at
                                                                                                          qt
                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                   at
                                                                                                                                                   qt

0.0                            0.0                               Δt
                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                          Δt
                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                   Δt



      0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16

              t                                       t                                        t                                        t
            (f) Group j in German Credit data : r “ 0.3, 0.1, 0.05, 0 from the leftmost to the rightmost

                                         Figure 28: Error bar version of Fig. 15.


                                                                        34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         1.0       at                                  1.0       at                                  1.0       at
                   qt                                            qt                                            qt
         0.8       Δt                                  0.8       Δt                                  0.8       Δt



         0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6


         0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4


         0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2


         0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0

               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (a) refined retraining process for Group i in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0

         0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8

         0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6
                                    at                                                        at                                            at
         0.4                        qt                 0.4                                    qt     0.4                                    qt
                                    Δt                                                        Δt                                            Δt
         0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2

         0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0


               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (b) refined retraining process for Group j in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0
                   at                                            at                                            at
         0.8
                   qt                                  0.8
                                                                 qt                                  0.8
                                                                                                               qt
                   Δt                                            Δt                                            Δt


         0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6


         0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4


         0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2


         0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0

               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (c) refined retraining process for Group i in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                           1.0
                                                                                                     1.0

         0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8

         0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6
                                                at                                at                                                        at
         0.4                                    qt     0.4                        qt                 0.4                                    qt
                                                Δt                                Δt                                                        Δt
                                                                                                     0.2
         0.2                                           0.2
                                                                                                     0.0
         0.0                                           0.0



               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (d) refined retraining process for Group j in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0


         0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8


         0.6                                           0.6                                           0.6


         0.4                                           0.4                                           0.4

                                    at                                            at                                            at
         0.2                        qt                 0.2                        qt                 0.2                        qt
                                    Δt                                            Δt                                            Δt

         0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0
               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (e) refined retraining process for Group i in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                           1.0                                           1.0


         0.8                                           0.8                                           0.8


         0.6                                    at     0.6                                    at     0.6                                    at
                                                qt                                            qt                                            qt
         0.4                                    Δt     0.4                                    Δt     0.4                                    Δt


         0.2                                           0.2                                           0.2


         0.0                                           0.0                                           0.0

               0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0    2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                                t                                             t                                             t
         (f) refined retraining process for Group j in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right).

                                              Figure 29: Error bar version of Fig. 16

                                                                              35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           1.2                             1.2
     1.00                                  1.0                             1.0
     0.75                                  0.8                             0.8
                          at for i         0.6             at for i        0.6        at for i
     0.50                 at for j         0.4             at for j        0.4        at for j
     0.25                 Unfairness       0.2             Unfairness      0.2        Unfairness
     0.00                                  0.0                             0.0
     0.25                                  0.2                             0.2
            0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16        0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                     t                             t                               t
            (a) Dynamics of unfairness in Uniform data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
     0.6
                              t for i                           t for i                    t for i
     0.4                      t for j      0.4                  t for j
                                                                           0.4             t for j

     0.2                                   0.2                             0.2
     0.0                                   0.0                             0.0
     0.2                                   0.2                             0.2
           0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16           0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                          t                               t                               t
                (b) Dynamics of ∆t in Uniform data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
      1.0                                1.0                             1.0
      0.8                                0.8                             0.8
      0.6                   at for i     0.6                at for i     0.6                at for i
      0.4                   at for j     0.4                at for j     0.4                at for j
      0.2                   Unfairness   0.2                Unfairness   0.2                Unfairness
      0.0                                0.0                             0.0
      0.2                                0.2                             0.2
           0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16           0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                          t                               t                               t
            (c) Dynamics of unfairness in Gaussian data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
                                         0.4                             0.4
      0.3        t for i                         t for i                         t for i
                 t for j                 0.3     t for j                 0.3     t for j
      0.2                                0.2                             0.2
      0.1                                0.1                             0.1
      0.0                                0.0                             0.0
      0.1                                0.1                             0.1
           0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16           0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                          t                               t                               t
                (d) Dynamics of ∆t in Gaussian data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
                                                                       1.0
    0.8                                0.8                             0.8
    0.6                     at for i   0.6                  at for i   0.6                  at for i
    0.4                     at for j   0.4                  at for j                        at for j
                            Unfairness                      Unfairness 0.4                  Unfairness
    0.2                                0.2                             0.2
    0.0                                0.0                             0.0
          0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16           0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                         t                               t                               t
        (e) Dynamics of unfairness in German Credit data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
    0.3                                   0.3                             0.3
    0.2                                   0.2                             0.2
    0.1                                   0.1                             0.1
                              t for i                          t for i                    t for i
    0.0                       t for j     0.0                  t for j    0.0             t for j
           0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16       0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16           0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                     t                            t                               t
             (f) Dynamics of ∆t in German Credit data : r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)

                                        Figure 30: Error bar version of Fig. 17


                                                          36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         1.0                                     1.0                                      1.0


         0.8                                     0.8                                      0.8


         0.6                                     0.6                                      0.6


         0.4                                     0.4                                      0.4
                                          at                                       at                                      at
         0.2                              qt     0.2                               qt     0.2                              qt
                                          Δt                                       Δt                                      Δt

         0.0                                     0.0                                      0.0
               0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                               t                                       t                                        t
         (a) Noisy retraining process for Group i in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                     1.0                                      1.0

         0.8                                     0.8                                      0.8

         0.6                                     0.6                                      0.6

         0.4                                     0.4                                      0.4

         0.2                              at     0.2                               at     0.2                              at
                                          qt                                       qt                                      qt
         0.0                                     0.0                                      0.0
                                          Δt                                       Δt                                      Δt



               0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                               t                                       t                                        t
         (b) Noisy retraining process for Group j in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                     1.0                                      1.0


         0.8                                     0.8                                      0.8


         0.6                                     0.6                                      0.6


         0.4                                     0.4                                      0.4

                                          at                                       at                                      at
         0.2                              qt     0.2                               qt     0.2                              qt
                                          Δt                                       Δt                                      Δt
         0.0                                     0.0                                      0.0

               0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                               t                                       t                                        t
         (c) Noisy retraining process for Group i in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                     1.0                                      1.0


         0.8                                     0.8                                      0.8


         0.6                                     0.6                                      0.6
                                          at
                                          qt
         0.4                                     0.4                                      0.4
                                          Δt


         0.2                                                                              0.2
                                                 0.2                               at                                      at
                                                                                   qt                                      qt
         0.0                                     0.0                                      0.0
                                                                                   Δt                                      Δt



               0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                               t                                       t                                        t
         (d) Noisy retraining process for Group j in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle)
         and 0 (right)
         1.0                                     1.0                                      1.0


         0.8                                     0.8                                      0.8


         0.6                                     0.6                                      0.6


         0.4                                     0.4                                      0.4
                                          at                                       at                                      at
         0.2                              qt     0.2                               qt     0.2                              qt
                                          Δt                                       Δt                                      Δt

         0.0                                     0.0                                      0.0
               0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                               t                                       t                                        t
         (e) Noisy retraining process for Group i in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                     1.0                                      1.0


         0.8                                     0.8                                      0.8


         0.6                                     0.6                                      0.6


         0.4                                     0.4                                      0.4


         0.2
                                          at     0.2
                                                                                   at                                      at
                                                                                          0.2
                                          qt                                       qt                                      qt
                                          Δt                                       Δt                                      Δt
         0.0                                     0.0                                      0.0

               0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8   10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16
                               t                                       t                                        t
         (f) Noisy retraining process for Group j in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)

                                        Figure 31: Error bar version of Fig. 18


                                                                       37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         1.0                                          1.0                                          1.0


         0.8                                          0.8                                          0.8


         0.6                                          0.6                                          0.6


         0.4                                          0.4                                          0.4

                                   at                                           at                                           at
         0.2                       qt                 0.2                       qt                 0.2                       qt
                                   Δt                                           Δt                                           Δt

         0.0                                          0.0                                          0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                               t                                            t                                            t
         (a) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group i in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0
                                 a
                                    1.0                     at                           a
                                                                                                   1.0
                                                t                                                                                         t

         0.8
                                 q
                                    0.8         t           qt                           q
                                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                          t
                                               Δt            t                                                                           Δt


         0.6                        0.6                                                            0.6


         0.4                        0.4                                                            0.4


         0.2                        0.2                                                            0.2


         0.0                        0.0                                                            0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                                        10 12 14 16                                                      0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                       t                          t                          t
         (b) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group j in Uniform data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                          1.0                                          1.0
                                               at                                           at                                           at
                                               qt                                           qt                                           qt
         0.8                                          0.8                                          0.8
                                               Δt                                           Δt                                           Δt


         0.6                                          0.6                                          0.6


         0.4                                          0.4                                          0.4


         0.2                                          0.2                                          0.2


         0.0                                          0.0                                          0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                               t                                            t                                            t
         (c) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group i in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                          1.0                                          1.0
                                               at                                           at                                           at
                                               qt                                           qt                                           qt
         0.8                                          0.8                                          0.8
                                               Δt                                           Δt                                           Δt


         0.6                                          0.6                                          0.6


         0.4                                          0.4                                          0.4


         0.2                                          0.2                                          0.2


         0.0                                          0.0                                          0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                               t                                            t                                            t
         (d) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group j in Gaussian data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05
         (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                          1.0                                          1.0


         0.8                                          0.8                                          0.8


         0.6                                   at     0.6                                   at     0.6                                   at
                                               qt                                           qt                                           qt
                                               Δt                                           Δt                                           Δt
         0.4                                          0.4                                          0.4


         0.2                                          0.2                                          0.2


         0.0                                          0.0                                          0.0
               0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                               t                                            t                                            t
         (e) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group i in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left),
         0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)
         1.0                                          1.0                                          1.0
                                               at                                           at                                           at
         0.8
                                               qt     0.8
                                                                                            qt     0.8
                                                                                                                                         qt
                                               Δt                                           Δt                                           Δt


         0.6                                          0.6                                          0.6


         0.4                                          0.4                                          0.4


         0.2                                          0.2                                          0.2


         0.0                                          0.0                                          0.0

               0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6    8       10 12 14 16         0   2   4   6   8        10 12 14 16
                               t                                            t                                            t
         (f) Nonstrategic retraining process for Group j in German Credit data: r “ 0.1 (left),
         0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)

                                             Figure 32: Error bar version of Fig. 19

                                                                            38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          1.25                           1.25                           1.0
          1.00                           1.00                           0.8
          0.75                           0.75                           0.6         at for i
          0.50                           0.50                                       at for j
                                                                        0.4         Unfairness
          0.25             at for i      0.25             at for i
          0.00             at for j      0.00             at for j      0.2
          0.25             Unfairness    0.25             Unfairness    0.0
                 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                         t                              t                         t
         (a) Dynamics of unfairness in Credit Approval data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0
         (right)
           0.6                t for i                     t for i 0.5     t for i
                                      0.6                                 t for j
           0.4                t for j                     t for j 0.4
                                      0.4
           0.2                        0.2                         0.3
           0.0                        0.0                         0.2
           0.2                        0.2                         0.1
                 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16          0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
                         t                              t                       t
         (b) Dynamics of ∆t in Credit Approval data: r “ 0.1 (left), 0.05 (middle) and 0 (right)

                                Figure 33: Error bar version of Fig. 12


                                                        39
