Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N THE G ENERALIZATION OF G RADIENT- BASED N EU -
RAL N ETWORK I NTERPRETATIONS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Feature saliency maps are commonly used for interpreting neural network pre-
         dictions. This approach to interpretability is often studied as a post-processing
         problem independent of training setups, where the gradients of trained models are
         used to explain their output predictions. However, in this work, we observe that
         gradient-based interpretation methods are highly sensitive to the training set: mod-
         els trained on disjoint datasets without regularization produce inconsistent inter-
         pretations across test data. Our numerical observations pose the question of how
         many training samples are required for accurate gradient-based interpretations. To
         address this question, we study the generalization aspect of gradient-based expla-
         nation schemes and show that the proper generalization of interpretations from
         training samples to test data requires more training data than standard deep super-
         vised learning problems. We prove generalization error bounds for widely-used
         gradient-based interpretations, suggesting that the sample complexity of inter-
         pretable deep learning is greater than that of standard deep learning. Our bounds
         also indicate that Gaussian smoothing in the widely-used SmoothGrad method
         plays the role of a regularization mechanism for reducing the generalization gap.
         We evaluate our findings on various neural net architectures and datasets, to shed
         light on how training data affect the generalization of interpretation methods.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Multi-layer neural network (NN) models have achieved revolutionary success in computer vision
problems including image recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2017), object detection (Zhao et al., 2019),
and medical image processing (Litjens et al., 2017). This success is primarily due to the enormous
capacity of NNs as well as their impressive generalization performance from training samples to
unseen data. In other words, not only do massive NNs perform almost perfectly in predicting the
label of training samples, but also they maintain their satisfactory training performance on test data
unobserved during the NN model’s training. The mysterious generalization success of deep learning
models has attracted a lot of attention in the machine learning community.
While NNs achieve great prediction performance over standard computer vision datasets, their de-
ployment in real-world applications such as self-driving cars and machine-based medical diagnostics
requires a reliable interpretation of their predictions. Such interpretation of these large-scale models
will help domain experts understand the basis of their predictions to further improve and robustify
the prediction model. Over the recent years, several algorithms have been developed to give such
an interpretation, including the widely-used gradient-based feature saliency maps such as the simple
gradient (Baehrens et al., 2010; Simonyan et al., 2013), integrated gradients (Sundararajan et al.,
2017), and SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al., 2017) methods. These gradient-based algorithms are based
on the first-order derivative of the NN model’s score function with respect to the input variables,
which reveal the features with a major impact on the model’s prediction.
While the gradient-based interpretation methods have found many applications in computer vision
problems, the theoretical understanding of the underlying factors contributing to their performance
is still largely inadequate. Specifically, the generalization aspect of standard interpretation methods
has not been studied in the literature, and it remains unclear how many training samples are required
to ensure a bounded variance of gradient-based explanation maps with respect to a random training
set and stochasticity of the training process. Therefore, characterizing the sample complexity of es-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


timating saliency maps provides an important criterion for the selection of an interpretation scheme
and its hyperparameters from the established gradient-based saliency maps in the deep learning lit-
erature. Such a theoretical understanding is necessary to avoid the application of the interpretation
schemes with a relatively high variance under a limited training set size.
In this paper, we focus on the generalization properties of standard gradient-based interpretation
maps, and provide theoretical and numerical results to show that the proper generalization of a
NN’s gradient-based saliency map could require a larger training set than the standard classification
problem focusing only on the accuracy of the prediction model. In other words, the variance of
the gradient-based maps with respect to the randomness of training data could be significantly more
than the variance of the neural network’s predictions.
To support the above statement on the generalization of gradient-based interpretation maps, we
prove theoretical bounds on the generalization rate of standard gradient-based saliency maps, in-
cluding simple and integrated gradients, from training samples to test data. Our generalization
bounds indicate the considerable discrepancy between the training and test performance scores of
gradient-based interpretation schemes. We compare the shown generalization error bounds with the
standard bounds on the generalization error of multi-layer NN classifiers, which suggests a higher
statistical complexity for the interpretation of neural nets than for the accuracy of a NN classifier as
characterized by Bartlett et al. (2017).
Subsequently, we focus on the SmoothGrad algorithm and show that the Gaussian smoothing in this
method can be interpreted as a regularization mechanism controlling the difference between test and
training interpretation performance. Our results indicate that the generalization error will decrease
linearly with the standard deviation of the SmoothGrad noise, which will reduce the variance of
the saliency map at the cost of a higher bias toward a constant interpretation. Therefore, this result
would parallel the well-known bias-variance trade-off for norm-based regularization methods in the
context of supervised learning.
Finally, we present the results of several numerical experiments demonstrating the effect of the
number of training data on the variance of the gradient-based saliency maps. Our empirical findings
reveal the significant impact of the size of the training set on the estimated saliency map for unseen
test data. We show that standard methods such as simple and integrated gradients are highly sus-
ceptible to the samples in the training set. In addition, our results show a lower correlation between
gradient-based interpretation maps of two NNs with disjoint training sets than the correlation be-
tween the NNs’ predicted labels, indicating that an interpretable NN model demands more training
data than an accurate NN classifier. Numerically, we show the regularization effect of the Smooth-
Grad algorithm which manages to properly control the variance of the saliency map on test data. Our
numerical results indicate the importance of proper generalization in the visual performance of in-
terpretation methods and support the SmoothGrad approach as a regularized interpretation scheme.
Here, we summarize our contributions:

• Highlighting the role of generalization in the performance of deep learning interpretations,
• Proving theoretical generalization bounds for standard gradient-based saliency maps,
• Demonstrating the regularization effect of Gaussian smoothing in SmoothGrad,
• Providing results on interpretations generalization and SmoothGrad regularization.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Standard generalization analysis in deep learning focuses on the consistency of neural nets’ predic-
tions across training and test samples. However, neural nets have been shown to memorize random
labels and Gaussian pixel inputs (Zhang et al., 2017); to easily overfit dataset biases and labeling
errors (Stock & Cisse, 2018; Beyer et al., 2020; Shankar et al., 2020), generating unexplainable pre-
dictions and exhibiting weak classification decision boundaries. To debug these faulty predictions,
several post-hoc interpretability (Lipton, 2016) methods attempt to explain the outputs via visu-
alizations, counterfactuals and numerical metrics. Unlike multi-modal concept learning methods,
such as TCAV (Kim et al., 2018), Concept Bottleneck Models (CBM) (Koh et al., 2020) and Inter-
pretable Basis Decomposition (IBD) (Zhou et al., 2018), post-hoc methods study interpretations as
a stand-alone problem independent of the blackbox model training process and setup. In this work,

                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we choose a different approach by experimenting on gradient-based and feature-based methods, to
show that the train-to-test generalization of interpretations depends heavily on training set size.
Gradient-based Interpretations. Gradients of the model output with respect to its input is an in-
tuitive way of attributing the prediction to the data representation (Sundararajan et al., 2017). Early
attribution techniques generate explanations from the product between simple gradients and features
(Baehrens et al., 2010; Simonyan et al., 2013); works such as Guided BackProp (Springenberg et al.,
2014), DeConvNet (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014), DeepLift (Shrikumar et al., 2017) and Layer-wise Rele-
vance Propagation (LRP) (Binder et al., 2016) utilize discrete step backpropagation to proportionally
attribute class-wise prediction scores to network features. Sundararajan et al. (2017) further improve
the reliability of using gradients to weigh feature importance, by proposing integrated gradients to
satisfy desirable axioms of sensitivity and implementation invariance.
Gradients also characterise interpretability within and between trained models. Gradient signal-to-
noise ratio (GSNR) Liu et al. (2020) uses gradient alignment across different samples to understand
representation consistency of a model; Raghu et al. (2021) utilize the norm of network gradients to
quantify the amount of discrepancy between the input and prediction. The difference of gradients
between 2 networks taken with respect to the same input evaluates how much the networks’ predic-
tions disagree. In this work, we experiment on gradient-based feature attribution methods of simple
gradients and integrated gradients. We further calculate the norm and distance of networks’ gradient
interpretations to evaluate prediction consistency and agreement.
Parameter Space Interpretations. Beyond gradient-based analysis, the representation similarity of
samples between networks and network layers is also an important interpretation metric. Class Ac-
tivation Mapping (CAM) (Zhou et al., 2016) and the subsequent Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017)
utilize inherent localization properties of deep NN features to visualize salient regions in images.
They project the target class’ weights from the output layer back to the convolutional feature maps,
using network parameter activations to score the importance of image features for classification. By
comparing the CAM interpretations of trained models, we qualitatively assess how consistently do
they attend to the same spatial regions. To directly compare between networks and across layers,
Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) (Kornblith et al., 2019) improved upon canonical correlation
analysis methods (Raghu et al., 2017; Morcos et al., 2018), by calculating the similarity index be-
tween representational matrices. Their results generalize to different kernels, network architectures
and layer types, providing us with insight into the similarity between differently trained models,
across layers and samples.
Robustness and Consistency of Interpretations. Several related papers analyze the fragility and
consistency of the standard saliency maps. The related papers (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Dombrowski
et al., 2019; Heo et al., 2019; Subramanya et al., 2019) show that standard gradient-based inter-
pretations of neural nets commonly lack robustness to input perturbations, and the manipulated
interpretation can transfer across neural net architectures. Levine et al. (2019) present a certifiably
robust interpretation scheme by applying sparsification to the SmoothGrad approach. In another
related paper, Fel et al. (2022) analyze the consistency and algorithmic stability of standard interpre-
tation methods and measure the sensitivity of interpretation methods to the inclusion of one specific
sample in the training set. However, unlike our work, the mentioned works do not focus on the
generalization of interpretation methods from training to test data.

3     P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we discuss the notation and definitions used throughout the paper and shortly review
the gradient-based saliency maps analyzed in the paper.

3.1   N OTATION

In the paper, we use notation X ∈ Rd to denote the random feature vector and Y ∈ {1, . . . , k} to
denote the k-ary classification label. The deep learning algorithm trains a neural network fw ∈ F
where w represents the vector containing the weights of the neural net function and F = {fw : w ∈
W} denotes the feasible set of functions including the neural nets with allowed weight vectors in
set W. Note that every fw : Rd → Rk maps the d-dimensional input to a k-dimensional prediction
vector including a real-valued entry for every label.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For training the neural net, we follow the standard empirical risk minimization (ERM) method min-
imizing the empirical expected loss, measured with loss function ℓ(ŷ, y) between actual y and pre-
dicted ŷ labels, over the training set {(xi , yi )ni=1 } consisting of n labeled training examples drawn
independently from an underlying distribution PX,Y :
                                                 n
                                          1X
                                       min      ℓ fw (xi ), yi .                                       (1)
                                      w∈W n
                                            i=1

We note that the standard generalization analysis in machine learning focuses on the difference
between the expected loss values on the training samples and the test samples drawn from the un-
derlying model PX,Y .

3.2   G RADIENT- BASED S ALIENCY M APS

In our generalization analysis, we consider standard gradient-based saliency maps as a neural net’s
interpretation. To define standard saliency maps, we use fc (x) to denote the real-valued output of
the c-th neuron at the final layer of neural net f . Assuming that c is the assigned label to input x, i.e.
the final layer’s neuron with the maximum value, we review the definitions of the following standard
saliency maps:

1. Simple Gradient Method: As defined by Simonyan et al. (2013), the simple gradient is the
   gradient of the neural net’s output at the predicted neuron with respect to the input feature vector:
                                     Simple-Grad(fc , x) := ∇x fc (x).                                 (2)
2. Integrated Gradients: Given a reference vector x0 , the integrated gradients (Sundararajan et al.,
   2017) calculate the gradient’s integral over the line segment connecting the reference point x0
   and a target point x. In practice, the integrated gradient is approximated using m intermediate
   points between x0 and x:
                          Z 1                                          m
                                                               ∆x X                  i
                              ∇x fc x0 + α∆x ⊙ ∆x dα ≈                    ∇x fc x0 + ∆x . (3)

      Int-Grad(fc , x) :=                                          ⊙
                           0                                    m     i=1
                                                                                     m

   In the above, ∆x = x − x0 denotes the difference between the reference and target points, and
   ⊙ denotes the vector element-wise product.
3. SmoothGrad: The SmoothGrad approach (Smilkov et al., 2017) applies Gaussian smoothing to
   the gradient-based interpretation, and calculates the average gradient with an isotropic Gaussian
   distribution centered at the target data point x. Specifically, we define Gaussian vector Z ∼
   N (0, σ 2 I) and define SmoothGrad as
                                                                   m
                                                                1 X
             Smooth-Grad(fc , x) := EZ∼N (0,σ2 I) ∇fc (x + Z) ≈       ∇fc (x + zi ),                   (4)
                                                                m i=1

    where z1 , . . . , zm ∼ N (0, σ 2 I) are independent observations of the Gaussian noise used to
    approximate the SmoothGrad expectation.

4     G ENERALIZATION IN I NTERPRETATION TASKS
Generalization from training examples to test data is a crucial factor behind the success of every
learning algorithm. In the case of interpretation methods, we note that the trained neural net fw ∈ F
is learned using the training data, and hence the learned function will be different from the optimal
neural net minimizing the expected loss over the underlying distribution of test data PX,Y . In our
discussion, we use f ∗ to denote an optimal classifier in F in terms of the achieved performance on
the underlying distribution of data, i.e.
                              f ∗ ∈ argmin E(X,Y )∼P ℓ f (X), Y .

                                                                                                   (5)
                                        f ∈F

Remark 1. In the following discussion, we suppose a unique minimizer f ∗ to the above risk mini-
mization problem. Note that if this assumption does not hold, we define f ∗ (x) = Ef ∼Unif(F ∗ ) [f (x)]


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as the expectation of the classifier’s output according to the uniform distribution on the set F ∗ of
optimal solutions to the above population risk minimization problem. In addition, we note that
the following definitions and Theorems 1, 2 will similarly hold under an alternative definition
f ∗ (x) = ES,A [fA(S) (x)] where the expected value is taken over the randomness of the size-n train-
ing set S independently drawn from PX,Y and stochastic learning algorithm A learning weights
A(S) to obtain the classifier neural net fA(S) .

While we, as the learner, do not know the underlying distribution PX,Y and therefore the optimal
f ∗ , we can still define the loss of an interpretation scheme I(·) at an input x as the norm difference
between I’s output for a given classifier f and the optimal f ∗ , that is
                               LossI (f, x) :=     I(f, x) − I(f ∗ , x) 2 ,                           (6)
where ∥ · ∥2 denotes the L2 -norm of an input vector. Here we define the interpretation vector I(f, x)
when we choose class c = y for the actual label y of sample x. Also, note that the above definition
uses I(f ∗ , x) as the underlying interpretation which the learner aims to estimate from training data.
Definition 1. For a classifier function f and training set {(xi , yi )ni=1 }, we define the interpretation
training loss L(f
               b ) as the expected interpretation loss on training data:
                                               n
                                     b ) := 1
                                              X
                                     L(f          LossI (f, xi ).
                                            n i=1
Also, we define the interpretation test loss L(f ) as the expected interpretation loss on the underlying
distribution of test data PX :

                                  L(f ) := EX∼PX LossI (f, X) .
Finally, we define the interpretation generalization error as the difference between the interpretation
training and test loss values:
                                       ϵgen (f ) := L(f ) − L(f
                                                            b ).

Based on the above definition, a necessary condition to have a controlled variance of the gradient-
based interpretation map is a bounded interpretation generalization error. In the next section, we
present theoretical bounds on the interpretation generalization error of neural network classifiers, to
compare the generalization rates for several standard gradient-based interpretation maps.

5    T HEORETICAL BOUNDS ON I NTERPRETATION G ENERALIZATION E RROR
In this section, we theoretically analyze the interpretation generalization error of neural networks.
Here we suppose that the neural net function fw : Rd → Rk has the following format:

                       fw (x) = WL ϕL−1 WL−1 ϕL−2 (· · · W2 ϕ1 (W1 x))· .                         (7)
Here the vector w concatenates the entries of the L layers’ weight matrices W1 , . . . , WL . Also,
ϕi : R → R represents the activation function at layer i.
Our first theorem concerns the interpretation generalization performance of the simple gradient and
integrated gradients. This result demonstrates that the generalization of these gradient-based inter-
pretation schemes could require a larger training set than the standard deep learning classification
problem. Specifically, this theorem extends the generalization analysis in Bartlett et al. (2017) to
the gradient-based interpretation of neural networks. In the following, we use ∥ · ∥2 to denote a
matrix’s spectral norm, i.e. its largest singular value, and also ∥ · ∥2,1 denotes the L2,1 -group norm
of a matrix, i.e. the summation of the L2 -norms of the matrix’s rows.
Theorem 1. Suppose that the neural net classifier in equation 7 has an γi -Lipschitz and γi -smooth
activation function satisfying ∀z ∈ R : max{|ϕ′i (z)|, |ϕ′′i (z)|} ≤ γi . We assume that the interpre-
tation loss is upper-bounded by constant c and the training data matrix Xn×d is norm-bounded as
∥X∥2 ≤ B with probability 1. Also, we use D to denote the maximum number of rows and columns
in fw ’s weight matrices. Then, for every ω > 0, with probability at least 1 − ω this generalization
error bound will hold for both the simple gradient method and integrated gradients of every fw :
                                          r
                                             log(1/ω) BRw log(n) log(D)
                        ϵgen (fw ) ≤ O c              +                         .
                                                 n                 n

                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Interpretation generalization loss              (b) CIFAR-10 interpretation-classification correla-
vs. spectral norm factor.                           tion scores.

Figure 1: We find that networks with pre-training and spectrally-normalized networks using smaller
(stricter) norm factors exhibit lower interpretation generalization loss.

                                                                               2/3
                PL Qi                      QL                        PL   ∥Wi ∥2,1  3/2
Here Rw :=        i=1    j=1 γj ∥Wj ∥2       i=1 γi ∥Wi ∥2       ×    i=1 ∥W ∥2/3       denotes the inter-
                                                                             i 2
pretation capacity of the neural net.

Comparing the generalization bound for the simple and integrated gradients interpretation to the
generalization bound in Bartlett et al.  (2017) for the standard supervised learning task, we notice an
                PL Qi
order-wise O      i=1    j=1 γj ∥Wj ∥2 greater generalization error for gradient-based interpretation
schemes. This additional term indicates the extra cost of generalization for the simple and integrated
gradients-based interpretation scheme. The generalization comparison with deep supervised learn-
ing could be also performed using the results of (Neyshabur et al., 2018; Galanti et al., 2023). Next,
we state the generalization bound for the SmoothGrad approach.
Theorem 2. Suppose that the neural net classifier in equation 7 has an γi -Lipschitz activation
function satisfying ∀z ∈ R : |ϕ′i (z)| ≤ γi . We assume that the interpretation loss is upper-bounded
by constant c and the training data matrix Xn×d is norm-bounded as ∥X∥2 ≤ B with probability
1. Then, for every ω > 0, with probability at least 1 − ω the following generalization error bound
will hold for the SmoothGrad interpretation of every fw with standard deviation σ > 0:
                                         r                                    √
                                           log(1/ω) BLw log(n) log(D) d
                      ϵgen (fw ) ≤ O c                +                           ,
                                                n                  nσ
                                  PL ∥Wi ∥2,1 2/3
               QL                                   3/2
where Lw := i=1 γi ∥Wi ∥2           i=1       2/3       denotes the spectral capacity of the neural net.
                                         ∥Wi ∥2
                                                                     √
Note that Theorem 2’s bound is only by a multiplicative factor σd different from the generalization
bound in the standard deep supervised learning problem (Bartlett et al., 2017). Therefore, the theo-
rem suggests that Gaussian smoothing can be interpreted as a regularization of the simple gradient
approach to improve its generalization behavior. The SmoothGrad interpretation algorithm could
gain a better generalization performance by increasing the standard deviation, while the training
performance could drop because of the additional noise.

6     N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
6.1   E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Datasets. We numerically study the generalization and visual consistency of interpretation methods
on the standard CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and the larger scale TinyImageNet (Le & Yang,
2015) and Caltech-256 (Griffin et al., 2022) datasets. TinyImageNet dataset is a downsampled subset
of ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) and comprises 200 object categories with 500 training images and
50 validation images for each class. Caltech-256 contains 256 object categories totaling 30,607
high-resolution images. We note that since our experiments would require us to train from scratch a


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Rank correlation coefficient and saliency pixel intersection on the test set, for the interpre-
tations of neural nets trained with a training set split factor of sf = 2, 4, 8, 16.

                            ResNet-18/50                ViT-B-16                 MLP-Mixer
                  sf    Rank C ↑      Px % ↑      Rank C ↑      Px % ↑     Rank C ↑      Px % ↑
                   2    .37 ± .02   28.0 ± 0.9    .31 ± .02   23.7 ± 1.6   .39 ± .01    34.1 ± 1.3
                   4    .33 ± .01   26.8 ± 1.0    .25 ± .02   18.4 ± 1.5   .38 ± .01    33.6 ± 1.0
      CIFAR-10
                   8    .31 ± .01   25.3 ± 0.7    .25 ± .02   17.7 ± 1.3   .36 ± .01    32.7 ± 0.9
                  16    .28 ± .01   23.8 ± 0.5    .23 ± .02   15.4 ± 1.4   .34 ± .01    28.4 ± 0.9
                  2     .31 ± .01    3.3 ± 0.1    .21 ± .05   3.8 ± 1.4    .31 ± .01    4.3 ± 0.3
      Caltech-    4     .30 ± .02    2.2 ± 0.3    .18 ± .05   1.7 ± 0.5    .21 ± .05    1.5 ± 0.4
        256       8     .27 ± .04    1.7 ± 0.6    .17 ± .02   0.7 ± 0.6    .18 ± .03    1.2 ± 0.7
                  16    .24 ± .03    0.1 ± 0.4    .15 ± .03   0.5 ± 0.6    .14 ± .02    0.9 ± 0.7
                   2    .12 ± .02   23.8 ± 0.9    .11 ± .01   20.3 ± 0.2   .11 ± .01    26.3 ± 0.3
        Tiny-      4    .10 ± .03   23.7 ± 0.5    .10 ± .01   20.1 ± 1.1   .06 ± .03    22.4 ± 0.4
      ImageNet     8    .06 ± .03   21.4 ± 0.5    .05 ± .02   18.8 ± 1.0   .03 ± .02    18.4 ± 1.0
                  16    .03 ± .03   20.0 ± 0.8    .05 ± .01   18.3 ± 0.5   .03 ± .01    18.3 ± 0.9


multitude networks on different subset levels for each dataset, it was infeasible to directly experiment
on the large-scale ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) dataset. Instead, to validate the message that the
generalization of interpretations requires more data, we utilize the large-scale ImageNet dataset for
pre-training via off-the-shelf weights.
Neural network architectures. To validate our hypotheses, we experiment on a diverse set of
computer vision architectures. We report numerical results for the following convolutional neural
networks: ConvNeXt-Tiny (Liu et al., 2022), EfficientNet-V2-S (Tan & Le, 2021), ResNet (He et al.,
2016) (we trained ResNet-50 on Caltech-256 and trained ResNet-18 on TinyImageNet, CIFAR-10);
for the ViT-B-16 Vision Transformer model proposed by Beyer et al. (2022); and for the multi-layer
perceptron model of MLP-Mixer (Tolstikhin et al., 2021).
Experiment design. To evaluate the effect of training set size on interpretation general-
ization, we consider split factors of sf = 2, 4, 8, 16, each corresponding to training with
50%, 25%, 12.5%, 6.25% of available training data. We train a neural net for every data subset
for 200 epochs. To further improve the interpretation generalization, we allow models to train on
“more data” by using pre-trained ImageNet weights, then fine-tuning for 50 epochs.

6.2    V ERIFYING THE G ENERALIZATION G AP

In Figure 1b, we show that network interpretation performance suffer more than network classi-
fication performance, under the effect of training set scale and overlap. On test set data, we plot
the normalized Spearman correlation of network interpretations against softmax predictions. As sf
increases from 2 to 16 and models are trained with smaller, more disjoint training sets, the rank
correlation of test set interpretations drop more acutely than that of network predictions. Results of
other datasets are in the Appendix.
Furthermore, we visualize the interpretation generalization gap in Fig. 2, by varying the number
of training samples from 6.25% of the training set, to pre-training on ImageNet and fine-tuning on
50% of the train set. As the number of training samples increased, GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017)
interpretations became more similar between pairs of models, as seen from how “Pretrain” model
pairs have near-perfect saliency map agreement across datasets. For models that are optimized with
more training samples, this localization ability transfers successfully to unseen test data, verifying
that more training samples are required for interpretations to agree across models and generalize
across train and test sets.

6.3    G RADIENT- BASED INTERPRETATIONS
In Figure 3, via qualitative experiments on Caltech-256 (Griffin et al., 2022) with the simple gradi-
ent (Simonyan et al., 2013), SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al., 2017), integrated gradients (Sundararajan
et al., 2017) and DeepLift (Shrikumar et al., 2017), we show that “Pretrain” models outperform


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Grad-CAM comparisons with ConvNeXt-Tiny. We experiment with models trained on
disjoint (thus independent) splits of the training set with sf = 2, 4, 8, 16. As we increase the number
of training samples from 1) 6.25% (sf = 16) of the training set, to 2) using 50% of the training set,
then to 3) pre-training on ImageNet plus fine-tuning with 50% training data, we observe that model
pairs generate increasingly consistent interpretations.

6.25% models in terms of visual fidelity, localization meaningfulness and generalization ability to
test samples. We present further numerical evidence by assessing the generalization gap in inte-
grated gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017). We vary the dataset split factor from 2 ( 12 of train set),
              1
4, 8 to 16 ( 16 of the train set) and generated mass-centered perturbations with the attacker network
for the source network. The intuition behind this technique is that if the networks have similar gra-
dient interpretations, then the perturbations generated by the attacker would have negligible effect
on the source networks’ saliency map outputs. In Table 1, we compare the a) rank correlation of
saliency maps, the Spearman rank correlation coefficient between saliency maps of original and per-
turbed images; b) top-100 salient pixel intersection %, indicating the percentage of overlap between
the top-100 most salient pixels, which are used for classifying the original and perturbed images.
Our comparison shows a consistent improvement of the metrics by increasing the sample size.

6.4   I MPROVING G ENERALIZATION VIA S PECTRAL N ORMALIZATION AND S MOOTH G RAD

Motivated by our theoretical results in Theorem 1, which suggest the application of spectral nor-
malization in closing the interpretation generalization gap, we numerically validate this in Figure 1a.
By plotting the interpretation generalization loss against the spectral norm factor of spectrally-
normalized neural nets, we verify that a lower (stricter) normalization factor leads to lower gen-
eralization loss; this demonstrates the practical implication of Theorem 1.
To further improve generalization performance, we emphasize Theorem 2, which reveals the regu-
larization effect of Gaussian smoothing in SmoothGrad to decrease the generalization gap. This is
a non-trivial result explaining why SmoothGrad substantially improves SimpleGrad and Integrated-
gradients; we conduct experiments comparing these methods. Our goals are to first quantify the
within-model discrepancy (mis-attribution) between the input and output and second to evaluate how
the cross-network gradient-based interpretations increasingly disagree with fewer training samples.
We subsequently compute the mean L2 -norm difference of the interpretation vectors for networks
with disjoint training sets of the same size. A larger norm difference indicates a greater discrepancy
between the interpretations and worse generalization.
We report results averaging over m = 1, 5, 20, 50 Gaussian noise vectors for the estimation of
the SmoothGrad interpretation, with Gaussian perturbation standard deviation σ chosen from the
set {0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0}. We observe that increasing the number of randomly-perturbed
samples with Gaussian noise has a gradient smoothing effect. Also, as visualized in Appendix


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Different gradient-based interpretation methods tested on Caltech-256. We compare the
fidelity, localization meaningfulness and train-test generalization abilities of interpretations, for Pre-
train and the 6.25% settings. The generalization and performance gaps widen for interpretations
generated by models trained on smaller, disjoint training sets. Full results are in the Appendix.

Figures 8-15, increasing the noise standard deviation improves Gaussian smoothing power, with
effects of increasing the interpretation agreement and reducing the generalization gap. Comparing
the simple gradient (marked by “no σ” in the legends) and SmoothGrad methods’ results, we observe
that the Gaussian smoothing in SmoothGrad improves cross-network interpretation agreement and
hence the generalization of the gradient-based saliency map. This observation is consistent with our
theoretical analysis, evidencing the regularization role of Gaussian smoothing in SmoothGrad.

7    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we highlight the role of proper generalization from training samples to unseen test
data in the success of deep learning-based interpretation methods. On the theory side, we prove gen-
eralization error bounds to show the higher sample complexity of learning interpretable neural net
classifiers, and further discuss the regularization effect of Gaussian smoothing in the SmoothGrad
approach. On the empirical side, our numerical results also demonstrate the influence of the training
set size on the generalization of gradient-based interpretation methods to test samples. To further
expand the analysis, an interesting future direction is to explore other regularization schemes and
their effect on the generalization of interpretation methods. Such a study can be performed for pop-
ular deep learning regularization schemes such as batch normalization and dropout. Furthermore,
the extensions of our generalization study to mask-based and perturbation-based explanation tools
could improve the understanding of the effect of adversarial schemes on the generalization proper-
ties of the interpretability of neural networks. We note that our developed generalization framework
is relatively general and potentially applicable for studying the discussed future directions.

8    R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To ensure reproducibility, we have attached our source code to the supplement. We also include
details on datasets, network architectures and experiment design in Section 6. We note that our
setups–including but not limited to the choice of benchmarks, baselines, metrics–are consistent with
existing literature and key references such as Ghorbani et al. (2019) and Smilkov et al. (2017).


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
David Baehrens, Timon Schroeter, Stefan Harmeling, Motoaki Kawanabe, Katja Hansen, and
  Klaus-Robert Müller. How to explain individual classification decisions. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 11(61):1803–1831, 2010. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v11/
  baehrens10a.html.
Peter L Bartlett, Dylan J Foster, and Matus J Telgarsky. Spectrally-normalized margin bounds for
  neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Lucas Beyer, Olivier J Hénaff, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiaohua Zhai, and Aäron van den Oord. Are
  we done with imagenet? arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07159, 2020.
Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, and Alexander Kolesnikov. Better plain vit baselines for imagenet-1k.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01580, 2022.
Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Sebastian Lapuschkin, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech
  Samek. Layer-wise relevance propagation for neural networks with local renormalization layers.
  In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 63–71. Springer, 2016.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, pp. 248–255, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Maximillian Alber, Christopher Anders, Marcel Ackermann, Klaus-
  Robert Müller, and Pan Kessel. Explanations can be manipulated and geometry is to blame.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Thomas Fel, David Vigouroux, Rémi Cadène, and Thomas Serre. How good is your explanation?
  algorithmic stability measures to assess the quality of explanations for deep neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV),
  pp. 720–730, January 2022.
Tomer Galanti, Liane Galanti, and Ido Ben-Shaul. Comparative generalization bounds for deep
  neural networks. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=162TqkUNPO.
Amirata Ghorbani, Abubakar Abid, and James Zou. Interpretation of neural networks is fragile.
 AAAI, 33(01):3681–3688, Jul. 2019. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33013681. URL https://ojs.
 aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/4252.
Griffin, Holub, and Perona. Caltech 256, Apr 2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Juyeon Heo, Sunghwan Joo, and Taesup Moon. Fooling neural network interpretations via adver-
  sarial model manipulation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, et al.
  Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors
  (tcav). In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2668–2677. Proceedings of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 2018.
Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and
  Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  5338–5348. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
  koh20a.html.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3519–
  3529. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60(6):84–90, 2017.

Alex Krizhevsky et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. 2015.

Alexander Levine, Sahil Singla, and Soheil Feizi. Certifiably robust interpretation in deep learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12105, 2019.

Zachary C Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03490, 2016.

Geert Litjens, Thijs Kooi, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi, Arnaud Arindra Adiyoso Setio, Francesco
  Ciompi, Mohsen Ghafoorian, Jeroen Awm Van Der Laak, Bram Van Ginneken, and Clara I
  Sánchez. A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. Medical image analysis, 42:
  60–88, 2017.

Jinlong Liu, Yunzhi Bai, Guoqing Jiang, Ting Chen, and Huayan Wang. Understanding why neural
   networks generalize well through gsnr of parameters. In Internatinoal Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HyevIJStwH.

Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A convnet for the 2020s. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 11976–11986, 2022.

Ari Morcos, Maithra Raghu, and Samy Bengio. Insights on representational similarity in neural
  networks with canonical correlation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31,
  2018.

Behnam Neyshabur, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, and Nathan Srebro. A PAC-bayesian approach to
  spectrally-normalized margin bounds for neural networks. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Skz_WfbCZ.

Maithra Raghu, Justin Gilmer, Jason Yosinski, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Svcca: Singular vector
 canonical correlation analysis for deep learning dynamics and interpretability. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Maithra Raghu, Thomas Unterthiner, Simon Kornblith, Chiyuan Zhang, and Alexey Dosovitskiy.
 Do vision transformers see like convolutional neural networks? In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
 P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Gl8FHfMVTZu.

Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localiza-
  tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 618–626, 2017.

Vaishaal Shankar, Rebecca Roelofs, Horia Mania, Alex Fang, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig
  Schmidt. Evaluating machine accuracy on ImageNet. In Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  8634–8644. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
  shankar20c.html.

Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through
  propagating activation differences. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3145–
  3153. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2017.

Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks: Vi-
  sualising image classification models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034, 2013.

Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin Wattenberg. Smoothgrad:
  removing noise by adding noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03825, 2017.

                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin Riedmiller. Striving for
  simplicity: The all convolutional net. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6806, 2014.
Pierre Stock and Moustapha Cisse. Convnets and imagenet beyond accuracy: Understanding mis-
  takes and uncovering biases. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), pp. 498–512, 2018.
Akshayvarun Subramanya, Vipin Pillai, and Hamed Pirsiavash. Fooling network interpretation in
  image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 2020–2029, 2019.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In In-
 ternational Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3319–3328. Proceedings of Machine Learning
 Research, 2017.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnetv2: Smaller models and faster training. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10096–10106. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
 2021.
Ilya O Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
   terthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, et al. Mlp-mixer: An
   all-mlp architecture for vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:24261–
   24272, 2021.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 818–833. Springer,
 2014.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In Internatinoal Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy8gdB9xx.
Zhong-Qiu Zhao, Peng Zheng, Shou-tao Xu, and Xindong Wu. Object detection with deep learning:
  A review. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 30(11):3212–3232, 2019.
Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Learning deep fea-
  tures for discriminative localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2921–2929, 2016.
Bolei Zhou, Yiyou Sun, David Bau, and Antonio Torralba. Interpretable basis decomposition for
  visual explanation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  September 2018.


                                               12
