Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S AMPLE -E FFICIENCY IN M ULTI -BATCH R EINFORCE -
MENT L EARNING :     T HE N EED FOR D IMENSION -
D EPENDENT A DAPTIVITY
 Emmeran Johnson & Ciara Pike-Burke
 Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
 {emmeran.johnson17,c.pike-burke}@imperial.ac.uk

 Patrick Rebeschini
 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
 patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk



                                              A BSTRACT
         We theoretically explore the relationship between sample-efficiency and adaptiv-
         ity in reinforcement learning. An algorithm is sample-efficient if it uses a number
         of queries n to the environment that is polynomial in the dimension d of the prob-
         lem. Adaptivity refers to the frequency at which queries are sent and feedback is
         processed to update the querying strategy. To investigate this interplay, we employ
         a learning framework that allows sending queries in K batches, with feedback be-
         ing processed and queries updated after each batch. This model encompasses the
         whole adaptivity spectrum, ranging from non-adaptive ‘offline’ (K “ 1) to fully
         adaptive (K “ n) scenarios, and regimes in between. For the problems of policy
         evaluation and best-policy identification under d-dimensional linear function ap-
         proximation, we establish Ωplog log dq lower bounds on the number of batches K
         required for sample-efficient algorithms with n “ Oppolypdqq queries. Our results
         show that just having adaptivity (K ą 1) does not necessarily guarantee sample-
         efficiency. Notably, the adaptivity-boundary for sample-efficiency is not between
         offline reinforcement learning (K “ 1), where sample-efficiency was known to
         not be possible, and adaptive settings. Instead, the boundary lies between different
         regimes of adaptivity and depends on the problem dimension.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Data collection in Reinforcement Learning (RL) usually falls into two main paradigms: online and
offline. An online learner interacts with the environment, immediately receiving feedback and adapt-
ing its decisions in real-time. In contrast in offline RL, the dataset is collected in a single batch prior
to observing any feedback. Many practical applications consider RL algorithms with limited adap-
tivity, which fall between online and offline RL. For example, in clinical trials, groups of patients
undergo multiple treatments simultaneously and the treatment allocations are only be updated once
the outcomes of the all the previous group have been observed (Yu et al., 2021). Similar settings
with parallelized data-collection include marketing, advertising and numerical simulations (Esfan-
diari et al., 2021). There are also applications where the data collection needs to be validated prior to
deployment by a human due to concerns of safety (Dann et al., 2019) and fairness (Koenecke et al.,
2020), which with large scale data collection, is not feasible to have at every data point.
This motivates considering the multi-batch learning model (Perchet et al., 2015) where a data-set
of size n is collected in K batches, and feedback from within a batch is only observed at the end
of a batch. This means only data from previous batches can be used to select how the next batch is
collected. This is also known as growing batch RL (Lange et al., 2012). We refer to it as multi-batch
RL to avoid any confusion with offline RL, also called batch RL, which considers a single batch.
The multi-batch setting covers different levels of adaptivity to feedback, which refers to how fre-
quently the learner can process feedback and use it to update its data collection strategy. We measure


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


it by the number of batches K. At one extreme, all the data is collected in a single batch (K “ 1,
offline-RL, no adaptivity). At the other extreme, each batch contains a single data-point (K “ n, full
adaptivity1 ). We say a learner is adaptive when K ą 1. In some of the applications that parallelize
data-collection mentioned above, algorithms with low-adaptivity where K is as small as possible
are of interest since there may be a cost associated to unifying and processing the parallelized data.
We study adaptivity in infinite-horizon discounted Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). We focus
on 1) the policy evaluation (PE) problem, where the learner is tasked with estimating the value of
a target policy, and 2) the best policy identification (BPI) problem, where the learner is tasked with
finding a near-optimal policy. A desirable property of the learner is that it is sample-efficient, i.e. it
only needs a dataset size that is polynomial in the dimension of the problem (e.g. state space size).
We aim to understand the minimum level of adaptivity necessary for sample efficient learning.
Linear Function Approximation: MDPs faced in practice often have state spaces S or action
spaces A that are infinite or too large to handle directly (Silver et al., 2016). Function approximation
is used to reduce the learning problem to a smaller set of parameters that leverage structure in the
problem. We consider a form of linear function approximation (Bellman et al., 1963) that assumes
the (action)-value of a policy is a linear combination of known features of the state-action pair with
an unknown parameter, each of dimension d. The sample complexity of algorithms is then measured
with respect to the smaller dimension d instead of the dimensions of the MDP (|S|, |A|).
Adaptive vs Non-Adaptive: It is known there is a sample-efficiency separation between offline RL
(K “ 1) and fully-adaptive RL (K “ n) under linear function approximation. Algorithms have been
shown to be sample-efficient in the fully-adaptive setting (Lattimore et al., 2020) and under various
assumptions in the offline setting (Duan et al., 2020; Xie & Jiang, 2020). Without assumptions in the
offline setting, it has been shown information-theoretically that no sample-efficient algorithms can
solve the PE or BPI problem (Zanette, 2021) even under the best possible offline dataset, showing
the separation. However, the MDP constructions of Zanette (2021) are easily solved with algorithms
using K “ 2 batches (see proofs of their Theorems 1 and 3), suggesting that the boundary of this
separation may be between offline RL (K “ 1) and RL with adaptivity (K ą 1). This motivates
studying the values of K where sample-efficiency is not possible and asking the following questions:
Does the boundary of sample-efficiency under linear function approximation lie between offline RL
(K “ 1) and RL with adaptivity (K ą 1)? If not, is the boundary dimension-dependent?
In this paper, we establish an Ωplog log dq lower-bound on the number of adaptive updates, K,
required to solve both PE and BPI problems sample-efficiently. This answers the first question neg-
atively and the second positively. This is achieved through a non-trivial extension of the framework
of (Zanette, 2021) for the offline setting to the multi-batch setting, which we describe next.
Learning Process: When faced with an unknown MDP within a known class of MDPs, we consider
a learner over K rounds. In a round, the learner chooses a set of state-action queries with knowledge
of the feedback from previous rounds. The following characteristics strengthen our lower bounds:
• Exact feedback: the feedback for a state-action query is the reward and transition functions, not a
  single sample. This makes a query equivalent to observing infinite samples from the reward and
  transition functions if these are stochastic and removes any hardness due to uncertainty.
• We consider two ways for the learner to specify the set of queries. The first (policy-induced) is
  through trajectories induced by chosen policies. The second (policy-free) explicitly specifies the
  state-action queries. Our results hold for any such set of queries whose size is polynomial in d.
• Realizability: the MDPs considered satisfy the linear representation of the action-values.
Tabular and finite-horizon MDPs and linear bandits are easily solved in the offline setting (K “ 1)
under this framework but infinite-horizon discounted MDPs are not (Zanette, 2021). Our work
studies what happens beyond the offline setting (K ą 1) for infinite-horizon discounted MDPs.
Contributions: Our results show that a number of batches K constant with respect to the dimension
d is not enough to solve PE or BPI problems sample-efficiently. Specifically, we show that if we
restrict the total number of queries (over all batches) to be polynomial in d (sample-efficiency), then
    1
      Typically, online refers to a setting with full-adaptivity along a single trajectory (sequence of transitions
from a starting state, potentially with restarts). Our notion of full-adaptivity covers this, but is more general
since we allow settings with a generative model where samples from any state-action pair can be drawn.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• there are PE problems that require K “ Ωplog log dq to be solved to arbitrary accuracy.
• with only policy-free queries, there are PE and BPI problems that require K “ Ωplog log dq to be
  solved to arbitrary accuracy, even if all policies satisfy linear realizability of their action-values.

These results show that adaptivity (K ą 1) does not guarantee sample-efficiency. The level of
adaptivity, or number of batches K, needed to guarantee sample-efficiency scales with the dimension
d of the linear representation. In particular, the boundary of sample-efficiency does not lie between
offline RL (K “ 1) and adaptive RL (K ą 1). Instead this boundary must lie within a regime of
adaptivity scaling with dimension: Ωplog log dq ď K ď n.
Interestingly, the class of MDPs considered in Zanette (2021) can be solved with d ` 1 queries
and K “ 2 batches (observing feedback from the first batch is enough to select queries in the
second that fully solve the MDPs) [Zanette (2021), Theorem 4]. Our results show that this is not
possible in general and that the class of MDPs we use for our results is fundamentally harder. From a
technical perspective, our work uses tools from the theory of subspace packing with chordal distance
(Soleymani & Mahdavifar, 2021). This enables the environment to erase information across multiple
dimensions (m-dimensional subspaces, see Section 5) in response to queries, instead of a single
direction as in Zanette (2021), which ultimately allows us to achieve lower-bounds for K ą 1.

2   P RELIMINARIES

A Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman, 1994)   Ť      is a discrete-time stochastic process com-
prised of a set of states S, a set of actions A “ sPS tAs u where As is the action space in state
s P S and, for each state-action pair ps, aq P S ˆ As , a next-state transition function given by a
measure pp¨|s, aq and a (deterministic) reward function rps, aq P r´1, 1s (in fact, even the value
functions defined below are in r´1, 1s for our constructions). In a state s, an agent chooses an action
a, receives a reward rps, aq and transitions to a new state according to pp¨|s, aq. Once in the new
state, the process continues. The actions chosen by an agent are formalised by policies. A deter-
ministic policy π : S Ñ A is a mapping from a state to an action. In each state s P S, an agent
following policy π chooses action πpsq P As . We do not consider stochastic policies.
In this work, for a discount factor γ P r0, 1q, we consider γ-discounted infinite-horizon MDPs. We
measure the performance of a policy π with respect to the value function V π : S Ñ R,
                                           8
                                          ”ÿ                             ı
                               V π psq “ E   γ t rpst , πpst qq|π, s0 “ s ,
                                             t“0

where st , at are the state and action in time-step t and the expectation is with respect to the random-
ness in the transitions. This is a notion of long-term reward that describes the discounted rewards
accumulated over future time-steps when following policy π and starting in state s. We consider γ
as fixed throughout. It is also useful to work with the action-value function Qπ : S ˆ A Ñ R,
                                        8
                                       ”ÿ                                     ı
                          Qπ ps, aq “ E   γ t rpst , πpst qq|π, s0 “ s, a0 “ a ,
                                          t“0
                      π
which is similar to V , with the additional constraint of taking action a in the first time-step. For a
policy π, we define the Bellman evaluation operator T π for action-value functions as:
                          pT π Qqps, aq “ rps, aq ` γEs1 „pp¨|s,aq rQps1 , πps1 qqs.
The action-value Qπ of a policy π is the unique fixed-point of the Bellman evaluation operator T π .
Under certain conditions on the state and action space, it is known that there exists a deterministic
policy that simultaneously maximises V π and Qπ for all states and actions [Puterman (1994), The-
orem 6.2.12]. We call such a policy an optimal policy and denote it by π ‹ . We will also denote
   ‹                  ‹
V π “ V ‹ and Qπ “ Q‹ . Given an MDP M , we will sometimes write VM            π
                                                                                  to denote the value of
a policy π in the MDP M (similarly for VM  ‹
                                             , QπM , Q‹M , pM , rM , TM
                                                                      π
                                                                        ). We denote the unit Euclidean
ball in Rd by B “ tx P Rd : }x}2 ď 1u and its boundary by BB “ tx P Rd : }x}2 “ 1u. For n vec-
tors v1 , ..., vn P BB, we denote the subspace spanning the vectors by xv1 , ..., vn y. For two positive
functions f and g, we say f pxq “ Ωpgpxqq if Dc ą 0, N such that for all x ą N , f pxq ě cgpxq.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     P ROBLEM S ETTING
In this section, we formally define the RL problems and the learning model we consider. We borrow
the framework from the work of Zanette (2021) and extend it beyond the offline RL setting.

3.1   P OLICY E VALUATION (PE)

Let M be a class of MDPs with the same S and A. For M P M, let ΠM be a set of (deterministic)
policies and Π “ tΠM uM PM . A PE problem defined by pM, Πq consists of:

1. An instance ps̄, M, M, πM , Πq, where M P M is an MDP, πM P ΠM is a target policy and
   s̄ P S is a starting state. M, Π and s̄ are known but M and πM are unknown.
2. An interaction procedure with the MDP M to collect a dataset D (see Section 3.3).
3. An objective: Following the collection of the dataset D, the target policy πM becomes known to
   the learner. Based on D and πM , the learner produces an output Q    p D ps̄, ¨q estimating the action-
   value QπMM ps̄, ¨q of the target policy πM . The performance of the learner is evaluated by the
   accuracy of the output on any instance, formalized aspε, δq-soundness (Definition 3.1).
Definition 3.1. A learner is pε, δq-sound for PE problems characterised by pM, Πq if for all M P
M, πM P ΠM , the learner faced with instance´ps̄, M, M, πM , Πq outputs Q           p D that is ε-accurate
                                                                                              ¯
                                                               π
with probability2 at least 1 ´ δ, i.e. it satisfies P supaPA |Q M ps̄, aq ´ Q
                                                                  M
                                                                             p D ps̄, aq| ă ε ą 1 ´ δ.


3.2   B EST P OLICY I DENTIFICATION (BPI)

Let M be a class of MDPs with the same S and A. A BPI problem defined by M consists of:

1. An instance ps̄, M, Mq, where M P M is an MDP in M and s̄ P S is a starting state. M and s̄
   are known but M is unknown.
2. An interaction procedure with the MDP M to collect a dataset D (see Section 3.3).
3. An objective: Based on D, the learner produces an output π   pD of a near-optimal policy for M .
   The performance of the learner is evaluated by pε, δq-soundness (Definition 3.2), i.e. the sub-
   optimality of the output policy on any instance (see 1.).
Definition 3.2. A learner is pε, δq-sound for BPI problems characterised by M if for all M P M,
the learner faced with ´instance ps̄, M, Mq outputs
                                              ¯      pD that is ε-optimal with probability2 at least
                                                     π
                             ‹     π
                                   pD
1 ´ δ, i.e. it satisfies P pVM ´ VM qps̄q ă ε ą 1 ´ δ.

3.3   M ULTI -BATCH L EARNING M ODEL

We define some important notions related to our learning model. A query is a state-action pair
ps, aq P S ˆ As that is submitted to the unknown MDP M and for which feedback is returned. A
query formalises how the learner interacts with an MDP, the feedback received is defined next.
Definition 3.3 (Query-Feedback). In return for a query ps, aq the environment provides feedback
to the learner. For BPI, the feedback is the reward rM ps, aq and the transition function pM p¨|s, aq.
For PE, the learner also receives evaluations of the target policy πM for all states in the support of
pM p¨|s, aq, i.e. tπM ps1 q : s1 P S s.t. pM ps1 |s, aq ą 0u.
Remark 3.4. The learner receives the transition function pM p¨|s, aq for a query ps, aq, instead of a
sample from pM p¨|s, aq. This removes any statistical uncertainty and is equivalent to observing in-
finite samples, which strengthens any lower-bounds proven under this frame-work. The evaluations
of the target policy πM are motivated by giving partial information about πM to the learner.

We summarise the learning model in Algorithm 1. We consider two mechanisms for the learner to
specify the set of queries µk at round k (line 4). For both, we denote nk “ |µk | the number of
                            řK
queries at round k and n “ k“1 nk the total number of queries.
   2
     There is no randomness in the feedback of the dataset D (see Section 3.3) so the probabilities are with
respect to randomness arising from the learner’s query selection or output strategies.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Multi-Batch Learning Model
 1: (Input) PE or BPI problem and a number of batches K.
 2: Initialise D
               s0 “ H.
 3: for k “ 1, ..., K do
 4:     (Query Selection) With knowledge of D   sk´1 , learner chooses a set of queries µk .
 5:     (Data Collection) Environment receives queries µk and returns to learner Dk (set of queries
    + feedback for all queries in µk - see Definition 3.3). Learner updates Dsk “ Ťk Di .
                                                                                      i“1
 6: Set D “ D  sK ” ŤK Di (and for PE, πM becomes known).
                       i“1
 7: (Output) Learner returns Qp D (PE) or πpD (BPI).


1. Policy-Free Queries: In the first mechanism, the learner explicitly selects the set of queries µk
by selecting a set of state-action pairs. The learner has access to the dataset D
                                                                                sk´1 , which contains
the feedback of the queries from the previous rounds from the MDP M the learner is faced with.
Let Mk Ă M be the set of MDPs in M that would produce exactly the feedback in dataset D         sk´1
given the queries in the previous rounds. Given the queries this is deterministic since there is no
randomness in the feedback of a query (see Definition 3.3). The learner can use Mk in the selection
of the queries at round k but the specific MDP it is interacting with remains unknown if |Mk | ą 1.
2. Policy-Induced Queries: The second mechanism produces queries indirectly by selecting poli-
cies and using the queries along trajectories induced by these policies interacting with the MDP M .
Stochastic transitions imply different realizations of a trajectory for a policy from a same starting-
state. We allow the queries to be the state-actions pairs along all realizations of the trajectories.
Definition 3.5 (Policy-Induced Queries (Zanette (2021), Definition 2)). Fix a set Tk “
tpsk0i , πik , cki quκi“1
                       k
                          of κk triplets, each containing a starting state sk0i , a deterministic policy πik and
a trajectory length cki . Then the query set µk induced by Tk is defined as
                                                   ď
                                          µk “            Reachps0 , π, cq
                                             ps0 ,π,cqPTk

          where       Reachps0 , π, cq “ tps, aq|Dt ă c s.t. Pppst , at q “ ps, aq|π, s0 q ą 0u
are the state-action pairs reachable in c or less time-steps from s0 using policy π. Note pst , at q is
the random state-action pair encountered at time-step t upon following π from s0 .
The learner specifies a set Tk from which a set of queries µk is induced3 . Similarly to policy-free
queries, the learner can use Mk in the selection of Tk at round k but the specific MDP it is interacting
with remains unknown if |Mk | ą 1.
Remark 3.6. Policy-induced queries include policy-free queries as a special case (cki “ 1). How-
ever, if the dynamics of all MDPs in the class M are the same, then policy-induced queries are also
policy free because the learner knows the dynamics of the MDP it is interacting with. So it knows
exactly the queries that any set Tk will induce and can specify these as policy-free queries. If the
dynamics of all MDPs in the class M are not the same, then policy-induced queries can reveal more
information because a trajectory is guided by the dynamics of the MDP while policy-free queries
only reveal information about individual distinct transitions. Because of this, we will obtain slightly
stronger results for policy-free queries in Section 4.
Adaptivity: The multi-batch learning model encompasses different levels of adaptivity to feedback,
which is measured by the number of batches K:
• For K “ 1, the learner is non-adaptive and the dataset D is collected in a single batch. This is
  the model considered by Zanette (2021) for offline RL that we extend for general K.
• For K ą 1, the learner is adaptive and the dataset D is collected in multiple batches. Queries for
  a batch are selected based on feedback from previous batches.
• For K “ n (i.e. each batch contains a single data-point), the learner is fully-adaptive. The queries
  are selected sequentially and depend on the feedback from previous queries.
   3
     A sample-efficient learner requires |µk | to be polynomial in d but the learner does not directly select µk .
For example, if the transition function is stochastic it is possible that Tk induces a µk with |µk | “ 8 or
non-polynomial in dimension. The MDPs we consider all have deterministic transitions so this is not an issue.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     M AIN R ESULTS

In this section, we present our main results: lower-bounds on the number a  of rounds K for sample-
efficient algorithms. First, we state some assumptions. We assume γ ą 3{4. We also consider
a linear representation of the action-values for a known feature map of state-action pairs. This is a
form of linear function approximation that is strictly more general than linear MDPs (Zanette et al.,
2020), which assume the reward and transition functions are linearly representable. Specifically:
Assumption 4.1 (QπM -Realizability (Zanette (2021), Assumption 1)). Given any PE problem in-
stance ps̄, M, M, πM , Πq, there exists a known feature map ϕ : S ˆ A Ñ Rd s.t. }ϕp¨, ¨q}2 ď 1 and
              πM
there exists θM  P B such that for all ps, aq P S ˆ A,

                                      QπMM ps, aq “ ϕps, aqT θM
                                                              πM
                                                                 .
Assumption 4.2 (Qπ -Realizability for every policy (Zanette (2021), Assumption 3)). Given any
BPI ps̄, M, Mq or PE ps̄, M, M, πM , Πq problem instance, there exists a known feature map ϕ :
S ˆ A Ñ Rd s.t. }ϕp¨, ¨q}2 ď 1 and for any policy π there exists θM
                                                                  π
                                                                    P B s.t. for all ps, aq P S ˆ A,

                                       QπM ps, aq “ ϕps, aqT θM
                                                              π
                                                                .

This first assumption is used for PE problems. The second is stronger as it concerns the action-value
of every policy (not just policies in Π) and in particular it holds for Q‹ . We assume the learner is
aware when these assumptions hold. Finally, we formally define a sample-efficient learner:
Definition 4.3. A learner for PE or BPI problems under Assumptions 4.1 or 4.2 is sample-efficient
                                  řK
if its total number of queries n “ k“1 nk is polynomial in d.

4.1   P OLICY-I NDUCED Q UERIES

We first present a result for PE under policy-induced queries. Since all MDPs in the class used in
the proof share the same dynamics, policy-induced queries are equivalent to policy-free queries (see
Remark 3.6) and the result holds for both. The full proof can be found in Appendix E.
Theorem 4.4. Fix d sufficiently large. There exists a class of MDPs M and policies Π defining PE
problems ps̄, M, M, πM , Πq satisfying Assumption 4.1 such that any sample-efficient learner better
than p1, 1{2q-sound using policy-induced or policy-free queries requires K “ Ωplog log dq.

In the class of MDPs used for Theorem 4.4 we can hide information about M P M in the target-
policy for PE but cannot for BPI. Instead, we could hide information in the transitions but this can be
revealed by following policy trajectories (policy-induced queries) in our constructions. In the next
section, we restrict the learner to policy-free queries and provide results for both PE and BPI. Note
that a p1, 1{2q-sound learner performs poorly since the MDP class has value functions in r´1, 1s.

4.2   P OLICY-F REE Q UERIES

We now consider only policy-free queries, which gives the environment freedom to hide information
in the transition function of the MDP and leads to lower-bounds for PE and BPI that hold for the
stronger Assumption 4.2 of all-policy realizability. The full proof can be found in Appendix F.
Theorem 4.5. Fix d sufficiently large. There exists a class of MDPs M and policies Π defining prob-
lems for PE ps̄, M, M, πM , Πq and BPI ps̄, M, Mq satisfying Assumption 4.2 such that any sample-
efficient learner better than p1, 1{2q-sound using policy-free queries requires K “ Ωplog log dq.

4.3   D ISCUSSION

The results indicate that K “ Ωplog log dq batches are necessary for solving PE or BPI tasks sample-
efficiently under realizable linear function approximation. Beyond the exact dependence on d, the
significance of these results is that just having K ą 1 is insufficient. In particular, more adaptivity is
needed as the dimension of the linear representation increases. These results demonstrate that sam-
ple efficiency is impossible not only in offline RL, but also in settings with some level of adaptivity
(K “ oplog log dq). Therefore, the boundary at which sample-efficiency becomes impossible is at a

                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dimension-dependent level of adaptivity between offline and full-adaptivity. This leaves interesting
open directions on the existence of a sample-efficient algorithm using K “ Oplog log dq batches.
Our lower-bounds no longer hold if the action space A is finite or with coverage assumptions on
the collected data (for BPI). While it may be necessary to have coverage assumptions in an offline
setting, this assumption need not be made when data is collected adaptively, as in our setting.
Furthermore, in Appendix B we provide results for the fully adaptive setting where the number of
batches K is equal to the number of total queries n (i.e. each batch contains a single query). We
show that if the feature-space covers B, there is a learner that solves any realizable (Assumption 4.1)
PE problem in d queries. Assuming a known target policy π, a linear dependence on d was already
known to be possible using roll-outs from π (Lattimore et al., 2020), however the dependence on d
was coupled with other quantities such as the effective horizon 1{p1´γq and desired accuracy ε. Our
result states that d-queries are sufficient to find Qπ exactly (ε “ 0), independently of γ. Our result
relies heavily on the condition that the learner observes the transition function pM p¨|s, aq rather than
a sample s1 „ pM p¨|s, aq for a query ps, aq (see Section 3.3), though our result under this condition
is strong since using this condition with the roll-outs from π would not give exact convergence in
d-queries. We also provide a matching lower-bound (that also holds for BPI). These results serve to
illustrate the trade-off between sample-efficiency and low-adaptivity for PE under our framework.
Full-adaptivity allows low sample-complexity, while reducing adaptivity below K “ oplog log dq
comes at the cost of high sample-complexity (losing sample-efficiency).


4.4   R ELATED W ORKS

The works discussed below are for infinite-horizon discounted MDPs unless stated otherwise.
Tabular MDPs (|A|, |S| are “small”) can be solved in the offline setting under policy-free queries:
model-based approaches (Li et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2020) under a generative model are
minimax-optimal (Azar et al., 2013) with sample-complexity linear in the dimension of the MDP
|A| ˆ |S|. These methods estimate the MDP by sampling equally from all state-action pair and
then use dynamic programming approaches on the estimated MDP. In particular, all the samples are
drawn in a single-batch. Beyond the generative model and under a restricted form of our policy-
induced queries (Definition 3.5), tabular offline RL is no longer sample efficient (Xiao et al., 2022)
and requires a number of samples exponential in |S| or 1{p1 ´ γq.
Linear Function Approximation: In the offline setting, there are lower-bounds showing OPE or
BPI is not possible with samples polynomial in the effective horizon 1{p1 ´ γq or the linear dimen-
sion (Amortila et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Zanette, 2021). The bound of Zanette (2021) is the
strongest as it holds for any data-distribution. These exponential lower-bounds can be overcome
with assumptions such as low-distribution shift (Chen et al., 2021), low inherent Bellman-error (Xie
& Jiang, 2020; Duan et al., 2020) or low local inherent Bellman error (Zanette, 2023). We refer
the reader to the work of Zanette (2021) for a more in depth discussion of offline RL. In the fully-
adaptive setting, there are sample-efficient algorithms under all-policy realizability (Lattimore et al.,
2020), under V ‹ -realizability only (Weisz et al., 2021) (if the action space is finite) and under linear
MDPs (Taupin et al., 2023; Kitamura et al., 2023).
The multi-batch learning model has been studied extensively for bandit algorithms (Perchet et al.,
2015; Jun et al., 2016; Gao et al., 2019; Esfandiari et al., 2021; Duchi et al., 2018; Han et al., 2020;
Ruan et al., 2021). In RL, it has been studied in the regret-minimisation setting for finite-horizon
tabular (Zihan et al., 2022) and linear MDPs (Wang et al., 2021) and MDPs under general function
approximation (Xiong et al., 2023). A closely related notion is deployment efficiency (Matsushima
et al., 2021), which constrains batches to be of a fixed size consisting of trajectories from a single
policy. In finite-horizon linear MDPs, it has been shown that BPI can be solved to arbitrary accuracy
with a number of deployments independent of the dimension d (Huang et al., 2022; Qiao & Wang,
2023) where the deployed policy is a finite mixture of deterministic policies. Our results suggest
that infinite-horizon discounted MDPs under more general linear representation of action-values are
fundamentally harder since the number of deployments must scale with dimension.
Please refer to Appendix A for a discussion of works related to low-switching cost (Qiao et al., 2022;
Bai et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Qiao & Wang, 2023; Qiao
et al., 2023) and policy fine-tuning (Xie et al., 2021; Zhang & Zanette, 2023).


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5       P ROOF S KETCH
In this section, we provide intuition for the proof of Theorem 4.4. We extend the ideas of Zanette
(2021) beyond offline RL to our multi-batch problem (see the end of this section for a comparison).
We consider the PE problem with policy-free queries under Assumption 4.1 for feature vectors ϕp¨, ¨q
covering the unit Euclidean ball B (see Figure 1). The intuition for Theorem 4.5 is closely related.
Consider the first batch of data with n1 queries and let psi , ai q be the i-th query and ps`          `
                                                                                              i , πM psi qq
the corresponding (assumed deterministic) successor state and target policy evaluation. Define
               »                  fi                                  »                      fi
                   ϕps1 , a1 qT              rps1 , a1 q                 ϕps`          ` T
                                                                              1 , πM ps1 q
                                           «             ff
          Φ“–          ...        fl , r “      ...         , Φ` “ –               ...       fl .
                                T           rpsn1 , an1 q                    `         `   T
                 ϕpsn1 , an1 q                                          ϕpsn1 , πM psn1 qq
Since QπM is the fixed point of the Bellman evaluation operator: QπM ps, aq “ pT πM QπM qps, aq
                                         πM                                  πM
and by Assumption 4.1 there exists θM       such that QπM ps, aq “ ϕps, aqT θM  for any ps, aq, the
learner aims to find a solution θ satisfying the (local) Bellman equation
                                   Φθ “ r ` γΦ` θ ùñ pΦ ´ γΦ` qθ “ r.
If X “ Φ ´ γΦ` is not full-rank, this equation does not have a unique solution. The learner only
chooses Φ. The environment, with knowledge of Φ, can pick Φ` to maximise the dimension of the
null-space4 of X, which can be viewed as erasing information along many directions (see Figure
1 left). This phenomenon where the value of a policy in a state depends on the same value in the
successor states is known as bootstrapping and is the mechanism inducing hardness in our setting as
it allows the environment to choose these successor states adversarially to erase information.


Figure 1: Left: Information can be erased in multiple directions: Consider the setting where
information is being erased along the pink plane N : the learner’s queries ϕpsi , ai q are shown
in blue and the environment’s responses ´γϕps`                `
                                                    i , πM psi qq are shown in black. The rows of X,
                  `         `
ϕpsi , ai q ´ γϕpsi , πM psi qq (blue + black vectors) all lie on the yellow line so the learner acquires
no information in the directions of the pink subspace N , the null-space of X. Right: Information
cannot be erased in all directions: Consider the opposite setting where information is being erased
along the pink line N . Because of the constraint }ϕps, aq}2 ď 1 and γ ă 1, a query ϕ1 (in blue)
in the pink cap cannot have ϕ1 ´ γϕ`    1 (blue + black vector) projected back onto the yellow plane
(unless }γϕ1 }2 ą γ ùñ }ϕ1 }2 ą 1). Despite the environment not being able to erase information
in certain directions, if the number of queries is ”small”, it can always find directions to erase.

Although the learner can prevent the environment from erasing information along certain directions
(see Figure 1 right), since n1 is polynomial in d this only prevents the environment from erasing in-
formation in a limited number of directions. Specifically, we show that if n1 is less than exponential
in d1{4 then there is a subspace of dimension d1{4 that can be included in the null-space of X.
Prior to choosing n2 queries for the 2nd batch, the learner observes the feedback from the first
batch. It becomes aware of the directions of the null-space and can focus its queries for the next
round on these directions. However, the null-space is still at least d1{4 -dimensional and so the same
    4
        By the rank-nullity theorem, this is equivalent to minimising the rank of X.


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


reasoning as in the first round can be applied where the original dimension is now d1{4 . So if n2 is
less than exponential in d1{16 then there is a subspace of dimension d1{16 that can be included in the
null-space of the new local Bellman equation that includes the data from the 1st and 2nd batch.
                                                                                       k
After k rounds if the number of queries at round k, nk is less than exponential in d1{4 , then the null-
                                                          k                            k
space of the local Bellman equation is still at least d1{4 -dimensional. If exppd1{4 q is more than
polynomial in d, the sample-efficient learner cannot prevent a non-zero null-space and the problem
                                                                        K
cannot be solved. The learner must reach a round K where exppd1{4 q becomes polynomial in d,
requiring K “ Ωplog log dq rounds, from which we get our lower-bound.
Description of the MDP construction for which the learner cannot do better than p1, 1{2q-
soundness. Consider an MDP class M with S “ A “ B and a feature map ϕ such that ϕps, aq “ a.
The successor state of ps, aq is deterministic and is the action a. Fix w P BB and consider two
MDPs: Mw,` and Mw,´ . We denote the reward function for either MDP with the same subscript:
                                                     "
                                                       0,              if a R Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq
   for z P t`, ´u :    on Mw,z :       rw,z ps, aq “
                                                       zp1 ´ γqaT w, otherwise,
where Cγ pwq “ tx P B : xT w{}w}2 ą γu is the γ-hyperspherical cap of w. For a w P BB and
a carefully designed target policy πw , we show that Assumption 4.1 holds. We also show with the
reasoning described above that if nk “ polypdq for all k and K “ oplog log dq, then none of the
learner’s queries are in Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq. Therefore the feedback observed contains no information
about the sign of the rewards in Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq. Mw,` is indistinguishable from Mw,´ . Since
QπMww,` ps̄, wq “ 1 and QπMww,´ ps̄, wq “ ´1, the learner must incur an error of 1 with probability at
least 1{2. All the details are in Appendix E, including further illustrations in Appendix E.5. The
construction for Theorem 4.5 is similar but the transitions differ across MDPs (see Appendix F).
To improve the lower-bound with the current construction, we require the existence of a sub-
space packing (of size exponential in d and subspace dimension cd (instead of d1{4a   ), for some c ă 1)
with minimal chordal distance (see Appendix D) between subspaces dmin pCq ě d ´ p2γ 2 ´ 1q2 .
                                                                                                      k
After k rounds, information would be missing along a subspace of dimension ck d, (instead of d1{4 )
from which we could get a log d lower-bound. As far as we are aware, such a result is not available
in the literature, nor is a subspace covering result that would rule out the possibility of such a pack-
ing. We highlight that our MDP construction can be combined with any subspace packing result,
paving the way for improved lower-bounds should new subspace packing procedures be developed.
Comparison to Zanette (2021): The work of Zanette (2021) erases information along a 1-
dimensional subspace (X is of rank d ´ 1). Therefore after having observed one round of feed-
back, a single additional query is sufficient to distinguish the MDP and solve the problem. Our
constructions erase information along m-dimensional subspaces where we attempt to maximise m
so that even after having observed feedback revealing this subspace, a polynomial number of queries
remains insufficient to distinguish the MDP, more adaptive rounds are needed.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have studied the connection between adaptivity and sample-efficiency for RL al-
gorithms solving PE and BPI problems under d-dimensional linear function approximation. For
multi-batch learning, we have established Ωplog log dq lower-bounds on the number of batches K
needed to solve the RL problems sample-efficiently (number of queries polynomial in d). In particu-
lar, having adaptivity (K ą 1) does not guarantee sample-efficiency. Consequently the boundary of
sample efficiency must not lie between batch RL (K “ 1) and adaptive RL (K ą 1) but rather within
a regime of adaptivity scaling with dimension. These insights contribute to a deeper understanding
of the trade-offs and possibilities in designing sample-efficient RL algorithms with low-adaptivity.
It remains unclear if the log log d dependence on d is tight. An upper-bound similar to the one we
have given for the fully-adaptive PE problem in Appendix B could be established by developing new
tools in the theory of subspace covering. These would formalise the number of directions for which
the learner can prevent information erasure. It is also unclear if Theorem 4.4 under policy-induced
queries also holds for BPI or if the sample-efficiency of BPI-algorithms in low-adaptivity settings
differs for policy-induced and policy-free queries. We leave these as future work.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND D ISCLOSURE OF F UNDING
EJ is funded by EPSRC through the Modern Statistics and Statistical Machine Learning (StatML)
CDT (grant no. EP/S023151/1) and thanks G-Research for partly funding attendance to ICLR 2024.
We would like to thank the reviewers and meta-reviewers for their time and feedback, which led to
a better version of this paper. We would also like to thank Nathan Mankovich and Hugo Chu for
helpful discussions.

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, and Lin F. Yang. Model-based reinforcement learning with a gener-
  ative model is minimax optimal. In Proceedings of Thirty Third Conference on Learning Theory,
  volume 125 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 67–83. PMLR, 2020.
Philip Amortila, Nan Jiang, and Tengyang Xie. A variant of the wang-foster-kakade lower bound
  for the discounted setting. 2020. Preprint, arXiv: 2011.01075.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Rémi Munos, and Hilbert Kappen. Minimax PAC bounds on the
 sample complexity of reinforcement learning with a generative model. Machine Learning, 91(3):
 325–349, 2013.
Yu Bai, Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Provably efficient q-learning with low
  switching cost. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Richard Bellman, Robert Kalaba, and Bella Kotkin. Polynomial approximation–a new computa-
  tional technique in dynamic programming: Allocation processes. Mathematics of Computation,
  17(82):155–161, 1963.
Lin Chen, Bruno Scherrer, and Peter L Bartlett. Infinite-horizon offline reinforcement learning with
  linear function approximation: Curse of dimensionality and algorithm. 2021. Preprint, arXiv:
  2103.09847.
John H. Conway, Ronald H. Hardin, and Neil J. A. Sloane. Packing lines, planes, etc.: packings in
  Grassmannian spaces. Experimental Mathematics, 5(2):139 – 159, 1996.
Christoph Dann, Lihong Li, Wei Wei, and Emma Brunskill. Policy certificates: Towards account-
  able reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1507–1516. PMLR,
  2019.
Yaqi Duan, Zeyu Jia, and Mengdi Wang. Minimax-optimal off-policy evaluation with linear func-
  tion approximation. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2701–2709. PMLR, 2020.
John Duchi, Feng Ruan, and Chulhee Yun. Minimax bounds on stochastic batched convex optimiza-
  tion. In Proceedings of the 31st Conference On Learning Theory, volume 75 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 3065–3162. PMLR, 2018.
Hossein Esfandiari, Amin Karbasi, Abbas Mehrabian, and Vahab Mirrokni. Regret bounds for
  batched bandits. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 35(8):7340–7348,
  2021.
Minbo Gao, Tianle Xie, Simon S Du, and Lin F Yang. A provably efficient algorithm for linear
 markov decision process with low switching cost. 2021. Preprint, arXiv: 2101.00494.
Zijun Gao, Yanjun Han, Zhimei Ren, and Zhengqing Zhou. Batched multi-armed bandits problem.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Yanjun Han, Zhengqing Zhou, Zhengyuan Zhou, Jose Blanchet, Peter W Glynn, and Yinyu Ye.
  Sequential batch learning in finite-action linear contextual bandits. 2020. Preprint, arXiv:
  2004.06321.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiawei Huang, Jinglin Chen, Li Zhao, Tao Qin, Nan Jiang, and Tie-Yan Liu. Towards deployment-
   efficient reinforcement learning: Lower bound and optimality. In International Conference on
   Learning Representations, 2022.

Zeyu Jia, Randy Jia, Dhruv Madeka, and Dean P Foster. Linear reinforcement learning with ball
  structure action space. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 755–
  775. PMLR, 2023.

Kwang-Sung Jun, Kevin Jamieson, Robert Nowak, and Xiaojin Zhu. Top arm identification in
 multi-armed bandits with batch arm pulls. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
 on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 51 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
 pp. 139–148. PMLR, 2016.

Toshinori Kitamura, Tadashi Kozuno, Yunhao Tang, Nino Vieillard, Michal Valko, Wenhao Yang,
  Jincheng Mei, Pierre Ménard, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Rémi Munos, Olivier Pietquin,
  Matthieu Geist, Csaba Szepesvári, Wataru Kumagai, and Yutaka Matsuo. Regularization and
  variance-weighted regression achieves minimax optimality in linear MDPs: Theory and practice.
  2023. Preprint, arXiv: 2305.13185.

Allison Koenecke, Andrew Nam, Emily Lake, Joe Nudell, Minnie Quartey, Zion Mengesha, Connor
  Toups, John R. Rickford, Dan Jurafsky, and Sharad Goel. Racial disparities in automated speech
  recognition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(14):7684–7689, 2020.

Sascha Lange, Thomas Gabel, and Martin Riedmiller. Batch Reinforcement Learning, pp. 45–73.
  Springer, 2012.

Tor Lattimore, Csaba Szepesvari, and Gellert Weisz. Learning with good feature representations in
  bandits and in RL with a generative model. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5662–
  5670. PMLR, 2020.

Gen Li, Yuting Wei, Yuejie Chi, Yuantao Gu, and Yuxin Chen. Breaking the sample size barrier in
  model-based reinforcement learning with a generative model. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020.

Tatsuya Matsushima, Hiroki Furuta, Yutaka Matsuo, Ofir Nachum, and Shixiang Gu. Deployment-
  efficient reinforcement learning via model-based offline optimization. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2021.

Vianney Perchet, Philippe Rigollet, Sylvain Chassang, and Erik Snowberg. Batched bandit prob-
  lems. In Proceedings of The 28th Conference on Learning Theory, volume 40 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 1456–1456. PMLR, 2015.

Martin L. Puterman. Markov decision processes : discrete stochastic dynamic programming. Wiley-
 Interscience, 1994.

Dan Qiao and Yu-Xiang Wang. Near-optimal deployment efficiency in reward-free reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2023.

Dan Qiao, Ming Yin, Ming Min, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning
  with loglog(T) switching cost. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 18031–18061. PMLR,
  2022.

Dan Qiao, Ming Yin, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Logarithmic switching cost in reinforcement learning
  beyond linear MDPs. 2023. Preprint, arXiv: 2302.12456.

Yufei Ruan, Jiaqi Yang, and Yuan Zhou. Linear bandits with limited adaptivity and learning distri-
  butional optimal design. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
  of Computing, pp. 74–87, 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Mahdi Soleymani and Hessam Mahdavifar. New packings in grassmannian space. In 2021 IEEE
 International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pp. 807–812, 2021.
Jérôme Taupin, Yassir Jedra, and Alexandre Proutiere. Best policy identification in discounted linear
    MDPs. In Sixteenth European Workshop on Reinforcement Learning, 2023.
Tianhao Wang, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Provably efficient reinforcement learning with
  linear function approximation under adaptivity constraints. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 34, 2021.
Gellert Weisz, Philip Amortila, Barnabás Janzer, Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Nan Jiang, and Csaba
  Szepesvari. On query-efficient planning in mdps under linear realizability of the optimal state-
  value function. In Proceedings of Thirty Fourth Conference on Learning Theory, volume 134 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4355–4385. PMLR, 2021.
Chenjun Xiao, Ilbin Lee, Bo Dai, Dale Schuurmans, and Csaba Szepesvari. The curse of passive
  data collection in batch reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of The 25th International Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 151 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 8413–8438. PMLR, 2022.
Tengyang Xie and Nan Jiang. Q* approximation schemes for batch reinforcement learning: A
  theoretical comparison. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 550–559.
  PMLR, 2020.
Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Yu Bai. Policy finetuning: Bridging
  sample-efficient offline and online reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 34, 2021.
Nuoya Xiong, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. A general framework for sequential decision-
  making under adaptivity constraints. 2023. Preprint, arXiv: 2306.14468.
Chao Yu, Jiming Liu, Shamim Nemati, and Guosheng Yin. Reinforcement learning in healthcare:
  A survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(1):1–36, 2021.
Andrea Zanette. Exponential lower bounds for batch reinforcement learning: Batch rl can be expo-
  nentially harder than online rl. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 12287–12297. PMLR,
  2021.
Andrea Zanette. When is realizability sufficient for off-policy reinforcement learning? In Proceed-
  ings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 40637–40668. PMLR, 2023.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Learning near
  optimal policies with low inherent Bellman error. In Proceedings of the 37th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  10978–10989. PMLR, 2020.
Ruiqi Zhang and Andrea Zanette. Policy finetuning in reinforcement learning via design of experi-
  ments using offline data. 2023. Preprint, arXiv: 2307.04354.
Zihan Zhang, Yuan Zhou, and Xiangyang Ji. Almost optimal model-free reinforcement learningvia
  reference-advantage decomposition. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 33, 2020.
Zhang Zihan, Yuhang Jiang, Yuan Zhou, and Xiangyang Ji. Near-optimal regret bounds for multi-
  batch reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    F URTHER R ELATED W ORKS

The works discussed below are for infinite-horizon discounted MDPs unless stated otherwise.
Low-Switching Cost: Limited adaptivity in RL has mostly been studied in the context of regret-
minimisation algorithms with low-switching cost for finite-horizon episodic MDPs, i.e. minimising
the number of times the policy used changes from one episode to the next. These works are not
directly comparable because they study regret-minimisation for finite-horizon MDPs and we study
BPI and PE in the discounted setting. Nevertheless, there are works on tabular MDPs (Qiao et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020), linear MDPs (Gao et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Qiao
& Wang, 2023) and MDPs with a linear representation for the action values (Qiao et al., 2023).
The policy finetuning setting assumes access to an offline dataset that can be complemented with
online trajectories (Xie et al., 2021) but is different from our setting since there is no adaptivity
constraint in the online algorithm, i.e. once the initial dataset has been collected, the query selection
strategy can be updated after each new observation (or episode in the episodic setting). However, if
the additional trajectories are collected using a non-adaptive policy instead of an online algorithm,
we can recover our setting with K “ 2 batches. This is studied by Zhang & Zanette (2023) who
show that for finite-horizon tabular MDPs, K “ 2 is enough to solve the BPI problem to arbitrary
accuracy. Our results rule out achieving a similar result for infinite-horizon discounted MDPs under
policy-free queries and linear function approximation.


B    B OUNDS FOR THE F ULLY A DAPTIVE S ETTING

In this section, we show an upper-bound result for the fully adaptive setting (K “ n - see Section
3.3). In this setting, the oracle selects one query in each round or batch of data, so chooses psk , ak q
at round k with knowledge of the feedback from queries up to time k ´ 1. The number of rounds
K coincides with the number of queries n (each batch contains one query). In particular, since it is
one query at a time, there is no difference between policy-induced or policy-free queries. The upper
bound we show relies on the following assumptions on the feature space:
Assumption B.1 (Feature Map). Fix a feature map ϕ. Given any orthonormal set of vectors
tu1 , ..., un u with n ă d, it is possible to choose a state-action pair ps, aq such that ϕps, aq P
xu1 , ..., un yK and }ϕps, aq}2 “ 1.

The superscript K on a subspace refers to the orthogonal complememnt of the subspace.
Theorem B.2. Fix d ą 0. Consider any PE problem ps̄, M, M, πM , Πq satisfying Assumptions 4.1
and B.1 for the same feature map ϕ, then there exists a fully-adaptive learner that solves the PE
problem exactly in at most d queries.

We complement our upper-bound with a matching lower-bound, which holds for both PE and BPI.
Theorem B.3. Fix d ą 0. There exists a class of MDPs M and target policies Π characterising
PE problems ps̄, M, M, πM , Πq and BPI problems ps̄, M, Mq that satisfy Assumption 4.2 and share
the same s̄ and M such that any fully-adaptive learner that is better than p1, 1{2q-sound requires
K “ n ě d.

Theorem B.2 together with Theorem B.3 shows that exactly d queries are optimal for solving a PE
problem under our feedback model and Assumption B.1. The lower-bound is to be expected because
the learner is operating in a d-dimensional feature space so has to learn in d directions. However,
it is interesting that the structure imposed by Assumption B.1 on the learner’s capacity to explore
the feature space is sufficient for the learner to fully solve the problem in only d queries. A similar
assumption was studied by Jia et al. (2023) to obtain a sample-efficient algorithm for BPI in finite-
horizon MDPs. We can obtain this result for PE with a simple analysis because the learner can
exploit that the action-value of a policy is the fixed point of a linear operator, the Bellman evaluation
operator. An equivalent approach does not work for BPI since the action-value of the optimal policy
is not the fixed point of a linear operator.
The proofs of the theorems in this section can be found in Appendix G.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    H YPER - SPHERICAL CAPS AND SECTORS FOR SUBSPACES
Recall that B “ tx P Rd : }x}2 ď 1u is the d-dimensional unit hyper-sphere.
Definition C.1. Fix w P B. Define the γ-hyperspherical cap of w as:
                                           !       xT w       )
                                Cγ pwq “ x P B :          ąγ .
                                                   }w}2

A vector x is in the γ-hyperspherical cap of w if the angle θ between x and w satisfies
                                                                  γ
                             γ ă }x}2 cos θ ðñ θ ă arccosp            q.
                                                                 }x}2
With γ close to 1, these represent a set of vectors in the hyper-cone around w that are close to the
boundary of B (see Figure 1 right). The key property that motivates considering vectors in this set is
that they require a vector of norm greater than γ to be projected in a direction orthogonal to w. We
extend the notion of γ-hyperspherical caps to subspaces of multiple dimensions.
Definition C.2. Fix a subspace H of Rd . Define the γ-hyperspherical sector of H as
                           △        !                        xT v         )
                           C γ pHq “ x P B : Dv P H s.t.             ąγ .
                                                           }v}2 }x}2
See Figure 2 for an illustration.


Figure 2: Illustration of a hyperspherical sector of a 1-dimensional subspace (left) and a 2-
dimensional subspace (right - all vectors whose direction is within the two pink bands). In both
cases, the subspace H is in yellow.

Beyond the extension to subspaces of multiple dimensions, Definition C.2 differs from Definition
C.1 in two ways. It is a hyper-spherical sector rather than cap, which does not restrict the vectors to
                                                                    △                   △
be close to the boundary of B. It is two sided meaning that if x P C γ pHq, then ´v P C γ pHq. Note
                                           △
that the subspace H is defined on Rd but C γ pHq Ă B.
                                                                        △
Similar to the intuition in the 1-dimensional case, a vector x is in C γ pHq if there is a vector in
H whose angle with x is ”small”. It is equivalent to taking the unions of the 1-dimensional γ-
hyperspherical sectors of all the vectors in H. Again, the key property that motivates considering
vectors in this set is that they require a vector of norm greater than γ to be projected in a direction
orthogonal to H.
                                         △                                                △
We also note that a vector x is not in C γ pHq if the subspace H does not intersect C γ pxxyq, the
γ-hyperspherical sector of xxy. This allows us to work with the γ-hyperspherical sectors of one
dimensional subspaces (span of a single vector) instead of subspaces of multiple dimensions. We
                                    △                  △
will also abuse notation and write C γ pxq instead of C γ pxxyq


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     S UBSPACE PACKING
D.1    P RELIMINARIES

Denote the set of all m-dimensional subspaces of Rd as Gm,d pRq, which is called the Grassmannian
space. An element A P Gm,d pRq is an m-dimensional subspace of Rd .
We present a measure of distance between subspaces known as the chordal distance (Conway et al.,
1996). Fix two subspaces A, B P Gm,d pRq. The principal angles θ1 , ..., θm P r0, π{2s between A
and B are defined as
                                                     aT b
                                 cos θi “ max max            “ aTi bi ,
                                           aPA BPB }a}2 }b}2

for i “ 1, ..., m such that }ai }2 “ }bi }2 “ 1, aT aj “ 0, bT bj “ 0 for 1 ď j ď i ´ 1. The chordal
distance dc is then defined as
                                         b
                           dc pA, Bq “ sin2 θ1 ` sin2 θ2 ` ... ` sin2 θm .
We define the notion of subspace packing, which is the usual notion of a packing where the set is
the Grassmanian space Gm,d pRq and the distance is the chordal distance.
Definition D.1. A subspace packing C of Gm,d pRq is a set of m-dimensional subspaces in Rd of size
|C|, i.e. it is a subset of Gm,d pRq. The minimum distance between elements of C is measured by the
chordal distance and is denoted
                                   dmin pCq “      min      dc pA, Bq.
                                                A,BPC,A‰B


D.2    A SUBSPACE PACKING BOUND

Lemma D.2 (Soleymani & Mahdavifar (2021), Theorem 4). Fix d “ 2N for some N P N and
                                                                            ´ ¯rk{2s´1
integers k ă d and m ă d. There exists a packing C in Gm,d pRq of size |C| “ d2         d
                                                                                       tm u s.t
                                              c
                                          ?           mpk ´ 1q2
                              dmin pCq ě m 1 ´                  .
                                                          d

Theorem 4 from Soleymani & Mahdavifar (2021) is presented for packings in Gm,d pCq but they give
(in Remark 1) a mapping from a packing in Gm{2,d{2 pCq to a packing in Gm,d pRq that preserves
                                       ?
the normalized distance δc (“ dmin pCq{ m) between the elements of the packing, giving the result
presented above.

D.3    E XISTENCE OF AN ISOLATED SUBSPACE

The following lemma is the key result for the construction of the class of MDPs used in the proof
of our main results. It establishes that if a number of points n is “small”, then for any n points
there exists a subspace whose γ-sector contains none of the n points. The environment can erase
                                                                                       △
information along this subspace (see Section 5). See Appendix C for the definition of C γ pHq for a
subspace H. The proof is given in Appendix D.3.2.
Throughout, we will use gpγq “ 2γ 2 ´ 1.
Lemma D.3. Fix d “ 2N for some N ě 8. Consider D “ ty1 , ..., yn u, a set of n points s.t. yi P B
for all i P rns. If
                                         ´ d ¯ 18 gpγqd1{4
                                    n`1ď                   ,
                                           2
then there exists a subspace A P G2rN {4s ,d pRq of dimension 2rN {4s s.t.
                                                          △
                                       @x P D,        x R C γ pAq.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3.1     P RELIMINARY L EMMAS
The proof of Lemma D.3 relies on the following lemmas. See Appendix D for the definition of
Gm,d pRq and the definition of a subspace packing C.
                        N
Lemma D.4. Fix ad “ 2 for some N P N. If there exists a packing C in Gm,d pRq of size |C| ě n`1
s.t. dmin pCq ě m ´ gpγq2 , then given a set ty1 , ..., yn u of n queries s.t. yi P B for all i P rns,
                                                                     △
there exists a subspace H P Gm,d pRq of dimension m s.t. yi R C γ pAq for all i.
This lemma establishes that if n ` 1 subspaces are sufficiently far in terms of chordal distance, then
for any n points there is a subspace whose γ-sector does not contain any of the n points. The proof
is given in Appendix D.3.3
Lemma D.5. Consider pn ` 1q subspaces A1 , ..., An`1 of dimension m s.t. for any i ‰ j,
                                                     xT z
                                         max                 ă gpγq.
                                      xPAi ,zPAj }x}2 }z}2
Given n vectors y1 , ..., yn P B (w.l.o.g. all unit norm), then there is a subspace H P tA1 , ..., An`1 u
s.t. for all y P ty1 , ..., yn u,
                                                    yT w
                                             max          ď γ,
                                              wPH }w}2
               △
meaning yi R C γ pHq for i “ 1, ..., n.
This lemma is similar to Lemma D.4 but uses a more explicit notion of distance between subspaces.
The proof is given in Appendix D.3.4.

D.3.2     P ROOF OF L EMMA D.3
To prove Lemma D.3, we show the existence of a subspace packing C in Gm,d pRq (with m “ 2rN {4s )
and use Lemma D.4. The subspace packing must satisfy two conditions:
        • |C| ě n ` 1.
                     a
        • dmin pCq ě m ´ gpγq2 .
                                                                                       ?
To show the existence of a suitable subspace packing, we use Lemma D.2 with k “ t gpγq
                                                                                   m     d ` 1u
                                                           ?
                                                  ´ ¯ gpγq
                                                       2m    d´1
(ď d). Lemma D.2 gives a packing C of size |C| ě d2               d
                                                                 tm u s.t
                                               a
                                     dmin pCq ě m ´ gpγq2 .

Substituting in m “ 2rN {4s into the lower-bound on the size of C gives
              ?
          gpγq d                         gpγq N {2´rN {4s                           gpγq N {4   ´ d ¯ gpγq 1{4
 d ´ d ¯ 2m ´1        d ´ d ¯´3{4 ´ d ¯ 2 2               ´ 14       t23N {4 u ´ d ¯ 4 2 ´ 14          8 d
t u               “t u                                         ě 23{4 3N {4                   ě                ,
 m 2                  m 2             2                               2          2                2
where we used
        • N {2 ´ rN {4s ě N {4 ´ 1 because rxs ď x ` 1.
                 3N {4
        • 23{4 t223N {4 u ě 1 if N ě 2.
        • gpγq      ´ 14 ě gpγq
               N {4             N {4
                                                          a
           4 2              8 2      if N ě 8 and γ ě      3{4.
Since the condition given in the statement of the lemma is
                                             ´ d ¯ gpγq
                                                    8 d
                                                        1{4

                                     n`1ď                   ď |C|,
                                               2        a
the packing C satisfies |C| ě n ` 1 and dmin pCq ě m ´ gpγq2 . By Lemma D.4 there exists a
subspace A P Gm,d pRq of dimension m “ 2rN {4s s.t.
                                                          △
                                    @x P D,           x R C γ pAq,
which concludes the proof of the lemma.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA D.4
Consider distinct A, B P C, i.e A, B are subspaces of dimension m s.t.
                                                 a
                                    dC pA, Bq ą m ´ gpγq2 .
Now letting 0 ď θ1 ď ... ď θm ď π{2 be the principal angles between A and B (see Appendix D),
we have
                             b                              b
                dC pH, Aq “ sin pθ1 q ` ... ` sin pθm q ď m ´ 1 ` sin2 θ1 .
                                 2                2


Combining with the inequality above,
               a                b
                  m ´ gpγq2 ď m ´ 1 ` sin2 θ1 ùñ sin2 pθ1 q ą 1 ´ gpγq2 .

The first principal angle θ1 “ arccos aT b where a P A, b P B are unit vectors chosen s.t.
                                                         xT y
                                       aT b “ max                .
                                               xPA,yPB }x}2 }y}2

So we have
                              xT y
                                                                b
                     max              “ aT b “ cos θ1 “          1 ´ sin2 pθ1 q ă gpγq.
                    xPA,yPB }x}2 }y}2

Since this applies to arbitrary distinct A, B P C, there are pn ` 1q subspaces A1 , ..., An`1 P C of
dimension m s.t. for any i ‰ j,
                                             xT z
                                  max                ă gpγq “ 2γ 2 ´ 1.
                                xPAi ,zPAj }x}2 }z}2

By Lemma D.5, there exists a subspace H in tA1 , ..., An`1 u s.t. for all y P ty1 , ..., yn u,
                                                yT w
                                            max      ď γ,
                                            wPH }w}2

         △
i.e. yi R C γ pHq for i “ 1, ..., n, which concludes the proof.

D.3.4    P ROOF OF L EMMA D.5
Recall that we consider pn ` 1q subspaces A1 , ..., An`1 of dimension m s.t. for any i ‰ j,
                                             xT z
                                  max                ă gpγq “ 2γ 2 ´ 1.                                (1)
                                xPAi ,zPAj }x}2 }z}2

Identify each yi to the subspace Ahpiq that is closest to yi in terms of inner product or angle, formally

                                    hpiq “ arg max max yiT u{}u}2 .
                                                j        uPAj

Since there are n vectors yi , there will be at least one subspace in tA1 , ..., An`1 u that is not associ-
ated to any of the yi s. Call this subspace H.
                                                    T
                                            y w
We show that for any y P tyi uni“1 , maxwPH }w}2
                                                 ď γ.
Fix y P tyi uni“1 and let A be its corresponding subspace Ahpiq . Let
                                                        y T w1
                                        w “ argmaxw1 PH        .
                                                        }w1 }2
                                                       y T a1
                                        a “ argmaxa1 PA 1 .
                                                       }a }2
Assume both w and a are of unit norm w.l.o.g. We know:


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      • 1. wT y ď aT y from the definition of hpiq.
      • 2. wT a ă gpγq from (1).
         w`a
Let x “ }w`a}2
               be the average of w and a, with }w ` a}22 “ wT w ` 2aT w ` aT a “ 2 ` 2aT w “
       T
2p1 ` a wq.
Claim: wT y ď wT x (intuition: y is “closer” to a than w, so w should be ”closer” to average of a
and w than to y).
Proof of claim: Assume wT y ą wT x. From 1. this implies aT y ą wT x. Now
                        w`a       wT w ` wT a   1 ` wT a   aT a ` wT a
           wT x “ wT            “             “          “             “ aT x.
                       }w ` a}2    }w ` a}2     }w ` a}2    }w ` a}2
So we have aT y ą aT x ùñ aT py´xq ą 0. From the initial assumption we also have wT py´xq ą
0. Combining:
                          pw ` aqT py ´ xq ą 0 ùñ xT py ´ xq ą 0
                                                  ùñ xT y ´ xT x ą 0
                                                  ùñ xT y ´ 1 ą 0
                                                  ùñ xT y ą 1,
which is a contradiction since both x and y are of unit-norm. End of proof of claim.
We now show wT x ď γ. Using 2.,
                          ?            a           a              a
        T    1 ` wT a       1 ` aT w    1 ` gpγq    1 ` 2γ 2 ´ 1    2γ 2
      w x“             “      ?      ď    ?      “     ?         “ ? “ γ.
             }w ` a}2           2           2            2           2
Combining with the claim we have that wT y ď γ. Given the definition of w and that y was arbitrary,
we have shown
                                                  yiT w
                                    arg max max         ď γ,
                                        i     wPH }w}2

which concludes the proof.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.4
E.1   MDP C LASS

The PE problems used in the proof of Theorem 4.4 are characterised by a class of MDPs M and
target policies Π. In this section, we define the class of MDPs M. All MDPs M P M in the class
share the same state-space S, action space A, feature map and transition function p but differ in
the reward function rM and target policy πM . This class of MDPs is the same as the one used by
Zanette (2021) in the proof of their Theorem 1. Our constructions differ in the set of target policies
ΠM P Π which are defined in Appendix E.2.
       • State-space: S “ B and the starting state is the origin s̄ “ 0 P B.
       • Action-space: For all s P S, As “ A “ B.
       • Feature-map: The feature map ϕ maps a state-action pair ps, aq to the action a, i.e.
         @ps, aq, ϕps, aq “ a. Since a P B, the feature space is the unit-hypersphere B and
         }ϕp¨, ¨q}2 ď 1 holds for all inputs.
       • Transition-function: The successor state of a state-action pair ps, aq is deterministic and
         is the action a. This is well-defined because both the action and state space are B. This
         only depends on the chosen action (and not the current state), so we will denote the unique
         successor state when taking action a by s` paq “ a.
The MDP class M is known to the learner (see Section 3). Therefore the learner knows the transition
function and that all MDPs share it. Therefore only the feedback of the reward function and target
policy is useful to the learner, as both of these are unknown. We define them in the following section.

E.2   I NSTANCE OF THE CLASS

Every MDP M P M is fully characterised by a vector w P BB and a sign ` or ´. Hence, they are
denoted by Mw,` or Mw,´ and the reward function associated to either MDP will be denoted with
the same subscript. Specifically it is defined as follows:
                                             "
                                               0,             if a R Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq.
            on Mw,` :        rw,` ps, aq “
                                               `p1 ´ γqaT w, otherwise.
                                             "
                                               0,             if a R Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq.
            on Mw,´ :        rw,´ ps, aq “
                                               ´p1 ´ γqaT w, otherwise.
See Appendix C for the definition of hyper-spherical caps Cγ pxq. Note that the transition function is
the same for all MDPs in the class M and is defined in Appendix E.1. In particular, the two MDPs
Mw,` or Mw,´ only differ in their reward functions, which are opposite.
Target policy: The set of target policies ΠM for an MDP M P M depends on the vector w P BB
that partially characterises the MDP but not on the sign ˘. The set of target policies is therefore the
same for Mw,` and Mw,´ .
Fix K ą 0 and consider a sequence of K nested (not necessarily strictly) subspaces of Rd :
                             BK Ă BK´1 Ă ... Ă B2 Ă B1 Ă B0 “ Rd ,
s.t. dim BK ą 0 and w P BK . Set BK`1 “ xwy. Let Hw “ tB1 , ..., BK , BK`1 u denote the
set of nested subspaces (including xwy). This is not defined as an ordered set, but for notational
purposes the order can always be recovered since the sequence must be nested. If A is a subspace
of Rd , let projA pxq denote the orthogonal projection of x onto A. See Appendix C for the definition
                                              △
of hyper-spherical caps Cγ pwq and sectors C γ pHq. A target policy πHw is specified by the set of
nested subspaces Hw and is defined as:

                         $
                                                    △         △
                         ’ 1 proj
                         ’
                                              if s P C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q for k “ 0, ..., K.
                         ’
                         &γ       Bk`1 psq,
             πHw psq “                               △
                           1
                                                                            Ť
                         ’
                         ’ γ projBK`1 psq,    if s P C γ pBK`1 qzpCγ pwq Cγ p´wqq.
                         ’                                  Ť
                         %s,                  if s P Cγ pwq Cγ p´wq.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The target policy is defined for all s P S “ B:
 K △
”ď           △            ı ď ”△                  ď        ıď”      ď       ı △
   C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q      C γ pBK`1 qzpCγ pwq Cγ p´wqq   Cγ pwq Cγ p´wq “ C γ pB0 q
 k“0
                                                                                              “ B0
                                                                                              “ B.
and the pair-wise intersections are all empty (so they form a partition). The actions taken are also
well-defined:
                                    △          △                  △
       • For k “ 0, ..., K, if s P C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q, then s R C γ pBk`1 q and from Definition C.2,
         this means that for any u P Bk`1 , |uT s|{}u}2 }s}2 ď γ. Denoting x “ projBk`1 psq P
         Bk`1 ,
                                                 xT x   |xT s|
                                        }x}2 “        “        ď γ}s}2 ď γ,
                                                 }x}2    }x}2
           meaning that γ1 projBk`1 psq P B.
                 △
       • If s P C γ pBK`1 qzpCγ pwq Y Cγ p´wqq, , then s R pCγ pwq Y Cγ p´wqq and from Definition
         C.1, this means that |wT s| ď γ. Denoting x “ projBK`1 psq P BK`1 ,

                                                     xT x   |xT s|
                                           }x}2 “         “        ď γ,
                                                     }x}2    }x}2
           meaning that γ1 projBK`1 psq P B.

The set of target policies ΠMw,˘ for the MDP Mw,˘ is the set of (deterministic) policies πHw for
any sequence of nested subspaces Hw satisfying the above conditions (w P BK ). We sometimes use
a w, ˘ subscript to refer to both MDPs simultaneously.
                                △          △
Crucially observing actions in C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q for k ď K may not reveal w. Without the knowl-
edge of w, the reward function is unknown and even with the knowledge of w or the target policy
the reward function is not fully identified, in which case Mw,` and Mw,´ cannot be distinguished.

E.3    R EALIZABILITY:

We show that the action-value of any target policy for any MDP M P M can be linearly represented
with the feature map defined in Appendix E.1. The action-value of a target policy πHw only depends
on w and the sign ˘ of the reward function of the MDP, the sequence of nested subspace does not
matter beyond w.
Lemma E.1 (Qπ Realizability). For any w P BB let Qw,` and Qw,´ be the action-value functions
of any π P ΠMw,˘ (a target policy) on Mw,` and Mw,´ , respectively. Then it holds that
                                   "
                                    Qw,` ps, aq “ `ϕps, aqT w on Mw,` .
                      @ps, aq,
                                    Qw,´ ps, aq “ ´ϕps, aqT w on Mw,´ .



Proof: Consider Mw,` and set Qps, aq “ ϕps, aqT w. We will show that Q satisfies the Bellman
evaluation equations for π at all state-actions pairs, which will imply that Qps, aq “ Qw,` ps, aq.
         π
Apply TM   w,`
               to Q at ps, aq:
                         π
                        TM w,`
                               pQqps, aq “ rw,` ps, aq ` γQps` paq, πps` paqqq
                                          “ rw,` ps, aq ` γQpa, πpaqq,
       `
since s paq “ a is the successor state of ps, aq. We consider the RHS of the above for all possible
cases.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               △         △
Case 1: If a P C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q for some k P r0, ..., Ks:
                                                             1
                       rw,` ps, aq ` γQpa, πpaqq “ 0 ` γQpa, projBk`1 paqq
                                                             γ
                                                        1
                                                 “ γϕpa, projBk`1 paqqT w
                                                        γ
                                                     1
                                                 “ γ projTBk`1 paqw
                                                     γ
                                                   “ projTBk`1 paqw.
However, recall that w P Bk`1 . Since projBk`1 paq is the orthogonal projection of a:
wT projBk`1 paq “ wT a. Plugging into the above, we have: rw,` ps, aq ` γQpa, πpaqq “ aT w “
ϕps, aqT w “ Qps, aq, which satisfies the Bellman evaluation equation.
               △
Case 2: If a P C γ pBK`1 qzpCγ pwq Y Cγ p´wqq, as above (recalling BK`1 “ xwy) :
                                                    1
            rw,` ps, aq ` γQpa, πpaqq “ 0 ` γQpa, projBK`1 paqq
                                                    γ
                                               1
                                      “ γϕpa, projBK`1 paqqT w
                                               γ
                                          1
                                      “ γ projTBK`1 paqw
                                          γ
                                         “ projTBK`1 paqw
                                         “ pwT aqwT w “ wT a “ ϕps, aqT w “ Qps, aq,
which satisfies the Bellman evaluation equation.
Case 3: If a P Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq, the reward is no longer 0 and we have:
                     rw,` ps, aq ` γQpa, πpaqq “ p1 ´ γqaT w ` γQpa, aq
                                                 “ p1 ´ γqaT w ` γϕpa, aqT w
                                                 “ p1 ´ γqaT w ` γaT w
                                                 “ aT w “ ϕps, aqT w “ Qps, aq,
which satisfies the Bellman evaluation equation.
For all cases, Q satisfies the Bellman evaluation equations, so it is the fixed point of the Bellman
evaluation operator. In particular, it is the action-value of the target policy π on Mw,` .
Now consider Mw,´ and set Qps, aq “ ´ϕps, aqT w. We will show that Q satisfies the Bellman
evaluation equations for π at all state-actions pairs, which will imply that Qps, aq “ Qw,´ ps, aq. As
               π
above, apply TM  w,´
                     at ps, aq to Q:
                              π
                             TM w,´
                                    pQqps, aq “ rw,´ ps, aq ` γQpa, πpaqq,
and consider the RHS of the above for all possible cases.
               △         △
Case 1: If a P C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q for some k P r0, ..., Ks:
                                                               1
                   rw,´ ps, aq ` γQpa, πpaqq “ 0 ` γQpa, projBk`1 paqq
                                                              γ
                                                            1
                                               “ ´γϕpa, projBk`1 paqqT w
                                                            γ
                                                     1
                                               “ ´γ projTBk`1 paqw
                                                     γ
                                               “ ´projTBk`1 paqw
                                               “ ´aT w “ ´ϕps, aqT w “ Qps, aq.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               △
Case 2: If a P C γ pBK`1 qzpCγ pwq Y Cγ p´wqq, as above:



                                              1
         rw,´ ps, aq ` γQpa, πpaqq “ 0 ` γQpa, projBK`1 paqq
                                              γ
                                            1
                                   “ ´γϕpa, projBK`1 paqqT w
                                            γ
                                        1
                                   “ ´γ projTBK`1 paqw
                                        γ
                                    “ ´projTBK`1 paqw
                                    “ ´pwT aqwT w “ ´wT a “ ´ϕps, aqT w “ Qps, aq.



Case 3: If a P Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq, the reward is no longer 0 and we have:



                   rw,´ ps, aq ` γQpa, πpaqq “ ´p1 ´ γqaT w ` γQpa, aq
                                             “ ´p1 ´ γqaT w ´ γϕpa, aqT w
                                             “ ´p1 ´ γqaT w ´ γaT w
                                             “ ´aT w “ ´ϕps, aqT w “ Qps, aq,



which satisfies the Bellman evaluation equation.
For all cases, Q satisfies the Bellman evaluation equations, so it is the fixed point of the Bellman
evaluation operator. In particular, it is the action-value of the target policy π on Mw,´ .


E.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.4


Consider the MDP class described in Appendix E.1 and Appendix E.2. First, we know from Lemma
E.1 (Qπ Realizability) that all instances of the PE problem characterised by the MDP class M and
target policies Π satisfy Assumption 4.1 (Qπ is Realizable) with the feature map ϕp¨, ¨q defined in
Appendix E.1.
The dynamics of the MDPs in the class M are the same, which as discussed in Remark 3.6 means
that policy-induced and policy-free queries are equivalent. We provide a proof for policy-free
queries.
We specify the instance with MDP M P M and target policy πM P ΠM according to the queries
selected by the learner. Fix K ą 0. Recall that nk is the number of queries made by the learner at
                   řK
round k and n “ k“1 nk is the total number of queries. Let Ak be the set of actions queried by
                                               sk “ Ťk Ak to be the set of all actions queried up to
the learner at round k (i.e. |Ak | “ nk ). Set A     i“1
round k.
The learner is sample-efficient so n is polynomial in d. Specifically, there exists some constant
α ą 0 and some integer T such that n ď αdT . Consider N P N s.t. 2N ď d ă 2N `1 and set
                                                      1{4K
d` “ 2N . Note that d` ě d{2. Fix W “ expp 18 gpγqd` q. If n ď W , we can show the learner
cannot solve the PE problem. Consider both cases:


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.4.1   C ASE 1
Suppose W ă n, then
         W ă n ùñ W ă αdT
                  gpγq 1{4K
               ùñ       d        ă logpαdT q
                    8 `
                  gpγq            K                                      d
               ùñ       pd{2q1{4 ă logpαdT q             using that d` ě
                    8                                                    2
                             K       8
               ùñ pd{2q1{4 ă              logpαdT q
                                   gpγq
                   1                       ´ 8              ¯
               ùñ K logpd{2q ă log                logpαdT q
                  4                          gpγq
                          logpd{2q
               ùñ     ´                    ¯ ă 4K
                           8           T
                  log gpγq logpαd q
                    1         ”        logpd{2q        ı
               ùñ        log        ´                 ¯ ăK
                  log 4         log gpγq8
                                            logpαdT q
                  ùñ K ě c1 log log d            for a constant c1 ą 0 and d sufficiently large.

E.4.2   C ASE 2
                                     1{4k
n ď W ùñ nk ď expp 18 gpγqd` q for k “ 1, ..., K. We inductively define the sequence of
nested subspaces BK Ă ... Ă B1 characterising w (P BK ) and used by the target policy πM s.t. for
                              k
k “ 1, ..., K, dim Bk “ 2rN {4 s ě 28 and
                                                          △
                                     @a P A
                                          sk ,        a R C γ pBk q.

Proof of existence of nested subspaces:
We proceed by induction. Let BK Ă ... Ă B1 be an arbitrary sequence of subspaces and w P BK XB
arbitrary. We will define these but for now consider the target policy πHw (see Appendix E.2) with
Hw “ txwy, BK , ..., B1 u.
Base Case: At round k “ 1, the learner has observed no feedback and chooses a set of action queries
A1 “ A  s1 (we ignore the queried states since the reward and transitions functions only depend on
the action) such that:
                                                             1{4
                                               ´ d ¯ 18 gpγqd`
                                1       1{4       `
              |A1 | “ n1 ď expp gpγqd` q ď                       ´1     (if d` ě 12) ,
                                8                 2
                                                                                           1{4
so by Lemma D.3 there exists a subspace H P G2rN {4s ,d` pRq of dimension 2rN {4s (ě d` ) such that
                                                               △
                                 @x P A1 “ A
                                           s1 ,           x R C γ pHq.
Set B1 “ H. The learner then observes the feedback for A1 (The state s in the reward does not
matter):
                              tprw,˘ ps, aq, πHw ps` paqqq : a P A1 u.
Not having fixed B2 , ..., BK , w does not cause problems with the feedback even though πHw and
rw,˘ depend on them since the feedback of A1 only depends on B1 : the learner only observes the
projection of the actions in A1 into B1 ,
                                 △
              @a P A
                   s1 ,      a R C γ pB1 q
                                                              1
         ùñ @a P A
                 s1 ,        πHw ps` paqq “ πHw paq “           projB1 paq,    rw,˘ ps, aq “ 0.
                                                              γ


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In particular, there is no dependence on w or B1`i Ă B1 for i ě 1, which can be arbitrary and fixed
in later rounds.
Inductive Step: Suppose that at round k, there exists a sequence of nested subspaces Bk Ă ... Ă B1
                                                                     i
used by the target policy πHw s.t. for i “ 1, ..., k, dim Bi “ 2rN {4 s ě 28 and
                                                            △
                                        @a P A
                                             si ,      a R C γ pBi q.

Bk`1 need not be fixed yet since the feedback of A
                                                 sk only depends on B1 , ..., Bk :
                         △
      @a P Ak ,     a R C γ pBk q
                                                    1
ùñ @a P Ak ,        πHw ps` paqq “ πHw paq “          projBj paq         for some j ď k,           rw,˘ ps, aq “ 0.
                                                    γ
The learner only observes the projection of actions in A
                                                       sk into B1 , B2 , ..., Bk . Note that the only
constraint on M up to this step is w P Bk .
                                          △                                                        k
Now Bk is such that @x P A   sk , x R C γ pBk q with dk “ dim Bk “ 2rN {4k s ě d1{4`    ě 28 . The
learner has observed the feedback from A sk and chooses a set of action queries Ak`1 such that

                                     ´ d ¯ 81 gpγqd`        1{4k`1         ´ d ¯ 18 gpγqd1{4
                     1     1{4k`1       k                                     k          k
|Ak`1 | “ nk`1 ď expp gpγqd`      qď                                 ´1ď                       ´1            (if d` ě 12) .
                     8                 2                                      2
                                                                                               ´        ¯ 18 gpγqd1{4
                                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                   dk
Then we know that the number of those queries that are in Bk is also less than                      2                   .
                                                                                      rrN {4k s{4s
Therefore by Lemma D.3, there exists a subspace H Ă Bk of dimension 2                 ě dk`1 “
      k`1
2rN {4 s (can reduce the dimension if they do not match, removing dimensions will not add queries
  △
to C γ pHq) such that
                                                                △
                                      @x P Ak`1 ,         x R C γ pHq.
In particular, Ak`1 can be entirely contained in Bk or can depend on Bk , ..., B1 in any arbitrary
                                                      △
                                     sk , x R C γ pBk q and Bk`1 Ă Bk so we have
way. Set Bk`1 “ H. We know that @x P A
                                                            △
                                     @x P A
                                          sk`1 ,       x R C γ pBk`1 q.

The learner then observes the feedback for Ak`1 (The state s in the reward does not matter):
                                 tprw,˘ ps, aq, πHw ps` paqqq : a P Ak`1 u.
Not having fixed Bk`2 , ..., BK , w does not cause problems with the feedback even though πHw
and rw,˘ depend on them since the feedback observed up to this round of A       sk`1 only depends on
B1 , ..., Bk`1 : the learner only observes the projection of the actions in Ak`1 into B1 , ..., Bk`1 ,
                                                                            s
                             △
      @a P A
           sk`1 ,       a R C γ pBk`1 q
                                                      1
ùñ @a P A
        sk`1 ,          πHw ps` paqq “ πHw paq “        projBj paq         for some j ď k ` 1,               rw,˘ ps, aq “ 0.
                                                      γ
In particular, there is no dependence on w or Bk`1`i Ă Bk`1 for i ě 1, which can be arbitrary and
fixed in later rounds.
We remark Lemma D.3 establishes the existence of a subspace in G2rrN {4k s{4s ,dk pRq where the am-
bient space is Rdk instead of Rd . Any dk -dimensional subspace of Rd is isomorphic to Rdk , so we
can consider Bk , project the points of Ak`1 into Bk , apply Lemma D.3 to get H within Bk , and
extend H to be defined in Rd . We omit these steps here for clarity but detail them fully in Appendix
E.4.3. This also holds for the base case (where d` is used as the ambient dimension instead of d)


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                       k
When applying Lemma D.3 with ambient dimension dk “ 2rN {4 s , we require rN {4k s ě 8. Since
          k
        1{4
dk ě d`       and d` ě d{2, it is enough to have
                                 k                 1        ´ 1          d¯
                          pd{2q1{4 ě 28 ðñ K ď          log          log
                                                 log 4       8 log 2     2
                                         ðù K ď c log log d,
for a constant c ą 0 and d sufficiently large. If this condition on K does not hold, then
                                           K ą c log log d.                                         (2)
Suppose it does hold. Then the steps above go through and we have the existence of our nested
subspaces. We also have dk ě 28 ą 12 for all k “ 1, ..., K, which was needed in some of the steps.
End of proof of existence of nested subspaces.
We now fully specify M . The complete set of queried actions by the learner is A
                                                                               sK , and
                                                          △
                                     @a P A
                                          sK ,        a R C γ pBK q.

Since dim BK ě 28 ą 0, we can pick some w P BK X BB and let Hw “ tB1 , ..., BK , BK`1 u
with BK`1 “ xwy. From the proof of the existence of nested spaces, we can consider the PE
problem instances with MDPs Mw,` and Mw,´ and πHw as target policy. The transition function
                                                             sK , a R Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq because
and target policy are the same on Mw,` and Mw,´ . Since @a P A
    △
a R C γ pBK q, the reward function for any query a P A
                                                     sK is 0. Thus, the learner cannot distinguish
Mw,` between Mw,´ from the submitted queries.
The learner has to produce an estimate of QπHw ps̄, ¨q for s̄ “ 0. But from Lemma E.1,
                      QπHw ps̄, wq “ ϕps̄, wqT w “ wT w “ 1                on Mw,` .
                        πHw                      T         T
                      Q       ps̄, wq “ ´ϕps̄, wq w “ ´w w “ ´1            on Mw,´ .
If the learner predicts a positive value for QπHw ps̄, wq, it will incur an error greater than 1 on Mw,´
and similarly for Mw,` if it predicts a negative value. Even if it randomizes between both, with
probability at least 1{2 it will incur an error of at least 1 on one of the MDPs. Therefore, the learner
can be at most p1, 1{2q-sound.
Therefore, to be more than p1, 1{2q-sound, we must either be in Case 1 or be in Case 2 and satisfy
condition (2). In either case, we have the condition
                                           K ą c log log d,
for some constant c ą 0 and d sufficiently large, which gives K “ Ωplog log dq, showing the
result.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.4.3    D EALING WITH SWITCHES IN AMBIENT SPACE
In this section we write out the missing details of the proof of Theorem 4.4 in Appendix E.4. In
particular, assuming the condition on nk`1 is satisfied, we show that we can use Lemma D.3 for the
existence of a subspace H Ă Bk Ă Rd of dimension dk`1 s.t.
                                                                 △
                                       @x P Ak`1 ,         x R C γ pHq.                                  (3)

Fix k P t0, 1, ..., K ´ 1u and set d0 “ d` and B0 to any d` -dimensional subspace of Rd . Picking
up the proof of in Appendix E.4, the condition on nk`1 “ |Ak`1 | for Lemma D.3 is satisfied.
Bk P Gdk ,d pRq is a dk -dimensional subspace within Rd . We find an orthonormal basis for Bk :
            Dv1 , ..., vdk P Rd s.t. Bk “ xv1 , ..., vdk y and viT vi “ 1, viT vj “ 0 for i ‰ j.
                                        řdk
Any vector in Bk can be written as m“1          αm vm for some pαm qdm“1    k
                                                                                . Bk is isomorphic to Rdk
                                                   dk
through the linear transformation T : Bk Ñ R (which can be shown to be a bijection) defined as
                                     dk
                                     ÿ
                                Tp      αm vm q “ rα1 , ..., αdk sT P Rdk .
                                    m“1

Letting projBk pxq denote the orthogonal projection of x P Rd onto Bk , consider
                              Apk`1 “ tT pprojBk pxqq : x P Ak`1 u Ă Rdk .
The size of Apk`1 is |Apk`1 | ď |Ak`1 | “ nk`1 so we can apply Lemma D.3: there exists a subspace
H p P Gdk`1 ,dk pRq s.t.
                                                                 △
                                     @xp P Apk`1 ,         x R C γ pH p q.
                    k                                                                  k                k`1
Recall dk “ 2rN {4 s and the lemma gives a subspace of dimension 2rrN {4 s{4s ě dk`1 “ 2rN {4                 s

but we can reduce the dimension if they do not match.
H p P Gdk`1 ,dk pRq is a dk`1 -dimensional subspace within Rdk . We find an orthonormal basis for
H p:
     Dup1 , ..., udpk`1 P Rdk s.t. H p “ xup1 , ..., updk`1 y and pupi qT upi “ 1, pupi qT upj “ 0 for i ‰ j.
Define
                                    H “ xT ´1 pup1 q, ..., T ´1 pupdk`1 qy.
                            řdk
Remark that T ´1 pupi q “ m“1       upi pmqvm P Bk Ă Rd so H Ă Bk . We use the notation xpmq for a
vector x to refer to the m-th coordinate of x. Since tv1 , ..., vdk u is an orthonormal set:
                                            dk                                "
                                           ÿ                                    1, if i “ j.
              pT ´1 pupi qqT T ´1 pupj q “     upi pmqupj pmq “ pupi qT upj “
                                           m“1
                                                                                0, if i ‰ j.
So tT ´1 pup1 q, ..., T ´1 pupdk`1 qu is an orthonormal basis for H, which means H P Gdk`1 ,d pRq is a
dk`1 dimensional subspace within Rd . H is the subspace we are trying to show the existence of, it
remains to verify the condition (3). The following claim concludes this section.
                          △
Claim: @x P Ak`1 , x R C γ pHq.
                                                                 △
Proof of Claim: Suppose not: Dx P Ak`1 s.t. x P C γ pHq. Then there exists a unit-normed
h P H Ă Bk such that xT h ą γ. Since h P Bk , we also have projBk pxqT h ą γ. h, projBk pxq are
both in Bk so
                                                    dk
                                                    ÿ
                        Dα1 , ..., αdk P R s.t. h “    αm vm ,
                                                           m“1
                                                                     dk
                                                                     ÿ
                              Dβ1 , ..., βdk P R s.t. projBk pxq “           βm vm .
                                                                     m“1


                                                      26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and we have
                                                   dk
                                                   ÿ
                        projBk pxqT h ą γ ùñ            αm βm ą γ
                                                  m“1
                                             ùñ T pprojBk pxqqT T phq ą γ
                                                                    △
                                             ùñ T pprojBk pxqq P C γ pH p q,
since T phq P H p as h P H. But T pprojBk pxqq P Apk`1 , which contradicts the definition of H p .


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.5   I LLUSTRATION OF MDP CONSTRUCTION

In this section, we provide a high-level illustration of how the hard instance M P M is constructed
when d “ 3 and the learner makes three queries per round. The reward vector of the MDP is
                                                      △
0 everywhere except in the γ-hyper-spherical sector C γ pwq (see Appendix C) of a vector w P B,
which is unknown to the learner. The target policy will be constructed in such a way that Qπ ps, aq “
˘ϕps, aqT w. If the learner can identify w and make a query in its γ hyper-spherical sector (to
distinguish between the ` and the ´), then it can fully solve the PE problem. Therefore the aim of
the learner in choosing its queries is to identify this vector w.

       Round 1


       A                                              B


       C                                              D


                                        Figure 3: Round 1.

Round 1 (Figure 3).

      • A: Three queries ϕi “ ϕpsi , ai q “ ai (i “ 1, 2, 3) are made by the learner.
                                                                 △
      • B: The three queries with their hyper-spherical sectors C γ pϕi q (i “ 1, 2, 3) (we only show
        one side of the sector for clarity).
      • C: There exists a 2-dimensional subspace B1 that does not intersect the hyper-spherical
        sectors of the queries which the environment can use to further hide w - if B1 does not
        intersect the γ hyper-spherical sectors of the queries, then the queries ϕi will not be in the
        γ hyper-spherical sector of any point in B1 (in particular w and cannot identify the ` or ´
        in the reward).
      • D: The target-policy πM is constructed in such a way that realizability is satisfied with
                                                 1                   1
        w P B1 . In particular, πM ps`                      `
                                          i q “ γ projB1 psi q “ γ projB1 pai q is valid because B1
        does not intersect the sectors of the queries (see Appendix E.2). This choice allows the
        component of ϕ in the direction of w to grow by 1{γ in ϕ` , this will cancel with the γ
        discount in the bellman equation and is a key step in satisfying realizability.
        Since the orthogonal projection is the same for all vectors in B1 , this definition of the
        target-policy (allowing realizability to be satisfied - see Appendix E.3) does not reveal any
        additional information about w other than w P B1 . In addition, w or the actions taken by
        the policy within B1 do not need to be specified yet and can depend on queries made by
        the learner in later rounds.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Since ϕi –γϕ` i “ ai ´ projB1 pai q is orthogonal to B1 , this construction admits the interpre-
           tation of erasing information along the directions of the subspace B1 . Hence, this provides
           the intuition discussed in Section 5 but is in fact exactly what is required to hide the w
           vector within the subspace B1 .



       Round 2


       E                                                 F


       G                                                  H


                                            Figure 4: Round 2.

Round 2 (Figure 4). Without loss of generality, we assume the queries made by the learner are
within B1 (the MDP is fully identified outside of B1 so the learner can gain no further information
from queries outside of B1 ) and only visualise B1 as a circle embedded in the sphere from Figure 3.

      • E: Three queries ϕi “ ϕpsi , ai q “ ai (i “ 4, 5, 6) are made by the learner.
                                                                                     △
      • F: The three queries with their (2-dimensional) hyper-spherical sectors C γ pϕi q (i “ 4, 5, 6).
      • G: There exists a 1-dimensional subspace B2 “ xwy that does not intersect the hyper-
        spherical sectors of the queries. As in C above, if xwy does not intersect the γ hyper-
        spherical sectors of the queries, then the queries ϕi will not be in the γ hyper-spherical
        sector of w.
      • H: Similar to D, the target-policy πM is constructed within B1 in such a way that realiz-
                                                        1                1
        ability is satisfied. In particular, πM ps`                `         T
                                                  i q “ γ projB2 psi q “ γ pw ai qw is valid because
                                                                                           △
           B2 “ xwy does not intersect the sectors of the queries. The reward inside C γ pwq is char-
                                                                             △
           acterised by a sign ` or ´. No queries have been made inside C γ pwq and so a third round
           is required to identify the sign ` or ´.

This illustration uses three queries per round. In the proof, we formally show that if the number of
queries in the first round is polynomial in d, then there always exists a subspace of dimension d1{4
that does not intersect the sectors of the queries in the first round. We make a similar argument for
later rounds to show log log d rounds are required to identify the vector w. See the earlier sections
for all the details.



                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.5
F.1   MDP C LASS

The BPI and PE problems used in the proof of Theorem 4.5 are characterised by a class of MDPs
M and target policies Π. In this section, we define the class of MDPs M. All MDPs M P M in
the class share the same state-space S, action space A, feature map and target policy π (for the PE
problem) but differ in the transition function pM and reward function rM . This class of MDPs is
similar to the one used by Zanette (2021) in the proof of their Theorem 3. Our construction differs
in the transition functions which are defined in Appendix F.2.
                                  Ť
        • State-space: S “ ts̄u B where s̄ is the starting state disjoint from B (i.e. ts̄u X B “ H).
        • Action-space: Each state has a single action (which we denote by the state itself for con-
          venience) other than the starting state s̄ which can take actions in B. Formally:
                                                       "
                                                         B       if s “ s̄.
                                              Apsq “
                                                         tsu if s P B.
          This notation enables that @s P S, Apsq Ă B.
        • Feature-map: The feature map ϕ maps a state-action pair ps, aq to the action a, i.e.
          @ps, aq, ϕps, aq “ a. Since a P B, the feature space is the unit-hypersphere B and
          }ϕp¨, ¨q}2 ď 1 holds for all inputs.
        • Target policy: For the PE problem, the target policy π is the same for all MDPs in the
          class: it takes action 0 in the starting state s̄ and in the other states, there is a single action.
          In particular ΠM “ tπu for all M P M.

F.2   I NSTANCE OF THE CLASS

Fix K ą 0 and consider a sequence of K nested subspaces of Rd :
                           BK Ă BK´1 Ă ... Ă B2 Ă B1 Ă B0 “ Rd .
s.t. dim BK ą 0 and fix some w P BK X BB. Set BK`1 “ xwy. Let Hw “ tB1 , ..., BK , BK`1 u
denote the set of nested subspaces (including xwy). This is not defined as an ordered set, but for
notational purposes the order can always be recovered since the sequence must be nested.
Every MDP M P M is fully characterised by the sequence of nested subspaces Hw and a sign ` or
´. Hence, they are denoted by MHw ,` or MHw ,´ .
Reward function: The reward function only depends on the vector w and the sign ˘ but we denote
them with the same subscript as the MDP. Specifically it is defined as follows:
                                             "
                                              0,                if a R Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq.
            on MHw ,` :      rHw ,` ps, aq “             T
                                              `p1 ´ γqa w, otherwise.
                                             "
                                              0,                if a R Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq.
            on MHw ,´ :      rHw ,´ ps, aq “
                                              ´p1 ´ γqaT w, otherwise.
See Appendix C for the definition of hyper-spherical caps Cγ pwq. We sometimes use a w, ˘ sub-
script to refer to both MDPs simultaneously.
Transition Function: The transition function for an MDP M P M depends on the sequence of
nested subspaces Hw but not on the sign ˘. The transition function is therefore the same for MHw ,`
and MHw ,´ . If A is a subspace of Rd , let projA pxq denote the orthogonal projection of x onto A.
                                                                                    △
See Appendix C for the definition of hyper-spherical caps Cγ pwq and sectors C γ pHq. The successor
state of a state-action pair ps, aq is deterministic and only depends on the chosen action (and not the
current state), so we will denote the unique successor state when taking action a by s`         Hw paq “ a,
which is defined as: $
                                                      △         △
                         ’ 1 proj
                         ’
                                               if a P C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q for k “ 0, ..., K.
                         ’
                         &γ        Bk`1 paq,
              s`
               Hw paq “      1
                                                      △
                         ’
                         ’  γ  projBK`1 paq, if a P C γ pBK`1 qzpCγ pwq Y Cγ p´wqq.
                         ’
                         %a,                   if a P Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq.


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that the starting state s̄ is not a successor state so a policy trajectory can never return to s̄.
Showing that the transition function and successor states are well defined follows the same steps as
showing the target policy is well defined in the proof of Theorem 4.4 in Section E.2.
                             △         △
Crucially actions queried in C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q for k ď K may not reveal w. Without the knowl-
edge of w, the reward function is unknown and even with the knowledge of w the reward function
is not fully identified, in which case MHw ,` and MHw ,´ cannot be distinguished.

F.3   R EALIZABILITY

We show that the action-value of any policy (not just the target policy) for any MDP M P M can
be linearly represented with the feature map defined in Appendix F.1. The action-value of a policy
π only depends on w and the sign ˘ of the reward function of the MDP, the sequence of nested
subspace does not matter beyond w.
Lemma F.1 (Realizability). For any w P BB and sequence of nested subspaces Hw satisfying the
construction from Appendix F.2, let QπHw ,` and QπHw ,´ be the action-value functions of an arbitrary
policy π on MHw ,` and MHw ,´ , respectively. Then it holds that
                                  #
                                    QπHw ,` ps, aq “ `ϕps, aqT w on MHw ,` .
                     @ps, aq,
                                    QπHw ,´ ps, aq “ ´ϕps, aqT w on MHw ,´ .


Proof: Consider Mw,` and set Qps, aq “ ϕps, aqT w. We will show that Q satisfies the Bellman
evaluation equations for π at all state-actions pairs, which will imply that Qps, aq “ QπHw ,` ps, aq.
         π
Apply TM   Hw ,`
                 to Q at ps, aq:
                    π
                   TM Hw ,`
                            pQqps, aq “ rHw ,` ps, aq ` γQps`          `
                                                            Hw paq, πpsHw paqqq.
We consider the RHS of the above for all possible cases.
               △         △
                                                                          1
Case 1: If a P C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q for some k P r0, ..., Ks, s`
                                                                 Hw paq “ γ projBk`1 paq. Furthermore,
π must return the only action available in the successor state (and the successor state is never s̄), so
πps`           `
   Hw paqq “ sHw paq and we have:
               rHw ,` ps, aq ` γQps`          `                  `        `
                                   Hw paq, πpsHw paqqq “ 0 ` γQpsHw paq, sHw paqq
                                                                                T
                                                          “ γϕps`        `
                                                                Hw paq, sHw paqq w
                                                                    T
                                                          “ γs`
                                                              Hw paq w
                                                             1
                                                          “ γ projTBk`1 paqw
                                                             γ
                                                          “ projTBk`1 paqw.
However, recall that w P Bk`1 . Since projBk`1 paq is the orthogonal projection of a:
wT projBk`1 paq “ wT a. Plugging into the above, we have: TM        π
                                                                      Hw ,`
                                                                            pQqps, aq “ aT w “
       T
ϕps, aq w “ Qps, aq, which satisfies the Bellman evaluation equation.
               △
                                                             1
Case 2: If a P C γ pBK`1 qzpCγ pwq Y Cγ p´wqq, s`   Hw paq “ γ projBK`1 paq, and as before the policy
can only take the only action available there, giving:
             rHw ,` ps, aq ` γQps`            `                     `       `
                                  Hw paq, πpsHw paqqq “ 0 ` γQpsHw paq, sHw paqq
                                                                              T
                                                        “ γϕps`        `
                                                              Hw paq, sHw paqq w
                                                                  T
                                                        “ γs`
                                                            Hw paq w
                                                           1
                                                        “ γ projTBK`1 paqw
                                                           γ
                                                        “ projTBK`1 paqw
                                                        “ aT w “ ϕps, aqT w “ Qps, aq,


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which satisfies the Bellman evaluation equation.
Case 3: If a P Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq, the reward is no longer 0 and s`Hw paq “ a, and again as before the
policy can only take the only action available there so we have:
                                                                T
             rHw ,` ps, aq ` γQps`          `
                                 Hw paq, πpsHw paqqq “ `p1 ´ γqa w ` γQpa, aq
                                                        “ p1 ´ γqaT w ` γϕpa, aqT w
                                                        “ p1 ´ γqaT w ` γaT w
                                                        “ aT w “ ϕps, aqT w “ Qps, aq,
which satisfies the Bellman evaluation equation.
For all cases, Q satisfies the Bellman evaluation equations, so it is the fixed point of the Bellman
evaluation operator. In particular, it is the action-value of the policy π on MHw ,` . The argument is
identical for Mw,´ with Qps, aq “ ´ϕps, aqT w.



F.4     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.5

Consider the MDP class described in Appendix F.1 and Appendix F.2. First, we know from Lemma
F.1 that all instances of the BPI and PE problem characterised by the MDP class M and target
policies Π satisfy Assumption 4.2 (Qπ is realizable for every π) with the feature map ϕp¨, ¨q defined
in Appendix F.1. The proof follows the same reasoning as in Appendix E.4. We consider policy-free
queries.
We specify the instance with MDP M P M according to the queries selected by the learner. Fix
                                                                                           řK
K ą 0. Recall that nk is the number of queries made by the learner at round k and n “ k“1 nk
is the total number of queries. Let Ak be the set of (policy-free) actions queried by the learner at
                                sk “ Ťk Ak to be the set of all actions queried up to round k.
round k (i.e. |Ak | “ nk ). Set A     i“1
The learner is sample-efficient so n is polynomial in d. Specifically, there exists some constant
α ą 0 and some integer T such that n ď αdT . Consider N P N s.t. 2N ď d ă 2N `1 and set
                                                      1{4K
d` “ 2N . Note that d` ě d{2. Fix W “ expp 81 gpγqd` q. If n ď W , we can show the learner
cannot solve the PE or BPI problems. Consider both cases:

F.4.1    C ASE 1
Suppose W ă n, then following the same steps as in E.4.1,
          W ă n ùñ K ě c1 log log d             for a constant c1 ą 0 and d sufficiently large.    (4)

F.4.2    C ASE 2
                                     1{4k
n ď W ùñ nk ď expp 18 gpγqd` q for k “ 1, ..., K. Using the same steps as in E.4.2 in
the proof of Theorem 4.4 but with πHw ps` paqq replaced by s`    Hw paq, we can inductively define the
sequence of nested subspaces BK Ă ... Ă B1 characterising w (P BK ) and used in the successor
                                                     rN {4k s
state function s`
                M s.t. for k “ 1, ..., K, dim Bk “ 2          ě 28 and
                                                         △
                                    @a P A
                                         sk ,        a R C γ pBk q.

We now fully specify M . The complete set of queried actions by the learner is A
                                                                               sK , and
                                                         △
                                    @a P A
                                         sK ,        a R C γ pBK q.

Since dim BK ě 28 ą 0, we can pick some w P BK X BB and let Hw “ tB1 , ..., BK , BK`1 u with
BK`1 “ xwy. From the proof of the existence of nested spaces, we can consider the BPI and PE
problem instances with MDPs MHw ,` and MHw ,´ . The transition function is the same on MHw ,`


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                     △
and MHw ,´ . Since @a P AsK , a R Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq because a R C γ pBK q, the reward function for
any queried action a P AK is 0. Thus, the learner cannot distinguish MHw ,` between MHw ,´ from
                       s
the submitted queries.
For PE, the learner has to produce an estimate of Qπ ps̄, ¨q. But
                     Qπ ps̄, wq “ ϕps̄, wqT w “ wT w “ 1             on MHw ,` .
                       π                     T          T
                     Q ps̄, wq “ ´ϕps̄, wq w “ ´w w “ ´1             on MHw ,´ .
                                              π
If the learner predicts a positive value for Q ps̄, wq, it will incur an error greater than 1 on MHw ,´
and similarly for MHw ,` if it predicts a negative value. Even if it randomizes between both, with
probability at least 1{2 it will incur an error of at least 1 on one of the MDPs.
Similarly for BPI, the learner has to produce a near-optimal policy in the starting state s̄. But
                   ‹
                  VM Hw ,`
                           ps̄q “ Q‹MHw ,` ps̄, wq “ ϕps̄, wqT w “ wT w “ 1.
                   ‹
                  VM Hw ,´
                           ps̄q “ Q‹MHw ,´ ps̄, wq “ ´ϕps̄, wqT w “ ´wT w “ ´1.

If the learner outputs a policy taking action a s.t. aT w ą 0, it will incur an error greater than 1 on
MHw ,´ and similarly for MHw ,` if it produces an action a s.t. aT w ď 0. Even if it randomizes
between both, with probability at least 1{2 it will incur an error of at least 1 on one of the MDPs.
Therefore, to be more than p1, 1{2q-sound, we must either be in Case 1 or be in Case 2 and satisfy
condition (4). In either case, we have the condition
                                           K ą c log log d,
for some constant c ą 0 and d sufficiently large, which gives K “ Ωplog log dq, showing the
result.


                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     P ROOFS FOR F ULLY-A DAPTIVE S ETTING
G.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM B.2

Fix an unknown MDP M . Consider a learning algorithm with the following procedure:
Step 1: The learner selects an arbitrary query ps1 , a1 q s.t. }ϕps1 , a1 q}2 “ 1 (possible by Assumption
B.1). The learner receives from the environment the reward rM ps1 , a1 q, the transition function
pM p¨|s1 , a1 q and evaluations of the target policy πM for all states in the support of the transition
function pM p¨|s1 , a1 q.
Step k ď d: For i ă k, let psi , ai q be the query at round i.                        Define vi “ ϕpsi , ai q ´
γEs1 „pM p¨|si ,ai q rϕps1 , πM ps1 qqs. Select the query psk , ak q s.t

                         ϕpsk , ak q P xv1 , ..., vk´1 yK     and    }ϕpsk , ak q}2 “ 1.
The feedback to the learner up to round k means the learner has access to v1 , ..., vk´1 . This together
with Assumption B.1 ensures the query-choice is possible.
Denote vk “ ϕpsk , ak q ´ γEs1 „pM p¨|sk ,ak q rϕps1 , πM ps1 qqs.
Claim: vk R xv1 , ..., vk´1 y.

Proof. Suppose the claim is not true, then vk P xv1 , ..., vk´1 y and vkT ϕpsk , ak q “ 0 since
ϕpsk , ak q P xv1 , ..., vk´1 yK . Using this,
                                                 1
      }Es1 „pM p¨|sk ,ak q rϕps1 , πM ps1 qqs}22 “ pvk ´ ϕpsk , ak qqT pvk ´ ϕpsk , ak qq
                                                γ2
                                                 1
                                               “ 2 pvkT vk ´ 2vkT ϕpsk , ak q ` ϕpsk , ak qT ϕpsk , ak qq
                                                γ
                                                 1
                                               “ 2 p}vk }22 ` 1q
                                                γ
                                                 1
                                               ě 2 ą 1,
                                                γ
which is not possible since ϕps, aq P B for all state-actions pairs ps, aq, and by Jensen’s inequality
             }Es1 „pM p¨|sk ,ak q rϕps1 , πM ps1 qqs}2 ď Es1 „pM p¨|sk ,ak q r}ϕps1 , πM ps1 qq}2 s ď 1.
This proves the claim.

The claim implies that tvi uki“1 is a linearly independent set of vectors. To see why this is the case,
suppose it is not true:
                                                                                k
                                                                                ÿ
                     Dpαi qki“1    s.t. one of them is non-zero and                   αi vi “ 0.
                                                                                i“1

Let j be the largest index s.t. αj ‰ 0, then
                                        1 ´ÿ       ¯
                                 vj “         αi vi P xv1 , ..., vj´1 y,
                                       αj iăj

which contradicts the claim. So tvi uki“1 is a linearly independent set of vectors.
Under realizability, we must have QπMM psi , ai q “ ϕpsi , ai qT θM
                                                                  πM           πM
                                                                     for some θM  and since it is the
fixed point of the Bellman evaluation operator we also have
                  QπMM psi , ai q “ rpsi , ai q ` γEs1 „pM p¨|si ,ai q rQπMM ps1 , πM ps1 qqs.
        »              fi                                    »                                          fi
          ϕps1 , a1 qT            rM ps1 , a1 q                Es1 „pM p¨|s1 ,a1 q rϕps1 , πM ps1 qqT s
                                «               ff
Let Φ “ –     ...      fl, r “        ...          and Φ` “ –                       ...                 fl.
                     T
          ϕpsd , ad q             rM psd , ad q                Es1 „pM p¨|sd ,ad q rϕps1 , πM ps1 qqT s

                                                         34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining the realizability assumption with the Bellman fixed point equation with the above nota-
tion we have:
                                                    ´          ¯
                          πM              πM                      πM
                      ΦθM     “ r ` γΦ` θM    ðñ Φ ´ γΦ` θM           “ r.

Noticing that vi is the ith row of Φ ´ γΦ` and using that they are all linearly independent, Φ ´ γΦ`
is a square full rank matrix and is thus invertible, giving the unique solution of the policy evaluation
           πM
problem θM     in terms of quantities known to the learner at the d-th round.

G.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM B.3

G.2.1    MDP C LASS
We consider the same MDP class as for Theorem F - see Appendix F.1.

G.2.2    I NSTANCE OF THE CLASS
Consider a sequence of d strictly nested subspaces of Rd :
                            Bd´1 Ă Bd´1 Ă ... Ă B2 Ă B1 Ă B0 “ Rd ,
s.t. dim Bk “ d ´ k. Since dim Bd´1 “ 1, there is some w P BK X BB s.t. Bd´1 “ xwy. Let
Hw “ tB1 , ..., Bd´1 u denote the set of nested subspaces. Every MDP M P M is fully characterised
by the sequence of subspaces Hw and a sign ` or ´. Hence, they are denoted by MHw ,` or MHw ,´ .
Reward function: The reward function only depends on the vector w and the sign ˘ but we denote
them with the same subscript as the MDP. Specifically it is defined
                                            "
                                             0,                 if a R Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq.
          on MHw ,` :       rHw ,` ps, aq “
                                             `p1 ´ γqaT w, otherwise.
                                            "
                                             0,                 if a R Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq.
          on MHw ,´ :       rHw ,´ ps, aq “              T
                                             ´p1 ´ γqa w, otherwise.
See Appendix C for the definition of hyper-spherical caps Cγ pwq.
Transition Function: The transition function for an MDP M P M depends on the sequence of
nested subspaces Hw but not on the sign ˘. The transition function is therefore the same for MHw ,`
and MHw ,´ . If A is a subspace of Rd , let projA pxq denote the orthogonal projection of x onto A.
                                                                                △
See Appendix C for the definition of hyper-spherical caps Cγ pwq and sectors C γ pHq. The successor
state of a state-action pair ps, aq is deterministic and only depends on the chosen action (and not the
current state), so we will denote the unique successor state when taking action a by s`       Hw paq “ a,
which is defined as:
                        $
                                                    △        △
                        ’ 1 proj
                                 Bk`1 paq, if a P C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q for k “ 0, ..., d ´ 2.
                        ’
                        ’
                        &γ
             s`
              Hw paq “     1
                                                    △
                        ’
                        ’  γ projBd´1 paq, if a P C γ pBK`1 qzpCγ pwq Y Cγ p´wqq.
                        ’
                        %a,                  if a P Cγ pwq Y Cγ p´wq.

This is defined in the same way as in the proof of Theorem F - we refer the reader to Appendix F.1
for an explanation of why this definition is well defined.
                               △        △
Crucially actions queried in C γ pBk qz C γ pBk`1 q for k ď d ´ 2 does not reveal w. Without the
knowledge of w, the reward function is unknown and even with the knowledge of w the reward
function is not fully identified, in which case MHw ,` and MHw ,´ cannot be distinguished.

G.2.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM B.3
Consider the MDP class described in Appendix G.2.1 and Appendix G.2.2. First, we know from
Lemma F.1 that all instances of the BPI and PE problem characterised by the MDP class M and


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


target policies Π satisfy Assumption 4.2 (Qπ is realizable for every π) with the feature map ϕp¨, ¨q
defined in Appendix F.1.
Defining the subspaces in Hw : Denote the first d ´ 1 queries chosen by the learner by
ps1 , a1 q, ..., psd´1 , ad´1 q. In the feature space, these are a1 , ..., ad´1 . Let Bk be the orthogonal
complement of xa1 , ..., ak y, i.e.
                                               !                                       )
                        Bk “ xa1 , ..., ak yK “ x P B : xT a “ 0 @a P xa1 , ..., ak y ,

and w P Bd´1 . The definition of Bk is well defined since the feedback of ta1 , ..., ak´1 u only
                                                                    1
depends on B1 , ..., Bk´1 : for i “ 1, ..., k ´ 1, s`Hw pai q “ γ projBi pai q, rw,˘ ps, ai q “ 0. The
learner only observes the projection of actions in ta1 , ..., ak´1 u into B1 , B2 , ..., Bk´1 . In particular,
Bk can be fixed as any subspace nested in Bk´1 once the learner has chosen the action-query ak at
round.
In Appendix G.2.2, we fixed dim Bk “ d ´ k. If a1 , ..., ak are not linearly independent, the di-
mension of Bk may be greater than d ´ k. In this case, we just restrict Bk arbitrarily such that the
sequence remains nested. In particular, we have dim Bd´1 “ 1 and Bd´1 “ xwy for some w P BB.
Let Hw “ tB1 , ..., Bd´1 u. Consider the BPI and PE problem instances with MDPs MHw ,` and
MHw ,´ . The transition function is the same on MHw ,` and MHw ,´ .
                     △                                                        Ť
By construction ai R C γ pBd´1 q for all i ď d ´ 1. In particular, ai R Cγ pwq Cγ p´wq for i ď d ´ 1
and the reward function for any queried action is 0. Thus, the learner cannot distinguish MHw ,`
between MHw ,´ from the submitted queries.
For PE, the learner has to produce an estimate of Qπ ps̄, ¨q. But
                       Qπ ps̄, wq “ ϕps̄, wqT w “ wT w “ 1               on MHw ,` .
                         π                     T           T
                       Q ps̄, wq “ ´ϕps̄, wq w “ ´w w “ ´1                on MHw ,´ .
If the learner predicts a positive value for Qπ ps̄, wq, it will incur an error greater than 1 on MHw ,´
and similarly for MHw ,` if it predicts a negative value. Even if it randomizes between both, with
probability at least 1{2 it will incur an error of at least 1 on one of the MDPs.
Similarly for BPI, the learner has to produce a near-optimal policy in the starting state s̄. But
                    ‹
                   VM Hw ,`
                            ps̄q “ Q‹MHw ,` ps̄, wq “ ϕps̄, wqT w “ wT w “ 1.
                    ‹
                   VM Hw ,´
                            ps̄q “ Q‹MHw ,´ ps̄, wq “ ´ϕps̄, wqT w “ w ´T w “ ´1.

If the learner outputs a policy taking action a s.t. aT w ą 0, it will incur an error greater than 1 on
MHw ,´ and similarly for MHw ,` if it produces an action a s.t. aT w ď 0. Even if it randomizes
between both, with probability at least 1{2 it will incur an error of at least 1 on one of the MDPs.
Therefore, the learner can be at most p1, 1{2q-sound for both PE and BPI problems with n “ K ď
d ´ 1 queries. To be more than p1, 1{2q-sound, n “ K ě d queries are required.


                                                     36
