Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C AN LANGUAGE AGENTS BE ALTERNATIVES TO PPO?
A P RELIMINARY E MPIRICAL S TUDY O N O PENAI G YM
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         The formidable capacity for zero- or few-shot decision-making in language agents
         encourages us to pose a compelling question: Can language agents be alterna-
         tives to PPO agents in traditional sequential decision-making tasks? To inves-
         tigate this, we first take environments collected in OpenAI Gym as our testbeds
         and ground them to textual environments that construct the TextGym simulator.
         This allows for straightforward and efficient comparisons between PPO agents
         and language agents, given the widespread adoption of OpenAI Gym. To ensure
         a fair and effective benchmarking, we introduce 5 levels of scenario for accurate
         domain-knowledge controlling and a unified RL-inspired framework for language
         agents. Additionally, we propose an innovative explore-exploit-guided language
         (EXE) agent to solve tasks within TextGym. Through numerical experiments
         and ablation studies, we extract valuable insights into the decision-making capa-
         bilities of language agents and make a preliminary evaluation on their potential
         to be alternatives to PPO in classical sequential decision-making problems. This
         paper sheds light on the performance of language agents and paves the way for
         future research in this exciting domain. Our code is publicly available at https:
         //anonymous.4open.science/r/Text-Gym-Agents-5220.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) is a representative traditional rein-
forcement learning (RL) method, attains or exceeds human decision-making performance with a
large number of environment interactions in diverse classic tasks (Jaderberg et al., 2019; Mankowitz
et al., 2023), and has been treated as a popular choice for learning decision. For example, when we
face a CliffWalking task (Brockman et al., 2016a), our first attempt may be taking PPO as a try.
However PPO usually needs a large number of interactions in the environment. Conversely, Large
language models (LLMs; Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2019; OpenAI,
2023) exhibit formidable zero- or few-shot decision-making capabilities based on multiple LLM
calls for reasoning (Creswell et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022b; Shinn et al., 2023) or
manipulating internal memory (Guu et al., 2020; Park et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023)
and other external tools (Schick et al., 2023; Mialon et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023). Consequently, a
direct and inescapable question arises:

        Can language agents be alternatives to PPO in sequential decision-making tasks?

A plethora of environments have been proposed to assess the decision-making capabilities of lan-
guage agents across domains, including games (Shridhar et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2022), code exe-
cution (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2023), and real-world tasks (Yao et al., 2022a; Zhou
et al., 2023). Nonetheless, these environments, still in their formative stages, mainly focus on natural
language understanding instead of general sequential decision-making. To this end, we adopt envi-
ronments gathered by OpenAI Gym, the often-used sequential decision environments in RL, as our
testbed. To evaluate the performance of language agents, we first ground the environments to texts
with LLMs and propose a pioneering platform, TextGym. Due to the continuous advancements
integrated into OpenAI Gym environments, TextGym not only enables a reliable and exhaustive
comparison between RL and language agents in terms of performance, sample efficiency, and gen-
eralizability but also involves, in a light-weight manner, the critical challenges inherent to existing


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


environments specifically designed for language agents, including complex reasoning, long planning
horizons, and exploration of high-dimensional policy spaces.
Nonetheless, evaluating language agents’ decision-making capabilities (to decide which agents to
use) in TextGym, which contains a set of classic sequence decision problems, with efficiency and
fairness is challenging due to two factors. On the one side, varying degrees of domain knowledge
are supplied to LLMs by different language agents while forming decisions, ranging from zero-shot
prompting (Kojima et al., 2022), fine-grained few-shot (or in-context) examples (Du et al., 2023), to
coarse-grained expert guidelines (Wang et al., 2023a); conversely, disparate language agents equip
LLMs with distinct cognition skills, such as thinking (Wei et al., 2022), memorizing (Park et al.,
2023), and reflecting (Shinn et al., 2023), with blurred boundaries in different algorithmic frame-
works. We shall expound upon these factors, i.e., domain knowledge, and algorithmic frameworks
individually.
Firstly, the design of LLM prompting for various language agents frequently incorporates disparate
degrees of domain knowledge. For instance, Zero-shot-CoT (Kojima et al., 2022) merely appends
“Let’s think step by step” prior to each response, devoid of any task-related knowledge. In contrast,
ELLM (Du et al., 2023) provides ground-truth examples in each round of goal generation, exem-
plified by “Q: You see water, grass, cow, and diamond. You are targeting grass. You have in your
inventory plant. What do you do? A: Drink water.” Furthermore, Voyager (Wang et al., 2023a) offers
expert guidance for attaining elevated scores through prompting, as illustrated by “I may sometimes
need to repeat some tasks if I need to collect more resources to complete more difficult tasks. Only
repeat tasks if necessary.” Intuitively, varying domain knowledge levels will unavoidably influence
language agents’ performance. Consequently, regulating the extent of domain knowledge is vital for
ensuring fair comparisons.
Secondly, to enhance the decision-making ability of LLMs, different language agents bestow upon
them various cognitive skills via the incorporation of external modules. CoT (Wei et al., 2022)
introduces a series of intermediate reasoning steps in the prompt, considerably improve LLMs’ ca-
pacity to conduct complex reasoning; Generative Agents (Park et al., 2023) delineate an architecture
that expands an LLM to maintain the agent’s experiences in natural language, synthesize memo-
ries over time, and dynamically retrieve them to plan more efficient behavior; Reflexion (Shinn
et al., 2023) proposes a novel framework to endow LLMs with self-reflection capabilities, thereby
facilitating planning via trial-and-error analogous to RL. However, the boundaries between different
cognitive skills are blurry, with reflection potentially encompassing both thinking and memorization
processes. Simultaneously, different language agents employ distinct algorithmic frameworks in
pursuit of identical cognitive skills. This status quo hinders the conduction of fair comparisons and
thorough ablation studies of diverse language agents. As such, it is imperative to integrate extant
language agents into a unified algorithmic framework.
This paper addresses the above challenges and assesses the decision-making capabilities of language
agents in a more efficient and fair manner. More concretely, we introduce a hierarchy of domain
knowledge, comprising 5 levels, ranging from the absence of domain knowledge to the provision of
expert strategies required for task completion. Additionally, drawing inspiration from the RL, we
dissect the language agents assessed in this paper into three components: actor, critic, and learner,
thereby assimilating these agents within a unified algorithmic architecture. Lastly, we put forth
an innovative EXplore-Exploit-guided language agent (EXE) devised to tackle partially observable,
sparse reward tasks, which pose significant challenges to all language agents examined herein. With
numerical experiments and ablation studies, we summarize the following important observations:
1) Language agents have the potential of completing tasks in the TextGym for several environments
(i.e., Blackjack, Cartpole, CliffWalking, MoutainCar, and MoutainCarContinu-
ous) while failing at more challenging environments (i.e., Acrobot, LunarLander, and Taxi).
2) By engaging in environmental interactions, the performance of language agents approaches lev-
els akin to those obtained via expert knowledge prompting. 3) Our proposed EXE achieves higher
performance compared to other language agents in the TextGym setting.
Remark 1: This paper presents a preliminary study that investigates the potential of language agents
in executing traditional sequential decision tasks, an area typically dominated by PPO and other RL
techniques. As a nascent field of inquiry, the decision-making capabilities of language agents are still
under-explored, particularly in the context of environments like OpenAI Gym. In this exploratory
phase, we aim to unveil the competencies of LLMs in understanding and engaging with sequential


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


decision-making processes. Our intent is not to perform an exhaustive comparison with PPO, but
rather to spark a dialogue on the adaptability and evolution of language agents within this domain.
We acknowledge the limitations inherent in such an early-stage investigation, and any conclusions
drawn are intended to serve as a foundation for future, more comprehensive research. This work
should be interpreted as a stepping stone towards a broader understanding of the roles that language
agents can play in the realm of decision-based tasks and their potential to complement or, in some
instances, offer alternative solutions to conventional approaches.

2       B ENCHMARK D ESIGN

This section presents a benchmark framework that facilitates the effective and fair comparison of var-
ious language agents’ decision-making capabilities in classic sequential tasks. At the same time, this
framework juxtaposes their capacities against those of PPO in terms of cumulative reward thereby
addressing the core question raised at this paper’s outset: Can language agents be alternatives to
PPO in traditional sequential decision-making tasks? More concretely, we elucidate upon the metic-
ulous design process of TextGym, crafting a dependable validation platform for language agents
and RL in Section 2.1. Subsequently, we propose a hierarchical domain knowledge framework,
facilitating precise and fair comparison of language agents through accurate prompt control in Sec-
tion 2.2. Ultimately, we introduce an RL-inspired unified algorithmic architecture, incorporating
mainstream language agents, thus rendering penetrative ablation studies feasible in Section 2.3.

2.1      T E X T G Y M : A F RIENDLY G YM FOR L ANGUAGE AGENTS

We select OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016b) as our benchmark environment, owing to its
extensive utilization in the assessment of PPO and other RL agents. In order to render Gym com-
patible with language agents, it is necessary to transform the environments into text-based represen-
tations, i.e., TextGym. It should be noted that we presuppose language agents possess access to the
fundamental documentation of the environments. Concretely, we use the environment description,
including the observation space, action space, reward function, and episode terminate conditions,
for benchmarked environments in the official documentation1 for the transformation. We construct
TextGym by adding a translation wrapper for OpenAI Gym. Specifically, the wrapper wraps each
observation in a mixture of “game description”, “goal description”, “action space description”, and
“observation description”. To speed up the translation, we take GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) to make the
translation, and the details are presented in Appendix C.1.
Remark 2: The assumption regarding the acquisition of documentation is justifiable, as documents
are typically accessible in real-world applications (Harbour et al., 2001; Brockman et al., 2016a).
By providing language agents with fundamental documentation, we emulate a pragmatic situation
in which the agent possesses an elementary comprehension of the environment. This establishes
the foundation for assessing language agents. In contrast to the prevailing handcrafted few-shot
examples and heuristic prompting techniques, our assumption exhibits a higher degree of realism.

2.2      H IERARCHICAL C ONTROL OF D OMAIN K NOWLEDGE AND S CENARIO F ORMULATION

This subsection addresses the issue of inequitable comparisons among language agents due to un-
regulated domain knowledge in prompting. Specifically, we introduce a hierarchical organization
of domain knowledge, consisting of 5 levels, and employ it to devise corresponding scenarios for
regulating the domain knowledge utilized in prompting (see Appendix C.2 for all pseudo codes).
We define the first level of domain knowledge as a constraint where no external knowledge is pro-
vided, and the situation created by this constraint is termed the Lv1:Zero Guidance (De Peuter
& Kaski, 2023; Chen et al., 2022). Achievable through a powerful, highly generalizable agent,
this level represents the ultimate goal for language agents. However, as evidenced by our empir-
ical studies and existing literature (Shinn et al., 2023), current agents are considerably far from
achieving this objective. Another constraint of domain knowledge occurs when a human participant
supplies valuable knowledge, expertise, or even optimal policy descriptions, which we designate
as the ultimate level of domain knowledge. The situation created by this constraint is called the
    1
        https://gymnasium.farama.org/.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lv5:Expert Guidance. This approach is prevalent in contemporary language agent develop-
ment. Nonetheless, human guidance is not always reliable, and the significant reliance on it poses a
major challenge when deploying language agents to address general decision-making problems.
To facilitate the assessment of more practical scenarios, we propose 3 additional levels of domain
knowledge and corresponding scenarios, inspired by data-driven learning paradigms. Firstly, in-
formed by offline RL, experiences acquired through non-optimal policies can serve as a form of
domain knowledge. We label such experiences as the second level of domain knowledge, and the sit-
uation created by this level is called the Lv2:Sub-optimal Experience Guidance. Sub-
sequently, influenced by RL, interactions with the environment can be considered a unique form of
knowledge to direct learning. We classify these interactions as the third level of domain knowledge,
and the situation created by this level is termed the Lv3:Self-Guidance (as shown in Algo-
rithm 1). The Lv3 scenario enables agents to accumulate experience autonomously and implement
corresponding enhancements. Finally, we identify expert or optimal policy-derived experiences as
the fourth level of domain knowledge and the associated scenario as the Lv4:Optimal Expe-
rience Guidance, which is informed by imitation learning. These 3 scenarios explicitly control
domain knowledge by imposing the same experience or number of interactions on language agents.

Algorithm 1 Pseudo-code for Level 3: Self-Guidance
  Initialize agent M , knowledge memory Mk = ∅.
  for episode = 1 to N do
      Update agent M .update(Mk )                                ▷ Update agents with the knowledge
      Collect a trajectory τ with M in the environment.                                    ▷ Rollout
      Append τ to Mk .                                                      ▷ Update the knowledge
  end for

Viewed from another angle, the complexity of scenario formulation generally increases with each
level. Constructing a Lv1 scenario is relatively simple for any task. For Lv2 and Lv4, the chal-
lenges involve formulating corresponding policies and implementing them in real world or simula-
tors to gather experiences. For Lv3, the challenge lies in deploying an unstable and evolving policy
to collect experiences and update accordingly. For example, in autonomous driving, numerous sub-
optimal trajectories can be readily obtained, thus establishing Lv2. Lv3 requires the deployment
of agents in real-world settings or simulators, which are more difficult to develop. For Lv4, re-
searchers must initially design expert policies and subsequently collect expert trajectories. The final
level, Lv5, necessitates that researchers create knowledge explicitly to guide the agent in making
safe and effective driving decisions. Although humans perform well on the road, it remains an open
question how to construct human knowledge to assist language agents in accomplishing the task.
This challenge becomes even more difficult for tasks that humans cannot complete.

2.3   RL- INSPIRED U NIFIED A LGORITHMIC F RAMEWORK FOR L ANGUAGE AGENTS

In this subsection, we propose a comprehensive framework (Figure 1) for the conceptualization
of language agents, drawing inspiration from RL principles. The language agents consist of three
components: the actor, critic, and learner, where the actor is tasked with action selection based on
the current environmental state, the critic is responsible for assessing the quality of actions executed
by the actor, and the learner is accountable for updating the actor and critic in response to feedback
obtained from the environment.
Actor. The majority of existing language agents predominantly emphasize actor design. Three com-
ponents are involved for an actor: the profile, memory, and action instruction. The profile delineates
its features, the action instructions specify the ways to generate the final action response, and the
memory establishes its capacity for retaining historical information. Despite the diversity of pro-
file designs, we classify them according to their adopted style, rather than concentrating on specific
“magic words or prompts.” The prompt style represents the manner in which researchers formulate
prompts for the actor. Numerous prompting variants have been proposed, which can be broadly cate-
gorized into machine language, free-form verbal, and structured verbal. Machine language prompts
direct the language agent to produce programs as opposed to natural language. Structured verbal
prompts instruct language agents to generate output in an organized fashion (e.g., SaP; Press et al.,
2022) produces output in the “Follow up→Intermediate answer” format), while free-form verbal


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Illustration of the actor-critic-learner framework. A typical language agent is composed of
3 components: the actor, critic, and learner, each with its profile, memory, and action instructions.
Initially, the actor interacts with the environment, collecting a trajectory. Subsequently, the critic
evaluates the trajectory and provides feedback to the learner. Finally, the learner offers suggestions
to the actor based on the critique, forming an iterative process of sampling and learning.


prompts impose no structural constraints. Regarding action instructions in the actor, two primary
methods exist single-path and multi-path action generation. The majority of agents employ single-
path generation, which directly yields the current action, while a select few utilize multi-path action
generation, generating the actions in a tree-like structure. In terms of memorization, most language
agents do not directly retain environmental history, whereas Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) and our
proposed method permit agents to maintain a brief memory.
Critic. We classify critics in language agents into three categories: those without critics, numerical-
based critics, and verbal-based critics. Numerical-based critics assess the policy by providing binary
or scalar scores akin to RL critics. Capitalizing on the extensive input space acceptable to language
agents, verbal-based critics offer descriptions of the policy and its performance, facilitating the
conveyance of richer information.
Learner. As for learners, the majority of existing language agents do not incorporate learners to
autonomously adjust the actor. Learners can be differentiated based on their aims, either learn to
exploit or learn to explore and exploit. We provide a summary of existing language agents within
the context of this framework in Table 1. We posit that this categorization enhances clarity in com-
parisons and fosters further development in language agent design.
Through the incorporation of language agents within the actor-critic-learner paradigm, it becomes
feasible to discern the salient features of language agents. Furthermore, this paradigm facilitates the
adaptation of concepts from RL in the development of language agent architectures.
Remark 2: It is important to note that many language agents do not directly account for the data
collected in Lv2 to Lv4. To facilitate equitable comparisons, we incorporate a default critic and
learner component for these agents. The critic summarizes the trajectory directly while the learner
takes the summarized information as a suggestion to the actor. See Appendix C.3 for details.


3   E XPLORE -E XPLOIT G UIDED L ANGUAGE AGENT (EXE)

Consider the cliff-walking scenario as an illustrative example: agents are initially unaware of the lo-
cations of cliffs and the goal. It is, therefore, imperative that agents engage in exploration within the
environment to acquire this information. Subsequently, they must leverage such information for ex-
ploitation to develop an optimal strategy. The principle of maximum-entropy reinforcement learning
(RL) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) takes into account both exploration and exploitation within its gradient
propagation, demonstrating commendable outcomes in scenarios characterized by partial observ-
ability and sparse rewards. Inspired by this, we introduce the Explore-Exploit Guided Language
Agent (EXE), designed to direct the actor with a dual emphasis on exploration and exploitation, as
illustrated in Figure 2 and delineated in Algorithm 4.
Actor: The actor, a language model, consists of three primary components. Initially, it accepts the
game description, state, and action space description as input, analogous to reinforcement learning
configurations. Subsequently, a suggestions component receives input from the learner prior to the


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Critic                                                                               Criticism


                             Profile of Critic: You are now an evaluator.
                             This is a game about: <Game Description> and the
                             trajectory is: <Trajectory>.
                                                                                                  Learner
                                                                                                                  Profile of Learner: You are an AI assistant that
                                                                                                                  help a human player win the following game. The Game
                     Short-term Memory:                                                                           is about <Game Description>.
               # 0: <Observation Description>, Action, Reward
               # 1: <Observation Description>, Action, Reward
               …
               # t: <Observation Description>, Action, Reward’
                                                                                                   Long-term Memory:
               The Suggestions to guide the trajectory is                                          Episode #0:
               Suggestions:     […]                                                                Criticism: The policy in this trajectory seems to be …, The
                                                                                                   performance of the policy in this trajectory is

                      Action Instruction:
Trajectory     1. Describe the policy and summarize its performance;
               2. Describe new information from the trajectory that can be exploited to
                                                                                                   Action Instruction: Help the human player win the game in the last
                                                                                                   episode. He has only 5 episodes left to try.
               improve performance compared to the summarization memory;
                                                                                                  1. Summary insights of the game.
                                                                                        Insights, 2. What information should the player obtain through exploration, and
                                                                                      Suggestions how to make the exploration (exploration) in the next episode?
     Profile of Actor: Now you are completing a task.                                             3. How we improve the policy to gain a higher performance (exploitation)
     The Game is about <Game Description>.                                                        in the next episode?


                                                                            Actor
     The current state is <State Description>, and a                                              4. The weight of the exploration and exploitation?
     description of all possible actions is as follows:
     <Action Description>.
      Insights from the Learner:                                                                  Action
      Insights on how to win the game is …
      Suggestions from the Learner:
                                                                                                               Environment
      1. Exploration: [try different actions]
      2. Exploitation: [push towards the tilt direction]
      3. Tradeoff: [explore more.]                                               Observation
                                                                                 and Reward

         Short-term Memory:
    # 0: <Observation Description>, Action, Reward
    # 1: <Observation Description>, Action, Reward
    …
    # t: <Observation Description>, Action, Reward



    Action Instruction: Please choose an action in the action space.



Figure 2: Illustration of EXE in the CartPole-v0 game, featuring three main components. Actor
receives insights and suggestions from the learner and interacts with the environment, Critic evalu-
ates the trajectory generated by the actor based on the suggestions used by the actor. The Learner
processes criticism from the critic and provides insights and suggestions to the actor.


commencement of each episode, corresponding to the gradient descent and exploration framework
in reinforcement learning. In addition to these elements, the actor possesses a short-term mem-
ory module that retains experiences from the current episode, analogous to the recurrent design in
reinforcement learning policies. Utilizing these components, the actor directly selects actions and
engages with the environment.
Critic: The critic is characterized by a combination of memory, game description, trajectory, sug-
gestion, and critic instruction. The game description informs the critic of its environmental context,
while the trajectory provides the necessary information for evaluation. The suggestion tells what the
trajectory is for and what information should be noted. Upon acquiring this information, the critic
adheres to the instructions to generate criticism, which characterizes the policy and extracts novel
information accordingly. This criticism is subsequently transmitted to the learner.
Learner: The learner receives the game description and utilizes its memory to retain the criticism
provided by the critic. Prior to the initiation of each episode, the learner processes the game de-
scription and its memory as the current state, adhering to instructions that explicitly account for the
number of episodes in order to offer suggestions regarding 1) exploration strategies, 2) exploitation
methods, and 3) the optimal balance between exploration and exploitation in subsequent episodes.
These suggestions are then conveyed to the actor. It should be noted that our EXE always generate
suggestions even if there is no trajectory obtained (Lv1 and Lv5)


4       E XPERIMENTS

This section performs a series of experiments to assess the efficacy of our proposed EXE, alternative
language agents within the TextGym, and PPO agents within OpenAI Gym. Our investigation
seeks to address the following research questions: Q1: Are language agents capable of achieving


                                                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


performance levels comparable to those of PPO? Q2: What is the influence of domain knowledge
controlling on language agent performance? Q3: How does the design of a language agent affect its
performance?
Environment and Scenario Configurations. Grounded environments include Classic Control
(Acrobot-v1, CartPole-v0, MountainCar-v0 and MountainCarContinuous-v0),
Toy Text (Blackjack-v1, Taxi-v3, CliffWalking-v0), and Box2D (LunarLander-
v2). Each environment poses distinct challenges for agents, as outlined in Appendix C.1. Moreover,
we devise the 5-level domain knowledge controlling scenario for each environment. For Lv2, we
employ a random policy to gather 5 trajectories per environment, offering a rudimentary approach to
scenario creation. For Lv3, we allow each agent to interact with the environment across 5 episodes.
For Lv4, we train cutting-edge policies based on Tianshou (Weng et al., 2022) for each environment
to collect 5 expert trajectories. To create Lv5 scenarios, we meticulously design the scenarios with
human input. Specifically, we allocate 1 hour of effort to develop scenarios for a single agent in each
environment, randomizing the sequence of language agents. These scenarios are crafted to evaluate
the agents’ capacity to leverage information and perform in a variety of contexts.
Language Agent Configurations. For language agents lacking a critic or learner, we implement
them with default one, as elaborated in Appendix C.3. This implementation does not modify their
behavior in Lv1 and Lv5 scenarios but allows them to exploit information in Lv2 to Lv4 scenarios.
We implement agents using OpenAI APIs2 , with all agents employing the gpt-3.5-turbo0301
model if not specifically mentioned. For more details, we refer the reader to Appendix C.3
We conduct extensive experiments involving all agents across every scenario within the given envi-
ronments with 5 seeds if not specifically mentioned. To assess performance across diverse environ-
ments, we initially establish a solvability threshold l and a state-of-the-art threshold h as in Table 3.
The solvability threshold evaluates the extent to which the primary objective3 of the task is achieved,
while the optimal threshold is derived from RL agents employed in constructing the Lv4 scenario.
                                                                           r−l
Subsequently, we normalize the performance r to rn by setting rn = h−l          if r > l while rn = −1
for r <= l. When the value surpasses 0, it signifies that agents can access the solvability zone, and
values nearing 1 indicate closeness to state-of-the-art performance. We take the median performance
of the agent across 5 seeds its performance when not specifically mentioned. For a more detailed
description of the evaluation process, refer to Appendix C.5.

4.1       I NVESTIGATING THE POTENTIAL OF LANGUAGE AGENTS .



                       CliffWalking-v0                               Solvability
                                                                     PPO
  MountainCarContinuous-v0                     CartPole-v0           Language Agents

                                                           1.0
                                                    0.5
                                              0.0
                                        0.5
MountainCar-v0                    1.0                     Blackjack-v1


         Acrobot-v1                           LunarLander-v2

                             Taxi-v3

    (a) Solvability results across environments.                                           (b) Solvability results across scenarios.

Figure 3: The radar graph and histogram comparing language agents and PPO. For Figure 3a, the
gray area demarcates the solvability threshold, and beyond this region, the task can be completed
by the algorithm. Figure 3b displays the solvability, with PPO solving 6 out of 8 environments
and language agents solving 5. This figure further examines the agent’s performance in specific
scenarios, showing that language agents in Lv3 and Lv5 solve 4 games, while others solve less.
     2
    https://openai.com/blog/openai-api.
     3
    E.g., the minimal return of reaching the goal without stepping into cliffs is set as the solvability threshold
of Cliffwalking.


                                                                                       7
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Figure 3a illustrates the median value of the normalized performance of the top-performing language
       agents for each environment. It is evident that language agents can successfully solve 5 out of the
       total 8 environments, demonstrating the potential of language agents. Furthermore, in our experi-
       mental setup, language agents require no more than 5 episodes to achieve this performance, whereas
       the PPO agent necessitates 20, 000 episodes. This highlights the superior task-relevant interaction
       efficiency of language agents in comparison to RL.
       However, there are 3 environments (LunarLander-v2, Taxi-v3, and Acrobot-v1) where
       no language agents can attain the solvability threshold. This reveals that language agents still face
       difficulties in addressing the challenges presented by these environments. Such tasks typically in-
       volve extremely partial observations and complex and stochastic dynamics. We posit that further
       advanced design are needed to overcome these challenges and render the tasks manageable.
       Key Observations: 1) Language agents exhibit good performance in environments that have simple
       dynamics. They can achieve the solvability threshold in these environments with significantly fewer
       interactions or data compared to PPO. 2) Additional efforts are required to design language agents
       designed to achieve similar performances to PPO in more challenging TextGym environments.

       4.2                        E XAMINING THE I MPACT OF S CENARIO VARIATIONS

       Figure 3b presents the maximal performance and median performance achieved by language agents
       in each environment, considering various scenario levels. It is evident that agents in Lv3 and Lv5
       outperform their counterparts, successfully solving 4/8 environments in the median performance.
       Agents in Lv1, Lv2, and Lv4 can only solve 2/8 environments indicating the zero-, sub-optimal,
       and optimal experience guidance are less helpful in achieving great performance in median.
       Key Findings: 1) The Lv3 scenario is effective and should be prioritized when designing a prompt.

       4.3                        E XPLORING L ANGUAGE AGENTS C HOICE

                                                                                                                                                                   Blackjack CartPole CliffWalking Mountain MountainCar
                                              1       2        3       4       5                                                                                      -v1      -v0         -v0      Car-v0 Continuous-v0
                                                                                      0.4                                                                                                                                  1.00
                               EXE(Ours)     -0.67   -0.66    -0.24   -0.67   -0.67                                                                  EXE(Ours)       0.60      0.16        0.39       -1.00    0.93
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.75
                                Reflexion    -0.84   -0.80    -0.80   -0.79   -0.70   0.2                                                             Reflexion      0.70      -1.00       -1.00      0.34     -1.00
Language and PPO Agents


                                                                                                                      Language and PPO Agents


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.50
                                     CoT     -0.70   -0.84    -0.82   -0.68   -0.86   0.0                                                                  CoT       0.50      0.05        -1.00      -1.00    -1.00



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Maximum Performance
                                                                                            Average Performance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.25
                                      SPP    -0.70   -0.86    -0.84   -0.85   -0.69    0.2                                                                  SPP      0.40      0.08        -1.00      -1.00    -1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                 Self-Ask    -0.80   -1.00    -0.81   -0.84   -0.61                                                                    Self-Ask      0.90      0.18        -1.00      -1.00    -1.00
                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.25
                          Self-Consistency   -0.65   -0.68    -0.78   -0.66   -0.66                                                             Self-Consistency     0.80      0.19        0.35       -1.00    -1.00
                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.50
                              Naive-Actor    -0.78   -0.80    -0.80   -0.84   -1.00                                                                 Naive-Actor      0.80      -1.00       -1.00      -1.00    -1.00
                                                                                       0.8                                                                                                                                  0.75
                                     PPO     0.45    0.45     0.45    0.45    0.45                                                                         PPO       0.80      1.00        1.00       0.97     -1.00
                                                                                       1.0                                                                                                                                  1.00
                                                             Levels                                                                                                                    Environments
                            (a) Average performance across environments.                                                                               (b) Maximum performance across levels.

       Figure 4: Heatmap for the performance of language agents in different scenarios and environments.


       Given a specific scenario, which language agent should be preferred? Figure 4a displays the
       average performance across all solvable environments for each language agent under different sce-
       nario levels. It is evident that the proposed EXE significantly surpasses other agents in the Lv3
       scenario, emphasizing the importance of active exploration and exploitation in this context. In the
       Lv1, Lv2, Lv3 and Lv5 scenario, EXE and Self-Consistency achieve similar performance and are
       not outperformed by other agents significantly. Thus EXE is generally preferred.
       Given a specific environment, which language agent should be preferred? We visualize the
       maximal performance across scenarios that each language agent can achieve for the environments
       in Figure 4b. EXE solves 4 environments while others can not solve more than 3 environments,
       demonstrating the superiority of our method. See Appendix D for extensive case studies.


                                                                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Key Findings: 1) In the Lv3 scenario, EXE outperforms other agents due to its active exploration
and exploitation capabilities. 2) In environments that are solvable for language agents, EXE sur-
passes other agents with the ability to solve 4 out of 5 environments.

4.4    C ASE S TUDY BETWEEN EXE AND R EFLEXION

EXE and Reflexion are designed for Lv3, however their performances diverge. Figure 5 and 6b
visualize their learning processes. Relfxion does not learn to avoid cliff in CliffWalking-v0
and fails to reach the goal in MoutainCarContinuous-v0. While EXE learns to improve
median performances reach to the solvability threshold at the last episode for the two environments.


    (a) The performance of EXE in Lv3 scenario.       (b) The performance of Reflexion in Lv3 scenario.

Figure 5: The performance of EXE and Reflexion in the CliffWalking-v0 environment at Lv3.


    (a) The performance of EXE in Lv3 scenario.       (b) The performance of Reflexion in Lv3 scenario.

Figure 6: The performance of EXE and Reflexion in MountainCarContinuous-v0 at Lv3
with 5 successive episodes.


5     C ONCLUSION
This paper introduces a benchmark for evaluating language agents in RL-dominated, classic
decision-making problems. This benchmark encompasses a language-agent-friendly simulator,
TextGym, a domain-knowledge-controlled hierarchical scenarios, and a unified language agents
framework. We assess language agents’ capabilities in approaching PPO, the influence of domain
knowledge construction, and the implications of agent design. Moreover, we present a novel lan-
guage agent, EXE, inspired by the exploration and exploitation principles inherent in RL. EXE
demonstrates superior performance in certain scenarios compared to other language agents. We
conclude by outlining many key insights regarding both language agent design and domain knowl-
edge incorporating, which we believe will contribute to a deeper understanding of language agents
and inspire further research in this domain.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi,
  Zhaohan Daniel Guo, and Charles Blundell. Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark.
  In ICML, 2020.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016a.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016b.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Annie Chen, Archit Sharma, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. You only live once: Single-life
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:14784–14797,
  2022.
Antonia Creswell, Murray Shanahan, and Irina Higgins. Selection-inference: Exploiting large lan-
  guage models for interpretable logical reasoning. In ICLR, 2023.
Sebastiaan De Peuter and Samuel Kaski. Zero-shot assistance in sequential decision problems. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 11551–11559,
  2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
  Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In NAACL-HLT (1), 2019.
Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek
  Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
  models. In ICML, 2023.
Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang,
  De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied
  agents with internet-scale knowledge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  18343–18362, 2022.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented
  language model pre-training. In ICML, 2020.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
M González Harbour, JJ Gutiérrez Garcı́a, JC Palencia Gutiérrez, and JM Drake Moyano. Mast:
 Modeling and analysis suite for real time applications. In Proceedings 13th Euromicro Conference
 on Real-Time Systems, pp. 125–134. IEEE, 2001.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin
  Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring coding challenge
  competence with apps. NeurIPS, 2021.
Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio Garcia
 Castaneda, Charles Beattie, Neil C Rabinowitz, Ari S Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, et al. Human-
 level performance in 3d multiplayer games with population-based reinforcement learning. Sci-
 ence, 364(6443):859–865, 2019.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Daniel J Mankowitz, Andrea Michi, Anton Zhernov, Marco Gelmi, Marco Selvi, Cosmin Paduraru,
  Edouard Leurent, Shariq Iqbal, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Alex Ahern, et al. Faster sorting algorithms
  discovered using deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 618(7964):257–263, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessı̀, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta
  Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, et al. Augmented
  language models: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07842, 2023.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023.
Philip Osborne, Heido Nõmm, and André Freitas. A survey of text games for reinforcement learning
  informed by natural language. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:
  873–887, 2022. ISSN 2307-387X. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00495. URL http://dx.doi.org/
  10.1162/tacl_a_00495.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
  and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350,
  2022.
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu,
  and Maosong Sun.      Communicative agents for software development. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.07924, 2023.
Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen, Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Yufei
  Huang, Chaojun Xiao, Chi Han, et al. Tool learning with foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.08354, 2023.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  20-1364.html.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
  Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In
 ICLR, 2021.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing
  cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-
  collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05300, 2023b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In NeurIPS,
  2022.
Jiayi Weng, Huayu Chen, Dong Yan, Kaichao You, Alexis Duburcq, Minghao Zhang, Yi Su, Hang
   Su, and Jun Zhu. Tianshou: A highly modularized deep reinforcement learning library. Journal of
   Machine Learning Research, 23(267):1–6, 2022. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v23/
   21-1127.html.
Tongshuang Wu, Michael Terry, and Carrie Jun Cai. AI chains: Transparent and controllable human-
  AI interaction by chaining large language model prompts. In CHI, 2022.
Yuzhuang Xu, Shuo Wang, Peng Li, Fuwen Luo, Xiaolong Wang, Weidong Liu, and Yang Liu.
  Exploring large language models for communication games: An empirical study on werewolf.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04658, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable
  real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. In NeurIPS, 2022a.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022b.
Qinkai Zheng, Xiao Xia, Xu Zou, Yuxiao Dong, Shan Wang, Yufei Xue, Zihan Wang, Lei Shen,
  Andi Wang, Yang Li, et al. Codegeex: A pre-trained model for code generation with multilingual
  evaluations on humaneval-x. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17568, 2023.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
  Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building
  autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Supplementary Material
Table of Contents
      A Problem Formulation                                                                          13

      B Related Work                                                                                 14
          B.1 Related Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14
          B.2 Language Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14

      C Experiments Details                                                                          15
          C.1 Environments Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
          C.2 Scenario Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
          C.3 Details of Language Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
          C.4 Details of PPO agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
          C.5 Evaluation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19

      D Extensive Results                                                                            19
          D.1 Absolute Performance Comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
          D.2 EXE without the game description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
          D.3 EXE in more environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
          D.4 Missing Case Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24


A    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

This paper aims to solve a set of sequential decision-making problems which each can be char-
acterized by a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP; Sutton & Barto, 2018)
M ⟨S, A, P, R, Ω, O, γ⟩, by utilizing RL or language agents. For each problem, the environmental
state is denoted by s ∈ S. At each discrete timestep t, the agent observes an observation ot ∈ Ω
based on the emission or observation function O (ot | st ), which is a probability distribution over
observations conditioned on the current state st . The agent maintains a belief state bt over the en-
vironmental states, which is updated based on the observation ot and the previous action at−1 . The
agent then opts for an action at ∼ π (at | bt ) ∈ A, based on the general policy π : B×A → [0, 1], ∀i
and the current belief state bt . This action consequently leads to the subsequent state st+1 ∈ S ac-
cording to the transition function P (st+1 | st , at ) and procures a scalar reward rt = R(st , at ) ∈ R.
The principal objective for an agent is to determine a policy π that maximizes the total expected
                                                         PT
cumulative reward, J = Eat ∼π(·|bt ),st+1 ∼P(·|st ,at ) [ t=1 γ t−1 rt (st , at )], via learning from transi-
tions during environment interaction. It is noteworthy that within the context of language agents, the
state, observations, actions, and rewards are manifested through textual representations.
We aspire to benchmark the two learning paradigms, RL and language agents, within the context
above, spanning the diverse tasks encompassed by TextGym and focusing on expected cumulative
rewards and sample complexity. Owing to the in-context learning ability of LLMs (Brown et al.,
2020), language agents naturally boast substantial superiority in the latter aspect (which shall be
thoroughly validated in the experiments). More concretely, RL necessitates a multitude of magni-
tudes more interactions with the environment to accomplish a task from scratch, compared to human
capabilities (Mnih et al., 2015; Badia et al., 2020; Vinyals et al., 2019). In contrast to RL, language
agents employ language as a universal interface, substantially diminishing the need for interaction
samples through their in-context learning capability and vast decision-making knowledge gleaned
from copious online text.

                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B      R ELATED W ORK
B.1      R ELATED B ENCHMARKS

As large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in generalization and
planning, an array of executive benchmarks has been proposed to assess their proficiency. Initial
benchmarks primarily focused on text-based games such as ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021), Jeri-
cho (Hausknecht et al., 2020), and TextWorld (Côté et al., 2018).
Contemporary research endeavors have sought to appraise LLMs’ performance in numerous real-
world tasks beyond text games. Pioneering works like APPS (Hendrycks et al., 2021), Hu-
manEval (Chen et al., 2021), and MBPP (Austin et al., 2021) emphasize code execution as a means
to assess LLMs for functional correctness rather than text similarity. Subsequent studies (Li et al.,
2022; Zheng et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2022; Nijkamp et al., 2022) have adopted this paradigm, further
solidifying its prominence.
A multitude of games has been devised to investigate LLMs’ task-planning aptitude. Examples
include approaches utilizing the Minecraft environment (Zhu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a;c) to
gauge LLMs’ efficacy in planning and decision-making. Tachikuma (Liang et al., 2023) employs a
TRPG game log to measure LLMs’ capacity to interpret and deduce intricate interactions involving
multiple characters and unanticipated objects. MindAgent (Gong et al., 2023) introduces a virtual
kitchen setting to evaluate LLMs’ planning and coordination competencies.
Additionally, several studies have constructed interactive settings that simulate real-world scenarios.
WebShop (Yao et al., 2022a) establishes a mock e-commerce website to assess LLMs’ capabilities
in product search and retrieval, while WebArena (Zhou et al., 2023) provides a thorough website
environment encompassing an array of domains.
Diverging from the aforementioned benchmarks, our research aims to ascertain whether language
agents can rival PPO in sequential decision-making tasks. Our primary focus is on decision-making
capabilities, rather than proficiency in processing textual information and natural language under-
standing. To this end, we leverage environments curated by OpenAI Gym as our experimental
platforms. These environments are typified by their comparatively lower-dimensional state and ac-
tion spaces relative to conventional TextGames (Osborne et al., 2022), thereby focusing on present-
ing challenges in exploration, sparse reward, and stochastic dynamics crucial for decision learning,
which renders them well-suited for assessing the performance of PPO. To adapt language agents
to these environments, we introduce TextGym—a framework that transforms these environments
into textual counterparts using their documentation and GPT-4. This transformation process is gen-
erally feasible for non-image-based environments. Should the language agents within TextGym
demonstrate competitive performance against PPO in the OpenAI Gym settings, it would suggest
the potential of language agents as viable alternatives to PPO.

B.2      L ANGUAGE AGENTS
                                                         Actor
         LLM Agent                                                                               Critic                    Learner
                                 Prompt Profile    Action Instruction       Memory
          ChatGPT                   free-form       single-path action          -                   -                          -
    CoT Wei et al. (2022)           free-form       single-path action          -                   -                          -
    SaP Press et al. (2022)      structured-form    single-path action          -                   -                          -
   ScP Wang et al. (2022)           free-form       multi-path action           -                   -                          -
  SPP Wang et al. (2023b)           free-form       multi-path action           -                   -                          -
 Reflexion Shinn et al. (2023)      free-form       single-path action    short memory   verbal/numerical-based         Learn to exploit
         EXE (Ours)                 free-form       single-path action    short memory        verbal-based        Learn to explore and exploit


                    Table 1: Summary of language agents in actor-critic-learner framework.

In recent months, numerous studies have emerged that consider pre-trained large language models
as agents for decision-making processes. Several of these works (Huang et al., 2022; Kojima et al.,
2022; De Peuter & Kaski, 2023) enable language agents to perform zero-shot decision-making tasks.
For instance, Kojima et al. (2022) employs a trigger phrase such as “think step by step” to prompt
language agents.
In addition to these, a multitude of research endeavors (Wei et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023; Press et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2022; 2023b;c; Sun et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023) seek to develop more intricate


                                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


prompts, allowing language agents to execute few-shot decision-making tasks. Wei et al. (2022);
Gao et al. (2023); Press et al. (2022) formulate specific chain-of-thought and programming few-shot
examples to guide the language model’s appropriate behavior. Wang et al. (2022; 2023b) propose
diverse action selection strategies to augment decision quality through multiple-time queries.
Distinct from the aforementioned studies, Wang et al. (2023c); Sun et al. (2023); Shinn et al. (2023)
introduce innovative architectures to facilitate enhanced reasoning and decision-making capabilities
for agents, as well as improved action execution with feedback.

C     E XPERIMENTS D ETAILS

C.1    E NVIRONMENTS D ETAILS

We summarize the environments of TextGym. The grounding process is subject to the criteria that
minimal human intervention to make the grounding scalable and objective. To fulfill this criterion,
we employ GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) for the grounding procedure. OpenAI Gym provides exhaustive
documentation elucidating the essential concepts of each environment. Initially, we develop a code
template (Appendix C.1) predicated on the CartPole-v0 environment and introduce code review
to make sure the code is objective. This template encompasses three classes: ObsTranslator,
GameDescriber, and TransitionTranslator. The ObsTranslator is responsible for
converting each observation into a textual description, while the GameDescriber offers an intro-
duction and delineates the objectives of the game. The TransitionTranslator grounds the
observation, action, reward, and consecutive observation in a textual format. Upon completion of the
code template, we adhere to the generation process illustrated in Figure 7 to ground additional en-
vironments. For each environment, we supply GPT-4 with the pertinent documentation and instruct
it to generate the translation code in Python format. Utilizing our manually crafted code exam-
ple, GPT-4 generates the remaining environments in a consistent manner. This grounding ensures
that our environments obviate the need for GPT-4 queries during sampling, substantially reducing
temporal and financial expenditures. In essence, we manually craft one environment and execute a
single query for each environment translation, rendering our grounding process both efficacious and
economical. To ground each environment, we first devise an example translation code as follows.
Then we adopt GPT-4 to verify the code does not introduce additional information compared to the
original document. After that, GPT-4 is further taken to ground all other environments as Figure 7.

                   Listing 1: The language grounded CartPole-v0 example.
class ObsTranslator:
   def __init__(self,):
      pass

      def translate(self, state):
         cart_position, cart_velocity, pole_angle, pole_angular_velocity =
             state
         cart_direction = "right" if cart_velocity > 0 else "left"
         pole_direction = "right" if pole_angular_velocity > 0 else "left"
         res = (f"The cart is positioned at {cart_position:.3f}, with a
             velocity of {abs(cart_velocity):.2f} towards the {
             cart_direction}. "
               f"The pole is tilted at {abs(pole_angle):.2f} radians,
                   rotating at {abs(pole_angular_velocity):.2f} radians per
                   second towards the {pole_direction}.")
         return res

class GameDescriber:
   def __init__(self):
      pass

      def describe_goal(self):
         return "The goal is to keep the pole balanced upright for as long
             as possible."

      def describe_game(self):


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               Document
                                            Description
                                            The MountainCar-v0 is a deterministic MDP…


      Control
                                            Observation Space
                                            The observation is a np.ndarray with shape (2,) …

                                                               Instruction

                                            Please use Python code to translate the
      Box 2D


                                            environment into an environment described in
                                            the text based on the above task document. I can
                                            solve tasks using an LLM that handles text input.
                                            Below is a Python code template…


                           Toy Text                          Code Snippet

                                            Grounded Cart Pole-V0 Code:
                                            class BasicLevelTranslator:
                                            class GameDescriber:

                                                               Response


                                            Grounded Mountain Car Code:
                                            class BasicLevelTranslator:
                                            class GameDescriber:

Figure 7: Illustration of grounding process. The left side of the figure presents sample target ground-
ing environments, while the right side details the grounding process. Specifically, GPT-4 is pro-
vided with the target environment document, general grounding instructions, and a code example
for grounded results in another environment. The code generated by GPT-4 is then considered the
grounded output.


                return "In the CartPole game, you control a cart that moves along a
                     horizontal track. There is a pole " \
                      "standing upright on the cart. The goal of the game is to keep
                           the pole balanced upright by moving the " \
                      "cart left or right. The game ends if the pole tilts too far
                          from the vertical position or if the cart " \
                      "moves too far from the center of the track. The longer you
                          can keep the pole balanced, the higher your score." \
                      "Note that when the Cart Position is out of the (-2.4, 2.4)"
                          zone or the Pole Angle is out of the zone (-.2095, .2095)
                          "\
                       ", the round ends and the game is lost. "

    def describe_action(self):
       return "Your Next Move: \n Please choose an action. Type ’1’ to
           push the cart to the left or ’2’ to push the cart to the right.
            Ensure you only provide the action number from the valid
           action list, i.e., [1, 2]."

class TransitionTranslator(ObsTranslator):
   def translate(self, infos, is_current=False):
      descriptions = []
      if is_current:
         state_desc = ObsTranslator().translate(infos[-1][’state’])
         return state_desc
      for i, info in enumerate(infos):
         assert ’state’ in info, "info should contain state information"



                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           state_desc = ObsTranslator().translate(info[’state’])
           action_desc = f"Take Action: Push {’right’ if info[’action’] ==
               2 else ’left’} ({info[’action’]})."
           reward_desc = f"Result: Reward of {info[’reward’]}, "
           next_state_desc = ObsTranslator().translate(info[’next_state’])
           descriptions.append(f"{state_desc}.\n {action_desc} \n {
               reward_desc} \n Transit to {next_state_desc}")
        return descriptions


Environment                              Task                                          Challenge                              Difficulty
Acrobot-v1                        Swing a robot arm                               Complex dynamic                             Moderate
Blackjack-v1                        Play Blackjack                               Stochastic dynamic                        Easy to moderate
CartPole-v0                     Balance a pole on a cart                          Inherent instability                     Easy to moderate
CliffWalking-v0                Navigate in a grid world                             Partial-Observe                              Easy
FrozenLake                    Navigate in a slippery world            Partial-Observe and stochastic dynamic                     Hard
LunarLander-v2                   Land a lunar module                        Complex states and dynamic                           Hard
MountainCarContinuous-v0          Drive a car up a hill                               exploration                             Moderate
MountainCar-v0                    Drive a car up a hill                              Sparse reward                            Moderate
Taxi-v3                     Pick up and drop off passengers   Complex states, partial observe and stochastic environment         Hard


                           Table 2: Summary of OpenAI Gym environments.


C.2   S CENARIO D ETAILS

This section presents the details of each scenario. First, we propose the pseudocodes.


Algorithm 2 Pseudocode for Lv1:Zero Guidance and Lv5:Expert Guidance
  Initialize agent M , knowledge memory Mk = ∅ for Level 1 while Mk = {expert − prompts}.
  Update agent M .update(Mk )                             ▷ Update agents with the knowledge
  Collect a trajectory τ with M in the environment.                                 ▷ Rollout


Algorithm 3 Pseudocode for Lv2:Suboptimal Guidance and Lv4:Optimal Guidance
  Initialize agent M , knowledge memory Mk = ∅, experiences τ1 , . . . , τN .   ▷ τ is sub-optimal
  (optimal) trajectory
  for episode = 1 to N do
      Append τ to Mk .                                                     ▷ Update the knowledge
      Update agent M .update(Mk )                         ▷ Update agents with the knowledge
  end for
  Collect a trajectory τ with M in the environment.                                      ▷ Rollout


C.3   D ETAILS OF L ANGUAGE AGENTS

We set the temperature as 0 to reduce the uncertainty raised by the LLM. It should be noted that
GPT-3.5/4 has unavoidable stochastic even set the temperature as 0. For EXE, its pseudocode in
Lv3 scenario is shown in Algorithm 4.


                                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 4 Pseudo-code for Explore-Exploit Guided Language Agent (EXE) in Lv3.
  Initialize agent M (which consists of actor Ma , critic Mc , learner Ml ) and knowledge memory
  Mk = {game document}.
  for episode = 1 to N do
      if Mk = {game document} then
           suggestion ← Ml (Mk )                                     ▷ Learning without experience
           Update actor Ma .update(suggestion)                  ▷ Update agents with the knowledge
           Collect a trajectory τ with Ma in the environment.                             ▷ Rollout
      else
           suggestion, insight ← Ml (Mk )                               ▷ Learning with experience
           Update actor Ma .update(suggestion, insight) ▷ Update agents with the knowledge and
  insight
           Collect a trajectory τ with Ma in the environment.                             ▷ Rollout
      end if
      evaluation ← Mc (τ, suggestion)                                                  ▷ Evaluation
      Append (τ, evaluation) to Mk .                                           ▷ Update Knowledge
  end for


For Reflexion, its algorithm is shown below and the critic uses the cumulative reward as the evalua-
tion results.

Algorithm 5 Pseudocode for Reflexion in Lv3.
  Initialize agent M (which consists of actor Ma , critic Mc , learner Ml ) and knowledge memory
  Mk = {game document}.
  for episode = 1 to N do
      Update actor Ma .update(Mk )                              ▷ Update agents with the knowledge
      Collect a trajectory τ with Ma in the environment.                                  ▷ Rollout
      evaluation ← Mc (τ )                                                             ▷ Evaluation
      suggestion ← Ml (Mk , τ, evaluation)                              ▷ Learning with experience
      Append (suggestion) to Mk .                                              ▷ Update Knowledge
  end for


For other agents that have no critic or learner, they follow the implementation of Reflexion but with
a different learner prompt:
                              Listing 2: Prompt of the Defual Learner
      You will be given the history of a past experience in which you were
          placed in an environment and given a task to complete. Summarize
          your trajectory and reasoning relation between your policy and the
           obtained result. Here are two examples:
      {FEW_SHOT_EXAMPLES}
      {game description}, {goal description}
      {traj}
      Memory from past attempts:
         Trial 1: [..]
         Trial 2: [..]
      Summary:


C.4    D ETAILS OF PPO AGENT

This section primarily elaborates on the implementation of PPO within OpenAI Gym. In our experi-
ment, we try Tianshou (Weng et al., 2022) in almost every environment and Taxi-v3 environment
with stable-baselines3 (Raffin et al., 2021), and we employed a custom neural network architecture,
The PPO architecture consists of the following components:
Policy Network: A sequential neural network with a linear layer (input features: observation space
(obs space), output features: 64, bias: enabled), followed by a hyperbolic tangent activation


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


function, another linear layer (input features: 64, output features: 64, bias: enabled), and another
hyperbolic tangent activation function.
Value Network: A sequential neural network with a linear layer (input features: 2, output features:
64, bias: enabled), followed by a hyperbolic tangent activation function, another linear layer (input
features: 64, output features: 64, bias: enabled), and another hyperbolic tangent activation function.
Action Output Network: A linear layer with input features equal to 64, output features equal to the
number of actions (action num), and bias enabled (bias=True).
Value Output Network : A linear layer with input features equal to 64, output features equal to 1,
and bias enabled (bias=True).
Regarding the model size, the total number of trainable parameters in our policy model is 8, 964
when the action number is 3, and the input dim is 1. This number was calculated by summing the
number of elements in each parameter tensor that requires gradient computation.
All our environments maintain consistency in the total number of training iterations, with 400 epochs
and 50 trajectories sampled per epoch. We conducted a grid search for the learning rate, including
{1e − 3, 1e − 4, 1e − 5}, discount factor, including {0.99, 0.95, 0.9}, weight for entropy loss, in-
cluding {0.01, 0.05, 0.1}, and the number of repeat times for policy learning, including {10, 20}.

C.5     E VALUATION D ETAILS

For Blackjack-v1 which possesses strong uncertainty, we evaluate all agents for 100 episodes
at Level 3 and 20 episodes at the other levels. We utilize the consistency between the agent’s actions
(encompassing ”hit” and ”stick”) in each episode and the optimal actions (Sutton & Barto, 2018)
as the reward mechanism. Specifically, when the two actions align, a reward of 1 is assigned; con-
versely, when they are inconsistent, a reward of 0 is given. Subsequently, the cumulative reward
across 20 episodes is employed as the agent’s overall reward within the blackjack environment.
Under the conditions of Lv3, we divide the 100 episodes into 5 groups, with each group’s cumu-
lative reward functioning as an individual episode’s reward for Lv3, which is analogous to other
environments. For other environments, we take 5 seeds to evaluate each agent in a scenario of the
environment. For Lv2 and Lv4 scenarios, each agent is guided by the same 5 trajectories. For the
Lv3 scenario, each agent interacts with the environment with 5 episodes.
As for the solvability threshold, each environment has its own goal and we set the minimal cumu-
lative reward to obtain the final goal as the threshold. For the sota threshold, we take the best RL
performance as the SOTA. They are reported as Table 3.

                  Table 3: Solvability and SOTA thresholds for different environments.
      Metric           Blackjack-v1    CartPole-v0     CliffWalking-v0   MountainCar-Continuous-v0
 Solvable Threshold          10              40              -200                     0
       SOTA                  20             200               -13                   94.53
                      MountainCar-v0    Acrobot-v1         Taxi-v3            LunarLander-v2
 Solvable Threshold        -200            -200                0                     120
       SOTA                 -87             -72              7.52                    261


D     E XTENSIVE R ESULTS

D.1     A BSOLUTE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS

See Figure 8 and Table 10.

D.1.1     E CONOMIC AND T IME COSTS
We statistic the time and economic costs for our experiments that contribute to Table 10 in Table 4,
5 and. The time cost is caused by the frequency limit and latency in access to OpenAI API. The
economic cost is caused by the service of OpenAI API. As a summary, the experiments in Table 4
consume about 64 hours and 2614 dollars.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    l2         EXE(Ours)                                       l2                  EXE(Ours)                                       l2                 EXE(Ours)
                               CoT                                                                 CoT                                                                CoT
                               Naive-Actor                                                         Naive-Actor                                                        Naive-Actor
                               Reflexion                                                           Reflexion                                                          Reflexion
  l3                           Self-Ask
                               Self-Consistency
                                                   l3                                              Self-Ask
                                                                                                   Self-Consistency
                                                                                                                      l3                                              Self-Ask
                                                                                                                                                                      Self-Consistency

                            100
                               SPP
                                                                                              15
                                                                                                   SPP
                                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                                                                                                      SPP

                       140120
                               PPO                                                                 PPO                                                                PPO

                                                                                        10                                                                     150
                     160                                                       5                                                                         100
                200180                                                                                                                           50
                              l1                                                                     l1                                                                  l1


  l4                                               l4                                                                 l4

                    l5                                                         l5                                                                  l5
          (a) Acrobot-v1.                                (b) BlackJack-v1.                                                      (c) CartPole-v0.
                   l2          EXE(Ours)                           l2      EXE(Ours)                                                     l2      EXE(Ours)
                               CoT                                                                 CoT                                                                CoT
                               Naive-Actor                                                         Naive-Actor                                                        Naive-Actor
                               Reflexion                                                           Reflexion                                                          Reflexion
  l3                           Self-Ask
                               Self-Consistency
                                                   l3                                              Self-Ask
                                                                                                   Self-Consistency
                                                                                                                      l3                                              Self-Ask
                                                                                                                                                                      Self-Consistency
                              0SPP
                                                                                               200
                                                                                                   SPP
                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                                      SPP

                         200100
                               PPO                                                                 PPO                                                                PPO

                      300                                                                 0                                                                  300
                                                                                        200                                                           400
                500400          l1
                                                                               400
                                                                                                     l1                                       500                        l1


  l4                                               l4                                                                 l4

                    l5                                                         l5                                                                  l5
       (d) CliffWalking=-v0.                            (e) LunarLander-v2.                                                        (f) Taxi-v3.
                                              l2            EXE(Ours)                                                      l2             EXE(Ours)
                                                            CoT                                                                           CoT
                                                            Naive-Actor                                                                   Naive-Actor
                                                            Reflexion                                                                     Reflexion
               l3                                           Self-Ask
                                                            Self-Consistency
                                                                                   l3                                                     Self-Ask
                                                                                                                                          Self-Consistency
                                                            SPP                                                                           SPP
                                                  100
                                             140120
                                                            PPO
                                                                                                                                  60 80   PPO

                                           160                                                                            20 40
                                      200180        l1                                                                200                  l1


               l4                                                                  l4

                                              l5                                                                           l5
                         (g) MountainCar-v0.                                   (h) MountainCarContinuous-v0.

Figure 8: Radar graphs for absolute value comparison, which shows language agents’ performances
in different scenarios. For better representation, we clip the worst performance to −500.

               Table 4: The total costs on time and economic for each environment.
                                     Game                                      Time Spend(s)                  Economic Cost ($)
                                 Acrobot-v1                                       49830                             565
                                Blackjack-v1                                       179                               49
                                 CartPole-v0                                       8000                              74
                              CliffWalking-v0                                     23616                             258
                               LunarLander-v2                                     38309                             415
                               MountainCar-v0                                     35979                             371
                          MountainCarContinuous-v0                                41571                             390
                                   Taxi-v3                                        36072                             489
                                     Total                                        233556                           2611


D.2     EXE WITHOUT THE GAME DESCRIPTION

Here we show the performance comparison between EXE and EXE-w/o doc to verify that GPT-
3.5 has a priori knowledge of the gym environment, and the results are shown in Table 6. From the
table, it can be observed that in Acrobot-v1, CliffWalking-v0, LunarLander-v2, and
Taxi-v3, both methods fail to achieve satisfactory results. Comparatively, in MountainCar-v0,


                                                                          20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Table 5: The total time spent on each decider.
                                               Decider        Time Spend(s)
                                                CoT              18115
                                            EXE (Ours)           12161
                                            Naive-Actor           9291
                                              Reflexion          12387
                                                SPP              63095
                                              Self-Ask           44640
                                          Self-Consistency       64743
                                                Total            224432


Table 6: Performance on different environments at Lv3 with 5 successive episodes using EXE and
EXE without game description (EXE-w/o doc). The results of the final episode are shown here.
The first value in each cell is the maximum and the second is the median of different trials.
                                      Game                       EXE          EXE-w/o doc
                                   Acrobot-v1                  -200/-200        -200/-200
                                 Blackjack-v1                    17/16            19/15
                                  CartPole-v0                    92/66            41/35
                                CliffWalking-v0                -118/-127        -101/-794
                                LunarLander-v2                 -656/-735        -571/-590
                                MountainCar-v0                 -116/-200        -200/-200
                           MountainCarContinuous-v0              91/88            -1/-1
                                    Taxi-v3                    -200/-227        -578/-731



CartPole-v0 and MountainCarContinuous-v0, due to the inability of EXE-w/o doc to
acquire pertinent knowledge about the game, its performance is markedly inferior to that of EXE.
However, in Blackjack-v1 setting, as GPT-3.5 possesses relevant prior knowledge, the disparity
between EXE and EXE-w/o doc is not pronounced. We shall proceed to analyze the two environ-
ments of MountainCarContinuous-v0 and Blackjack-v1 individually.
It is important to note that in the EXE-w/o doc, we obscure or attenuate the environment’s game
description and goal description but retain the action description, allowing the knowledge of the
valid action space to be preserved.

D.2.1    C ASE S TUDY: M O U N T A I N C A R C O N T I N U O U S - V 0
This section analyzes the result of EXE and EXE-w/o doc in MountainCarContinuous-v0.
The prompts of the environment for EXE and EXE-w/o doc are shown below.
          The prompts of the environment for EXE in MountainCarContinuous-v0
Now you are in the task. In the Mountain Car game, you control a car
    placed stochastically at the bottom of a sinusoidal valley. The only
    possible actions are the accelerations between -1 and 1 that can be
    applied to the car in either direction. The goal of the game is to
    strategically accelerate the car to reach the goal state on top of
    the right hill as quickly as possible. The episode ends if either the
     car reaches the goal position on top of the right hill or the length
     of the episode is 200. Your Next Move:
 Please select a numerical value within the range of [-1,1], which
     represents the directional force being applied to the car. The action
      will be limited to the range of [-1,1], and then multiplied by a
     power of 0.0015. The goal is to reach the flag placed on top of the
     right hill as quickly as possible.


        The generated insights and suggestions of EXE in MountainCarContinuous-v0
The insights of the game are listed below: The key information that can
    be exploited to improve the performance of the player includes
    knowledge of the car’s position and velocity, trying different
    actions and observing their effects on the car’s position and
    velocity, using learned effective actions to move towards the flag as
     quickly as possible, and balancing exploration and exploitation. The
     player should also aim to improve their policy behavior by making


                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    more informed decisions and finding a better balance between
    exploration and exploitation. Additionally, the player should aim to
    achieve a higher final score in order to improve their overall
    performance.
The suggestions are listed below:1. The player needs to know the car’s
    position and velocity to determine the best way to move the car
    towards the flag on top of the right hill. They also need to know
    which actions are effective in moving the car towards the flag.
2. The player should try different actions and observe how they affect
    the car’s position and velocity. They can also try combining
    different actions to see if they work better together.
3. Once the player has learned which actions are best, they should use
    them to move the car towards the flag as quickly as possible. They
    can also try to anticipate the car’s movements and adjust their
    actions accordingly.
4. The player should balance trying new actions to learn more about the
    game with using the actions they have learned are effective to
    improve their performance. They should also try to avoid taking
    actions that have not been effective in the past.


   The prompts of the environment for EXE-w/o doc in MountainCarContinuous-v0
Now you are in the task.
 Your Next Move:
 Please select a numerical value within the range of [-1,1], which
     represents the directional force being applied to the car. The action
      will be limited to the range of [-1,1], and then multiplied by a
     power of 0.0015.
Your goal is to maximize the cumulative rewards for the game.


The generated insights and suggestions of EXE-w/o doc in MountainCarContinuous-v0
The insights of the game are listed below: The key information that can
    be exploited to improve the performance of the player includes
    understanding the movement of the car and how force application
    affects it, avoiding obstacles and reaching the end of the track to
    earn rewards, experimenting with different values of force and paths,
     observing other players/experts, adjusting force application and
    timing, balancing exploration and exploitation, learning from
    mistakes, and maximizing rewards through exploration and exploitation
    . The player should also try to take risks while avoiding unnecessary
     risks that could lead to failure. The policy behavior should involve
     trying different values of force, exploring different paths, and
    adjusting force application and timing to avoid obstacles and reach
    the end of the track faster. The player should also balance
    exploration and exploitation to maximize rewards and learn from their
     mistakes to improve their performance.
The suggestions are listed below:1. Understanding how the car moves and
    how force affects its movement, as well as how to avoid obstacles and
     reach the end of the track to earn rewards, is critical to determine
     the optimal policy.
2. The player should try different values of force and explore different
    paths to see how the car responds and learn from their mistakes. They
     can also observe how other players or experts play the game to gain
    insights.
3. The player can exploit the information obtained by adjusting their
    force application and timing to avoid obstacles and reach the end of
    the track faster. They can also try to earn more rewards by taking
    risks and exploring new paths.
4. The player should balance exploration and exploitation by trying new
    strategies while also sticking to what has worked in the past. They
    should not be afraid to take risks, but also not take unnecessary
    risks that could lead to failure.



                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From the aforementioned case study, it can be observed that due to the inability of the EXE-w/o
doc to ascertain the game description and the goal description, it consequently fails to generate
accurate and effective insights and suggestions. This, in turn, results in the actor being unable to
make well-informed judgments.

D.2.2     C ASE S TUDY: B L A C K J A C K - V 1
This section analyzes the result of EXE and EXE-w/o doc in the environment Blackjack-v1.
The prompts of the environment for EXE and EXE-w/o doc are shown below.
                    The prompts of the environment for EXE in Blackjack-v1
Now you are in the task.
 In the game of Blackjack, the main aim is to obtain a higher card sum
     than the dealer, but not higher than 21. Face cards count as 10,
     numerical cards hold their value, and aces can count either as 1 or
     11. The game starts with the dealer having one face-up and one face-
     down card, while the player has two face-up cards. The player can
     either choose to ’hit’ (add a card) or ’stick’ (stop receiving cards)
     . The game ends when the player or the dealer busts or when both the
     player and dealer are finished drawing cards.
Your Next Move: \n Please choose an action. Type ’1’ to stick (stop
    receiving cards) or ’2’ to hit (add a card). Ensure you only provide
    the action number from the valid action list, i.e., [1, 2] in json
    format.
The goal is to beat the dealer by obtaining cards that sum to closer to
    21, without going over 21.

         The current game state and the corresponding response of EXE in Blackjack-v1
Current Game State:
The player’s current sum is 14, the dealer is showing 10, and the player
    has a usable ace: no.

The GPT response is: Based on the current game state, the player has a
    total card value of 14, which is not very close to 21. The dealer is
    showing a 10, which is a strong card. Since the player does not have
    a usable ace, they cannot use it to improve their hand.

In this situation, the player should consider taking another card (action
     2) to try and improve their hand. However, they should be careful
    not to exceed 21 and bust.

Therefore, the optimal action for the player in this situation would be
    to take another card (action 2).

        Case Study: The prompts of the environment for EXE-w/o doc in Blackjack-v1
Now you are in the task.
 Your Next Move: \n Please choose an action. Type ’1’ to stick (stop
     receiving cards) or ’2’ to hit (add a card). Ensure you only provide
     the action number from the valid action list, i.e., [1, 2] in json
     format.
Your goal is to maximize the cumulative rewards for the game.

Case Study: The current game state and the corresponding response of EXE-w/o doc in
Blackjack-v1
Based on the current game state, the player’s total sum is 14, and the
    dealer is showing 10. The player has two options: hit or stick.

If the player chooses to hit, they will receive another card. The new
    card could be any value from 1 to 10. If the new card is a 7 or
    higher, the player will bust and lose the game. If the new card is a
    6 or lower, the player will have a chance to improve their hand.


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If the player chooses to stick, they will stop receiving cards and wait
    for the dealer to reveal their hand. The dealer will then draw cards
    until their total sum is 17 or higher. If the dealer busts, the
    player wins. If the dealer’s total sum is higher than the player’s,
    the player loses. If the dealer’s total sum is equal to the player’s,
     the game is a tie.

Based on the current game state, the player’s best option is to hit. This
     is because the player’s total sum is only 14, which is not a strong
    hand. By hitting, the player has a chance to improve their hand and
    get closer to 21 without busting.

Therefore, the optimal action for the player to take is to choose action
    number 2, which is to hit.

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the
    JSON schema below:

{"action": 2}

From the aforementioned case studies of Blackjack-v1, it is evident that GPT-3.5 possesses
prior knowledge pertinent to Blackjack-v1. Regardless of whether users provide a game de-
scription or goal description, the EXE method is able to execute superior actions in response.

D.3     EXE IN MORE ENVIRONMENTS

We have accomplished the translation of the FrozenLake-v1 environment and conducted experi-
ments using EXE Lv3 on it, with each trial consisting of five successive episodes. The performance
is illustrated in the following table 7. Evidently, EXE Lv3 is unable to resolve the FrozenLake-
v1 environment well.
Table 7: The performance of EXE with 5 successive episodes using GPT-3.5 at Level 3 in the
FrozenLake-v1 environment. The first value in each cell is the median of different seeds and the
value inside the parentheses represents the interquartile range while the last value is the maximum
value.

                       Episode 1    Episode 2    Episode 3    Episode 4     Episode 5
               EXE      0(0)/0       0(0)/0       0(0)/0       0(0)/0        0(0)/0

We attribute the failure to the inherent randomness of the FrozenLake-v1 environment, where
the agent has a certain probability of moving in the wrong direction and falling into a hole, thereby
ending the round of the game. Consequently, EXE’s exploration fails to acquire any information
about the target point, making it unable to provide advantageous suggestions for the agent’s actions.

D.4     M ISSING C ASE S TUDIES

In this section, we will present the performance differences of representative language agents in var-
ious environments, stemming from domain knowledge controlling or different architectural designs.
We will delve into a detailed analysis through typical cases.

D.4.1    BL A C K J A C K-V1
In this section, we analyze the performances of language agents in Blackjack-v1. From Ta-
ble 10, agents in Lv1 achieve great performance and their performances can hard to be improved by
injecting knowledge (Lv2 to Lv5). The main reason behind this is that GPT-3.5 may have enough
knowledge on accomplishing this task and inappropriate knowledge may mislead it.

Lv1 versus Lv5: For CoT and Naive Actor, their maximal performances downgrade more than 5.
Take CoT as an example:


                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Case Study: The expert few-shot examples in Lv5 for CoT in blackjack-v1
Question:
State description: Current Game State: The player’s current sum is 12,
    the dealer is showing 6, and the player has a usable ace: no.
Goal description: The goal is to beat the dealer by obtaining cards that
    sum to closer to 21, without going over 21.
Action description: Your Next Move: Please choose an action. Type ’1’ to
    stick (stop receiving cards) or ’2’ to hit (add a card). Ensure you
    only provide the action number from the valid action list, i.e., [1,
    2].

Answer:
In the specific case where the player’s hand is 12 and the dealer’s
    visible card is 6, according to the game rules, the dealer must have
    at least 17 points in their hand to stop taking another card. If the
    dealer’s card value is relatively small, the probability of the
    dealer taking another card is relatively high. If the player takes
    another card in this situation, there is a risk of exceeding 21
    points, so the optimal strategy is to stick (stop receiving cards).
So the final answer is: stick (stop receiving cards) (Action 1).

Example 2:
Question:
State description: Current Game State: The player’s current sum is 17,
    the dealer is showing 10, and the player has a usable ace: no.
Goal description: The goal is to beat the dealer by obtaining cards that
    sum closer to 21, without going over 21.
Action description: Your Next Move: Please choose an action. Type ’1’ to
    stick (stop receiving cards) or ’2’ to hit (add a card). Ensure you
    only provide the action number from the valid action list, i.e., [1,
    2].

Answer:
The player’s current sum of cards is 17, while the dealer is showing a
    10, and the player does not have a usable ace. The objective is to
    have a card sum closer to 21, without exceeding that value, to beat
    the dealer. Since the player’s sum is 17 and there is a risk of going
     over 21 if the player hits, it might be wiser to stick with the
    current hand and not take an additional card to avoid the risk of
    busting.
So the final answer is: stick (stop receiving cards) (Action 1).


These examples are correct but CoT gets misled as follows:

                 Case Study: The decision of CoT in Lv5 for blackjack-v1
Prompt: {expert few-shot examples}
The player’s current sum is 14, the dealer is showing 1, and the player
    has a usable ace: no.
Please select an action based on the current game state and the
    information you get. You must select the appropriate action from the
    given action descriptions and cannot refrain from taking action or
    performing any prohibited actions. Here is the action description
    below:
Your Next Move: \n Please choose an action. Type ’1’ to stick (stop
    receiving cards) or ’2’ to hit (add a card). Ensure you only provide
    the action number from the valid action list, i.e., [1, 2].
...

Response: Chain-of-Thought Method:

1. The player’s current sum is 14, and the dealer is showing 1.
2. According to the rules of Blackjack, the dealer must take another card
     if their visible card is less than 17.


                                               25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3. If the dealer takes another card, there is a high probability that
    they will exceed 21 and bust.
4. If the player takes another card, there is a risk of exceeding 21
    points, so the optimal strategy is to stick (stop receiving cards).
5. Therefore, the optimal action for the player is to stick (stop
    receiving cards).

Output:
‘‘‘
{"action": 1}

The optimal action should be to hit (Action 2), not to stick (Action 1). The provided response is
conservative and does not favor hitting in this scenario to potentially improve the hand. Compared
to conservative reasoning, CoT in Lv1, which has no expert guidance can correctly make decisions
in such a scenario:
                  Case Study: The decision of CoT in Lv1 for blackjack-v1
The player’s current sum is 14, the dealer is showing 1, and the player
    has a usable ace: no.

Chain of Thought:
- The dealer is showing a 1, which means there is a high probability that
     the dealer’s next card will be a 10, resulting in a total of 21.
- The player’s current sum is 14, which is a low number and far from 21.
- The player does not have a usable ace, which means the player cannot
    use it to improve their hand.
- Therefore, the best course of action is to hit (add a card) in hopes of
     getting closer to 21 without going over.

Action: 2

This shows the challenge of expert guidance: correct examples may lead to unexpected performance
downgrades.

D.4.2   CA R T P O L E-V0
In the Cartpole-v0 environment, the EXE algorithm outstrips competing methods in the Lv1
scenario with respect to median performance metrics, as evidenced in Figure 9. The primary distinc-
tion of EXE lies in its unique paradigm of learning without prior experience. This approach presents
initial heuristic suggestions to the agent, which are devoid of extensive historical data. Such prelim-
inary guidance, although rudimentary, does not necessitate a foundational dataset. Therefore, the
observed enhancement in performance with EXE under the Lv1 scenario could be primarily driven
by the generative reasoning step it induces for the agent.
            Case Study: The suggestion in prompt of EXE in Lv1 for Cartpole-v0
The suggestions are listed below: 1. The player needs to understand that
    the goal of the game is to keep the pole balanced upright by moving
    the cart left or right. They should also know that the game ends if
    the pole tilts too far from the vertical position or if the cart
    moves too far from the center of the track. It’s important to pay
    attention to the position of the cart and the angle of the pole to
    make the right decisions.

2. The player should try different actions and observe the results to see
     what works best. They can also try to keep track of their score and
    see how it changes with different actions.

3. Once the player has gathered enough information, they can use it to
    make better decisions in subsequent episodes. For example, if they
    notice that moving the cart to the left tends to keep the pole
    balanced for longer, they can try to do that more often.



                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4. Balancing exploration and exploitation is important to improve
    performance. The player should try different actions to explore the
    environment and gather information, but also use the information they
     have already obtained to exploit what they know works well. It’s
    important to find a balance between trying new things and sticking
    with what has worked in the past.


        Figure 9: The performance of different deciders in CartPole-v0 game at level 1


D.4.3   CL I F FWA L K I N G-V0
A comparison of the performance between EXE and Reflexion at Lv3 We conducted 5 con-
secutive experiments in the CliffWalking-v0 environment for EXE and Reflexion in the Lv3
scenario, and the performance is shown in Figure 5. The pink dashed line represents the solvable
threshold (−200), the blue solid line denotes the maximum value line, the orange solid line sig-
nifies the median line and the green solid line corresponds to the mean line. As can be observed,
with the increase of episodes, both the median and mean of the EXE show growth. In contrast, the
performance of Reflexion does not exhibit any improvement as the episodes progress.

Table 8: The number of goal-visiting of EXE and Reflexion at Lv3 with 5 successive episodes using
GPT-3.5. The first value in each cell is the number of goal visits and the second is the number of
trials.

                         Episode 1     Episode 2        Episode 3   Episode 4   Episode 5
             EXE            5/5           4/5              3/5         5/5         5/5
           Reflexinon       0/5           0/5              0/5         0/5         0/5

Additionally, we have also compiled the number of goal-visiting of EXE and Reflexion at Lv3 with
5 successive episodes. From Table 8, it can be discerned that under the GPT-3.5, EXE excels at
exploration, thus effectively locating the target points, while Reflexion’s exploration efficiency is
considerably less impressive. The case studies of EXE and Reflexion are shown below.

Case Study: The previous suggestion, summary, insight and current suggestion generated by GPT-
3.5 using EXE at Lv3


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The suggestion response is: 1. Critical knowledge for determining the
    optimal policy includes the layout of the grid world, the location of
     cliffs and the goal, safe actions and actions leading to cliffs or
    boundaries, and the penalties associated with each action.
2. The player should try different actions and observe the rewards
    received to explore the grid world. They can also try new actions to
    acquire information while choosing actions that have been successful
    in the past to achieve higher performance.
3. The player can exploit the information obtained by choosing actions
    that have been successful in the past and avoiding actions that lead
    to cliffs or boundaries. They can also use the optimal policy to
    navigate towards the goal while avoiding cliffs.
4. The player should balance exploration and exploitation by trying new
    actions to acquire information while also choosing actions that have
    been successful in the past to achieve higher performance. They
    should also use the optimal policy to navigate towards the goal while
     avoiding cliffs.

The summary is: 1. {
  "grid_size": "4x12",
  "cliff_locations": [
     {"x": 3, "y": 2},
     {"x": 3, "y": 1},
     {"x": 2, "y": 1},
     {"x": 1, "y": 3},
     {"x": 1, "y": 4},
     {"x": 2, "y": 4}
  ],
  "goal_location": {"x": 0, "y": 11},
  "safe_actions": [1, 2, 3, 4],
  "penalties": {
     "cliff": -100,
     "boundary": -1,
     "safe": -1
  }
}
2. The policy behavior is a combination of exploration and exploitation.
    The player tries different actions to explore the grid world and
    acquire information, while also choosing actions that have been
    successful in the past to achieve higher performance. The player also
     uses the optimal policy to navigate towards the goal while avoiding
    cliffs. However, the player’s performance is poor, as they do not
    reach the goal within 200 steps and receive a performance score of
    -3863.

The insight response is: 1. Layout of the grid world, including the
    location of cliffs and the goal.
2. Safe actions and actions leading to cliffs or boundaries.
3. Optimal policy for navigating towards the goal while avoiding cliffs.
4. Balancing exploration and exploitation to acquire information and
    achieve higher performance.
5. Penalties for cliffs, boundaries, and safe actions.
6. Total reward received and performance score.
To improve performance, the player should focus on learning the optimal
    policy and safe actions, while avoiding cliffs and boundaries. They
    should also balance exploration and exploitation to acquire
    information and achieve higher performance. Additionally, they should
     aim to receive a higher total reward and performance score.

The suggestion response is: 1. Critical knowledge for determining the
    optimal policy includes the layout of the grid world, the location of
     cliffs and the goal, safe actions and actions leading to cliffs or
    boundaries, and the penalties associated with each action.


                                             28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2. The player should try different actions to explore the grid world and
    observe the rewards received. They can also use trial and error to
    find safe paths to the goal while avoiding cliffs.
3. The player can exploit the information obtained by choosing actions
    that have been successful in the past and using the optimal policy to
     navigate towards the goal while avoiding cliffs.
4. The player should balance exploration and exploitation by trying new
    actions to acquire information while also choosing actions that have
    been successful in the past to achieve higher performance. They
    should also use the optimal policy to navigate towards the goal while
     avoiding cliffs.


                Case Study: The plan generated by GPT-3.5 using Reflexion at Lv3
In this environment, my plan was to move right to avoid the cliff.
    However, I was stuck in a loop in which I continually tried to move
    down instead of moving right. In the next trial, I will move right if
     I am stuck in a loop again.

It is evident that compared to Reflexion, EXE extracts a greater amount of information, offering
more detailed guidance.

GPT-4 VS GPT-3.5 Although EXE is capable of extracting some useful information, the limita-
tions in the performance of GPT-3.5 cause it to be prone to hallucinations and result in incomplete
information extraction. Consequently, the insights and suggestions provided by EXE may be some-
what misleading, leading to a certain degree of deviation in the agent’s action selection and hindering
it from reaching optimal performance. Therefore, we employ GPT-4 to evaluate its performance in
the CliffWalking-v0 environment.
We executed 5 iterations each for EXE and Reflexion within the GPT-3.5, allocating 200 steps per
iteration. In contrast, under the GPT-4 environment, merely 2 iterations were conducted, as the
decision-making component effectively resolved the problem within the second iteration. Addition-
ally, we capped the STEP parameter at 50 steps, owing to the elevated computational cost associated
with GPT-4. The performance and the cost per step are shown in Table 9. As we can see, using
GPT-4 can greatly improve the performance of EXE and Reflexion.
We compiled the occurrences of EXE and Reflexion visiting the goal position during the first round
of exploration under different versions of GPT. As can be seen, regardless of whether it is GPT-3.5
or GPT-4, EXE can locate the goal position during the initial exploration. In contrast, Reflexion
does not perform as effectively when navigating to the goal position under the GPT-3.5 version. It
is only with the GPT-4 version that Reflexion exhibits a 50% probability of discovering the goal
position (see the second row of Table 9).

Table 9: The performance of EXE and Reflexion in the CliffWalking-v0 environment when
using GPT-4 and GPT-3.5-turbo at Lv3. The first value in each cell is the maximum and the second
is the median of different trials.

                         EXE-GPT3.5        Reflexion-GPT3.5      EXE-GPT4       Reflexion-GPT4
      Performance         -118/-127         -19505/-19901         -13/-13           -13/-50
    Goal found times         5/5                  0/5               4/4               2/4
     Cost(Per Step)         0.003                0.008              0.06              0.05

Case Study: The previous suggestion, summary, insight and current suggestion generated by GPT-4
using EXE at Lv3
The suggestion response is: 1. Important knowledge:
  - Starting position
  - Goal position
  - Cliff locations
  - Safe paths
2. Exploration in the next episode:


                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  - Start by moving carefully, one step at a time
  - Try different directions to find safe paths
  - Remember cliff locations to avoid them in the future
3. Exploit information:
  - Use the safe paths found in the previous episode
  - Avoid cliffs and dangerous areas
  - Move towards the goal using the shortest path
4. Balance exploration and exploitation:
  - Begin by exploring new paths to find the shortest route
  - Once a safe path is found, exploit it to reach the goal quickly
  - If stuck, explore a new direction but remember to avoid cliffs.

The summary response is: 1. {"Starting position": "(3, 0)", "Goal
    position": "(3, 11)", "Cliff locations": ["(3, 1)"], "Safe paths":
    ["(2, 0)", "(2, 1)", "(2, 2)", "(2, 3)", "(2, 4)", "(2, 5)", "(2, 6)
    ", "(2, 7)", "(2, 8)", "(2, 9)", "(2, 10)", "(2, 11)", "(1, 11)",
    "(0, 11)", "(0, 10)", "(0, 9)", "(0, 8)", "(0, 7)", "(0, 6)", "(0, 5)
    ", "(0, 4)", "(0, 3)", "(0, 2)", "(0, 1)", "(1, 1)", "(1, 2)", "(1,
    3)", "(1, 4)", "(1, 5)", "(1, 6)", "(1, 7)", "(1, 8)", "(1, 9)", "(1,
     10)"]}
2. The policy behavior involves exploring the grid world.

The insights of the game are listed below: To help the six-year-old
    player improve their performance in the game, we can focus on the
    following key information:
1. Starting position: The player starts at position (3, 0).
2. Goal position: The player needs to reach position (3, 11).
3. Cliff locations: There is a cliff at position (3, 1) that the player
    should avoid.
4. Safe paths: There are multiple safe paths available for the player to
    reach the goal, such as moving through positions (2, 0) to (2, 11) or
     (1, 1) to (1, 10).
5. Policy behavior: The player should explore the grid world to find the
    best path to the goal.
By understanding these key points, the player can focus on navigating
    through the safe paths and avoiding the cliff while exploring the
    grid world to reach the goal position.

The suggestions are listed below:1. Important knowledge:
  - Remember the starting position (3, 0) and the goal position (3, 11).
  - Be aware of the cliff location (3, 1) and avoid it.
  - Follow the safe paths provided.
2. Exploration in the next episode:
  - Start by moving up (action 1) to avoid the cliff.
  - Then, move right (action 2) and follow the safe path.
  - Keep exploring the safe paths and avoid cliffs.
3. Exploit the information:
  - Use the safe paths to reach the goal quickly.
  - Remember the steps taken in the previous episode to avoid mistakes.
4. Balance exploration and exploitation:
  - Focus on following the safe paths and avoid unnecessary exploration.
  - Learn from previous mistakes and make better decisions in the next
      episode.

Through the above case study, we can observe that under the GPT-4 version, EXE is capable of
extracting more abundant and useful information without experiencing hallucinations. Simultane-
ously, the insights and suggestions provided by EXE in the GPT-4 are more specific and effective,
allowing the agent to reach the goal position more rapidly.
                Case Study: The plan generated by GPT-4 using Reflexion at Lv3
In the previous attempt, I made a mistake by stepping into the cliff at
    location (3, 1) at the beginning, which resulted in a large penalty
    of -100. To avoid this mistake, I should move up first instead of
    moving right. My new plan is as follows:


                                               30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1. Start at location (3, 0).
2. Move up to location (2, 0).
3. Move right along row 2, avoiding the cliffs, until reaching location
    (2, 11).
4. Move down to location (3, 11), which is the goal location.

By following this plan, I should be able to reach the goal location with
    a better performance score.

Similarly, we can see that under GPT-3.5, Reflexion does not generate useful plans, whereas under
GPT-4, Reflexion generates detailed and correct plans that tell the actor the optimal moves for each
step, thus allowing the actor to reach the goal point faster and gain points.
Nevertheless, during the examination of the GPT-4 version’s reflexion, we discerned that the plan
generated by the Reflexion is not entirely accurate, thus precluding the actor from obtaining sub-
stantial rewards while implementing the plan. We attribute this to an inadequate level of exploration
in the early stages of the Reflexion, thereby hindering the discovery of valuable information. The
incorrect plan generated by GPT-4 using Reflexion is shown below.

            Case Study: The incorrect plan generated by GPT-4 using Reflexion at Lv3
In the previous attempt, I moved along the top row of the grid world,
    then backtracked and moved along the second row. This approach was
    inefficient and did not lead to the goal. In the next trial, I will
    try a more direct path to the goal by moving right and up, avoiding
    cliffs, and adjusting my path as needed.

Plan:
1. Start at location (3, 0).
2. Move right until reaching the last column (column 11).
3. Move up until reaching the top row (row 0).
4. If the goal is not found, adjust the path by moving left or down to
    explore other areas of the grid world while avoiding cliffs.
5. Continue adjusting the path until the goal is reached or the maximum
    number of steps (50) is reached.


Lv4 and Lv5 outperform other levels in CliffWalking-v0 From Table 10, with certain
deciders, agents can attain higher rewards under conditions Lv4 and Lv5 than other levels. The
primary reason is that both Lv4 and Lv5 contribute to knowledge leakage to a certain degree. For
example, in Lv4, the expert trajectories we provide allow the agent to deduce valuable information
such as the goal position. On the other hand, in Lv5, our action responses within the human ex-
amples make mention of useful data like the goal position and cliff position, thereby enabling the
agent to capitalize on this information for decision-making purposes. Here, We opt for 2 case studies
featuring Lv4 from EXE and Lv5 from CoT.

            Case Study: The insight and the suggestion generated by using EXE at Lv4
The insight response is: 1. The grid size is 4x12.
2. The start position is at [3,0] and the goal position is at [3,11].
3. There are no cliff positions in the grid.
4. The optimal policy behavior is to move right repeatedly until reaching
     the goal position, while avoiding cliffs and receiving small
    penalties for each action taken.
5. The player’s current policy behavior is to repeatedly move right until
     reaching the edge of the grid, then move down one row and repeat.
6. The player incurs a total penalty of -13.0 in all episodes.
7. In episode #3, the player’s policy behavior is slightly improved, but
    still suboptimal.
8. The maximum number of actions allowed is 200.

The suggestion response is: 1. The player needs to know the location of
    the cliffs and the goal, as well as the penalties for each action. It


                                                 31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     is also important to understand that moving towards the edge of the
    grid may not always be the best strategy.
2. The player can explore the environment by trying different actions and
     observing the resulting penalties. They can also try moving in
    different directions to see if there are any hidden paths that lead
    to the goal.
3. Once the player has obtained information about the environment, they
    can use it to make better decisions. For example, they can avoid the
    cliffs and take the shortest path to the goal.
4. Exploration and exploitation should be balanced by trying new actions
    to gather information while also using the information already
    obtained to make better decisions. The player should also be willing
    to take risks and try new strategies to improve their performance..


                Case Study: The response of CoT in CliffWalking-v0 at Lv5
State description:
Current Game State: The player is at location [2, 11] in the grid world.
Goal description: The goal is to navigate from the starting point to an
    target which locate at (3,11), avoiding the cliff, in as few steps as
     possible.
Action description: Your Next Move:
Please choose an action. Type ’1’ to move up, ’2’ to move right, ’3’ to
    move down, or ’4’ to move left. Ensure you only provide the action
    number from the valid action list, i.e., [1, 2, 3, 4].

Observation:
The player is at location (2, 11) in the grid world.

Chain of Thought:
The player is at the rightmost column of the grid and the goal is also at
     the rightmost column. Therefore, the optimal action should be to
    move down, i.e., action 3.

Action:
{"action": 3}.

From the suggestions and insights generated by EXE in Lv4, as well as the responses from CoT in
Lv5, it is evident that the agent can obtain global information pertaining to CliffWalking-v0,
which in turn facilitates superior action selection.

Self-Consistency Lv5 outperforms other deciders at Level 5 in the CliffWalking-v0 en-
vironment From Table 10, we can observe a fascinating phenomenon: under the condition of
Lv5, both the median and maximum values of Self-Consistency surpass those of other deciders.
This demonstrates that, in the CliffWalking-v0 environment, Self-Consistency can not only
achieve superior performance but also maintain excellence across multiple runs. The performance
of different deciders at Lv5 in the CliffWalking-v0 environment is depicted in Figure 10.
We attribute its outstanding performance to two aspects: on the one hand, Self-Consistency inherits
the way of thinking from CoT and the expert information of CoT at Lv5; on the other hand, Self-
Consistency employs a method that selects the action with the highest frequency after multiple
queries, thus reducing action outliers and making the choice of actions more deliberate and well-
considered. Here comes the case study with five responses to one query with Self-Consistency.

Case Study: The responses generated by using Self-Consistency at Lv5 in the CliffWalking-
v0 environment
Current Game State: The player is at location [3, 0] in the grid world.

Response 1:
Logic:
The player is currently at location (3, 0) in the grid world. Moving
    right is not a valid action as there is a cliff at (3, 1...10).


                                                32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: The performance of different deciders in CliffWalking-v0 environment at Lv5. In
the graph, the orange line represents the median value.



    Moving down is the optimal action as the target is located at (3, 11)
    , and there are no cliffs in the player’s neighborhood.
Output:
{"action": 3}

Response 2:
Thought process:
Since we are trying to reach the goal in as few steps as possible, we
    need to choose the action that moves us closer to the goal. The goal
    is at position (3, 11) which is to the player’s right side. Therefore
    , we should choose action 2, i.e., move right.
Output:
{"action": 2}

Response 3:
Logic:
Since the player is at the leftmost column and there is a wall to their
    left, the optimal action would be to move up (action 1). This will
    keep the player away from the cliff and still allow them to make
    progress towards the target.
Output:
{"action": 1}

Response 4:
Logic:
Since the player is at the leftmost position, the only valid actions are
    moving up or down. Moving up will take the player closer to the
    target, while moving down will take the player away from the target.
    Therefore, the optimal action is to move up, i.e., action 1.
Output:
{"action": 1}

Response 5:
Thought process: Since the target is at (3,11), it is clear that the
    player needs to move towards the right side of the grid. However,


                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    moving right from the current position (3,0) will lead the player to
    fall off the cliff, which will incur a large penalty of -100.
    Therefore, the player needs to move up towards row 2 to avoid the
    cliff.
Answer:
{"action": 1}.

The action list is: [3, 2, 1, 1, 1]
The optimal action is: 1.

From the aforementioned response on self-consistency, it is evident that precisely due to the em-
ployment of multiple samples to select the action with the highest occurrence frequency, the agent
is capacitated to execute the accurate course of action when presented with a given state.

D.4.4   M OUNTAIN C AR C ONTINUOUS - V 0
In this section, we analyze the performances of different language agents in
MountainCarContinuous-v0.                    We conducted 5 consecutive experiments in the
MountainCarContinuous-v0 environment using EXE and Reflexion at Lv3, and the
resulting performance box plot is shown in Figure 6. It is evident that with the increase in episodes,
both the median and mean of the EXE method are growing, while the maximum value remains at a
relatively high figure. In contrast, the performance of Reflexion does not exhibit any improvement
as the episodes progress. The generated suggestions from EXE are presented below.

Case Study: The suggestion generated by GPT-3.5 using EXE in MountainCarContinuous-
v0 environment at Lv3
The suggestion response is: 1. The player needs to understand how the car
    ’s position and velocity change when they apply different amounts of
    force. They should also try to figure out which direction to
    accelerate in to move the car towards the goal faster.
2. The player should try different amounts of force in different
    directions to see how the car responds. They can also try
    accelerating in the same direction multiple times to see if it leads
    to faster movement.
3. Once the player has gathered information about how the car responds to
     different forces, they can use that information to make more
    informed decisions about which actions to take. For example, if they
    know that accelerating in a certain direction leads to faster
    movement, they can exploit that knowledge by continuing to accelerate
     in that direction.
4. The player should balance exploration and exploitation by trying new
    actions to gather information while also using the information they
    have already gathered to make more informed decisions. They should
    try to find a balance between trying new things and using what they
    already know to improve their performance.

The generated memory from Reflexion are presented below.

Case Study: The memory generated by GPT-3.5 using Reflexion in MountainCarContinuous-
v0 environment at Lv3
Trial #0: I will try to accelerate the car to the right hill as quickly
    as possible. I will try to accelerate the car to the right hill as
    quickly as possible.
Trial #1: I will try to accelerate the car to the right hill as quickly
    as possible.
Trial #2: I have been trying to accelerate the car to the right hill as
    quickly as possible. However, I have not been able to reach the goal
    state. I should have tried to accelerate the car to the right hill as
     quickly as possible while avoiding the left hill. I will try to
    accelerate the car to the right hill as quickly as possible while
    avoiding the left hill in the next trial.


                                                 34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From the two case studies presented above, it is evident that EXE possesses the capacity to generate
considerably effective exploration strategies based on historical trajectories, such as “They can also
try accelerating in the same direction multiple times to see if it leads to faster movement.” Con-
versely, Reflexion is unable to generate accurate and useful strategies predicated on the historical
trajectories found in lengthy texts, which ultimately results in the actor’s inability to make optimal
decisions drawing from historical information.
Simultaneously, we observed that the performance of EXE Lv4 is significantly inferior to that of
EXE Lv3 in the MountainCarContinuous-v0 environment. We analyzed the suggestions provided
by EXE Lv4 which are shown below. It can be noted that the suggestions generated by EXE Lv4
are excessively broad and fail to effectively guide the agent’s action selection. We attribute the
aforementioned issues to the following factors: On the one hand, due to the limited capabilities of
GPT-3.5, it is unable to adequately summarize valuable information and conclusions from expert
trajectories or mimic expert actions for making superior choices. On the other hand, during the
generation of suggestions in EXE Lv3, various effective strategies are explored, as demonstrated
in the aforementioned case study, which can offer more effective guidance for the agent’s action
selection.
Case Study: The suggestion generated by GPT-3.5 using EXE in MountainCarContinuous-
v0 environment at Lv4
The suggestions are listed below:1. The player needs to understand that
    the goal of the game is to reach the flag on top of the right hill as
     quickly as possible. They also need to know that the only actions
    they can take are to accelerate the car in either direction between
    -1 and 1.
2. The player should try different acceleration values to see how they
    affect the car’s movement. They can also observe how the car moves in
     response to different actions.
3. Once the player has found a good acceleration strategy, they should
    stick to it and try to optimize it. They can also try to anticipate
    the car’s movements and adjust their actions accordingly.
4. The player should balance exploration and exploitation by trying new
    actions to see if they improve performance, but also sticking to what
     has worked well in the past. They should also pay attention to the
    car’s movements and adjust their actions accordingly.


D.4.5   M OUNTAIN C AR - V 0
From Table 10, agents with Reflexion at Lv5 achieve great performance than any other deciders and
levels. So in this section, we analyze the performances of Reflexion in MountainCar-v0 at Lv5.
We surmise that the primary reason behind this is that at Lv5, we have provided Reflexion with past
cumulative experiences and human-generated actions along with their thought processes. However,
other deciders (such as CoT, SPP, and EXE) and levels have not furnished corresponding information,
which has led to Reflexion Lv5’s significantly superior performance in the MountainCar-v0 en-
vironment when compared to other deciders and levels. The prompt for Reflexion Lv5 is illustrated
below.
Case Study: The human few-shot example of Reflexion in MountainCar-v0 environment at Lv5
Question:
State description: Current Game State: The car is positioned at 0.472,
    with a velocity of 0.049 towards the right.
Goal description: The goal is to reach the flag placed on top of the
    right hill as quickly as possible.
Action description: Your Next Move:Please choose an action. Type ’1’ to
    accelerate to the left, ’2’ to not accelerate, or ’3’ to accelerate
    to the right.Ensure you only provide the action number from the valid
     action list, i.e., [1, 2, 3].
Your memory for the task below:
Trial 0:
In this environment, my plan was to accelerate the car to the right as
    quickly as possible. However, the goal of the game is to reach the


                                                 35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    flag placed on top of the right hill as quickly as possible. I should
     have accelerated the car to the right until it had enough velocity
    to reach the top of the left hill, then I should have accelerated the
     car to the left to reach the flag. In the next trial, I will
    accelerate the car to the right until it has enough velocity to reach
     the top of the left hill, then I will accelerate the car to the left
     to reach the flag.
Trial 1:
I will accelerate the car to the right until it has enough velocity to
    reach the top of the left hill, then I will accelerate the car to the
     left to reach the flag.
Trial 2:
In this environment, my plan was to accelerate the car to the right until
     it had enough velocity to reach the top of the left hill, then I
    should have accelerated the car to the left to reach the flag.
    However, I did not take into account the fact that the car may not
    have enough velocity to reach the top of the left hill. I should have
     monitored the car’s velocity and adjusted my strategy accordingly.
    In the next trial, I will accelerate the car to the right until it
    has enough velocity to reach the top of the left hill, then I will
    monitor the car’s velocity and adjust my strategy accordingly.

Answer:
Based on the current game state and memories of the task, the optimal
    action for the player to take would be to accelerate to the right (
    action 3). Therefore, the optimal action to take now is to push the
    cart to accelerate to the right (action 3).

Despite a few inaccuracies in the above few-shot example, Reflexion is still able to execute a superior
strategy.


                                                  36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 10: Performance on different environments, deciders, and domain knowledge controlling lev-
els. The first value in each cell is the median of different seeds and the value inside the parentheses
represents the interquartile range while the last value is the maximum value.
        Environment          Decider Name            Lv1                Lv2                     Lv3              Lv4               Lv5
                              EXE (Ours)         -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                                  CoT            -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                              Naive-Actor        -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                                Reflexion        -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
        Acrobot-v1
                                Self-Ask         -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                            Self-Consistency     -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                                  SPP            -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                                  PPO                                                     -96(14)/-70
                              EXE (Ours)           15(1)/17            16(1)/17              16(1)/17          16(1)/17          15(0)/16
                                  CoT              14(2)/17            13(2)/16              14(1)/14          15(2)/16          11(0)/12
                              Naive-Actor          18(0)/18            16(2)/18              16(1)/17          13(6)/18          10(0)/11
                                Reflexion          13(0)/13            16(0)/16              16(1)/17          17(2)/17          11(0)/11
      Blackjack-v1              Self-Ask           16(1)/17            9(4)/16               15(1)/15          13(2)/14          19(0)/19
                            Self-Consistency       18(0)/19            15(4)/16              18(1)/18          15(2)/19          14(2)/15
                                  SPP              13(1)/13            11(3)/16              13(1)/14          12(0)/19          14(1)/16
                                  PPO                                                       18(1)/20
                              EXE (Ours)          59(1)/131            62(28)/74             66(16)/92       52(39)/107           58(8)/67
                                  CoT             45(15)/53            24(16)/69             34(20)/54        48(14)/63          34(27)/69
                              Naive-Actor         13(0)/13              9(0)/15              10(8)/18         10(0)/10             9(0)/9
                                Reflexion         12(3)/21              9(0)/11              12(5)/46         12(6)/15             9(0)/9
       CartPole-v0              Self-Ask          28(1)/30             25(10)/40             35(6)/41         27(19)/65          69(18)/81
                            Self-Consistency      41(7)/56              52(8)/73             38(3)/48         70(23)/72          30(15)/55
                                  SPP             53(14)/71             15(3)/22             17(17)/37        31(31)/76          51(26)/71
                                  PPO                                                     200(0)/200
                              EXE (Ours)       -1982(738)/-563     -847(1363)/-354       -127(110)/-118     -2576(1889)/-26   -347/-2675(297)
                                  CoT            -249(37)/-217     -1685(990)/-200      -2159(990)/-394      -200(553)/-171    -551(1040)/-23
                              Naive-Actor         -398(0)/-299     -299(1089)/-200       -398(198)/-200    -20000(0)/-18515      -200/-200(0)
                                Reflexion       -893(297)/-497    -5843(17325)/-695   -19901(396)/-19505       -200(0)/-200      -794(0)/-596
     CliffWalking-v0            Self-Ask          -299(0)/-186       -497(87)/-299       -314(115)/-200       -398(99)/-299    -337(548)/-126
                            Self-Consistency    -497(102)/-200       -425(99)/-299       -299(322)/-200      -1808(145)/-28     -134(110)/-15
                                  SPP           -354(132)/-124      -243(431)/-133       -992(982)/-133     -1883(693)/-319     -344(154)/-51
                                  PPO                                                      -13/-13(0)
                              EXE (Ours)        -931(279)/-696      -926(93)/-743        -735(113)/-656      -825(72)/-755    -713(143)/-685
                                  CoT           -891(306)/-867     -1003(0)/-1003        -555(571)/-132     -1033(0)/-1033     -718(23)/-714
                              Naive-Actor         -804(0)/-804     -1033(0)/-1033        -1033(0)/-1033     -1033(0)/-1033    -1033(0)/-1033
                                Reflexion        -701(35)/-650      -279(92)/-174         -1033(0)/-978      -248(40)/-107    -1033(0)/-1033
     LunarLander-v2             Self-Ask         -452(59)/-274     -889(432)/-795       -1073(343)/-643    -1376(87)/-1287    -1457(6)/-1029
                            Self-Consistency   -1463(137)/-1026   -1408(381)/-1007       -550(549)/-483     -1033(0)/-1033     -747(25)/-726
                                  SPP           -814(149)/-694      -769(36)/-737        -728(360)/-459      -488(46)/-267    -766(118)/-586
                                  PPO                                                   262/261(103)
                              EXE (Ours)         -200(0)/-120       -200(0)/-139          -200(76)/-116     -200(70)/-123      -200(0)/-135
                                  CoT            -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                              Naive-Actor        -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                                Reflexion        -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -162(1)/-161
     MountainCar-v0             Self-Ask         -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                            Self-Consistency     -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                                  SPP            -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200           -200(0)/-194      -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                                  PPO                                                      -90(1)/-87
                              EXE (Ours)          -13(1)/86             -10(6)/-4            88(99)/91          -8(1)/-6        -12(3)/88
                                  CoT             -15(1)/-14           -11(0)/-10             -6(5)/-2          -9(3)/-7        -20(0)/-20
                              Naive-Actor          -5(0)/-5              -5(0)/-5           -17(13)/-5          -5(0)/-5          -2(0)/-2
                                Reflexion          -5(0)/-4              -3(1)/-2            -7(11)/-4          -5(0)/-5        -20(0)/-20
 MountainCarContinuous-v0       Self-Ask          -12(1)/-11           -12(1)/-11           -15(3)/-10        -12(4)/90          -10(1)/-9
                            Self-Consistency      -14(1)/-14            -10(3)/-9           -13(1)/-12        -15(1)/-14        -20(0)/-20
                                  SPP             -11(1)/-10            -10(0)/-9            -12(6)/-6         -11(2)/-9        -12(0)/-10
                                  PPO                                                        0(0)/0
                              EXE (Ours)          -821(0)/-605      -227(27)/-218        -227(630)/-200     -236(459)/-218    -740(216)/-605
                                  CoT            -245(18)/-227      -209(27)/-200        -353(261)/-218      -245(36)/-218      -200(0)/-200
                              Naive-Actor       -1964(0)/-1964       -200(0)/-200          -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                                Reflexion         -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200          -200(0)/-200       -200(0)/-200      -200(0)/-200
         Taxi-v3                Self-Ask         -254(45)/-227      -272(54)/-263         -335(81)/-272      -308(45)/-236      -200(0)/-200
                            Self-Consistency     -200(18)/-200       -200(0)/-200         -290(72)/-200       -200(9)/-200      -200(0)/-200
                                  SPP            -875(99)/-675       -371(9)/-353        -686(423)/-290      -650(36)/-614     -866(72)/-812
                                  PPO                                                   -144(12)/-140


                                                                  37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES FOR S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Marc-Alexandre Côté, Ákos Kádár, Xingdi Yuan, Ben Kybartas, Tavian Barnes, Emery Fine,
 James Moore, Ruo Yu Tao, Matthew Hausknecht, Layla El Asri, Mahmoud Adada, Wendy
 Tay, and Adam Trischler. Textworld: A learning environment for text-based games. CoRR,
 abs/1806.11532, 2018.
Sebastiaan De Peuter and Samuel Kaski. Zero-shot assistance in sequential decision problems. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 11551–11559,
  2023.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 10764–10799. PMLR, 2023.
Ran Gong, Qiuyuan Huang, Xiaojian Ma, Hoi Vo, Zane Durante, Yusuke Noda, Zilong Zheng, Song-
  Chun Zhu, Demetri Terzopoulos, Li Fei-Fei, et al. Mindagent: Emergent gaming interaction.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.09971, 2023.
Matthew Hausknecht, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Xingdi Yuan. Interac-
 tive fiction games: A colossal adventure. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 7903–7910, 2020.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin
  Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring coding challenge
  competence with apps. NeurIPS, 2021.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In ICML, 2022.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation
  with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
Yuanzhi Liang, Linchao Zhu, and Yi Yang. Tachikuma: Understading complex interactions with
  multi-character and novel objects by large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12573,
  2023.
Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese,
  and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program
  synthesis. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
  and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350,
  2022.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
  Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. {ALFW}orld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In
 ICLR, 2021.


                                               38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Haotian Sun, Yuchen Zhuang, Lingkai Kong, Bo Dai, and Chao Zhang. Adaplanner: Adaptive
  planning from feedback with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16653, 2023.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing
  cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-
  collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05300, 2023b.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
  select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023c.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In NeurIPS,
  2022.
Frank F Xu, Uri Alon, Graham Neubig, and Vincent Josua Hellendoorn. A systematic evaluation of
  large language models of code. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN International Sympo-
  sium on Machine Programming, pp. 1–10, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable
  real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Qinkai Zheng, Xiao Xia, Xu Zou, Yuxiao Dong, Shan Wang, Yufei Xue, Zihan Wang, Lei Shen,
  Andi Wang, Yang Li, et al. Codegeex: A pre-trained model for code generation with multilingual
  evaluations on humaneval-x. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17568, 2023.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
  Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building
  autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, Yu Qiao, Zhaoxiang Zhang, and Jifeng Dai. Ghost in the minecraft:
  Generally capable agents for open-world environments via large language models with text-based
  knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.


                                               39
