Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S PARSE AUTOENCODERS F IND H IGHLY I NTER -
PRETABLE F EATURES IN L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Hoagy Cunningham∗12 , Aidan Ewart∗13 , Logan Riggs∗1 , Robert Huben, Lee Sharkey4
 1
   EleutherAI, 2 MATS, 3 University of Bristol, 4 Apollo Research
 {hoagycunningham, aidanprattewart, logansmith5}@gmail.com



                                              A BSTRACT

            One of the roadblocks to a better understanding of neural networks’ internals is
            polysemanticity, where neurons appear to activate in multiple, semantically dis-
            tinct contexts. Polysemanticity prevents us from identifying concise, human-
            understandable explanations for what neural networks are doing internally. One
            hypothesised cause of polysemanticity is superposition, where neural networks
            represent more features than they have neurons by assigning features to an over-
            complete set of directions in activation space, rather than to individual neurons.
            Here, we attempt to identify those directions, using sparse autoencoders to re-
            construct the internal activations of a language model. These autoencoders learn
            sets of sparsely activating features that are more interpretable and monoseman-
            tic than directions identified by alternative approaches, where interpretability is
            measured by automated methods. Moreover, we show that with our learned set
            of features, we can pinpoint the features that are causally responsible for coun-
            terfactual behaviour on the indirect object identification task (Wang et al., 2022)
            to a finer degree than previous decompositions. This work indicates that it is
            possible to resolve superposition in language models using a scalable, unsuper-
            vised method. Our method may serve as a foundation for future mechanistic in-
            terpretability work, which we hope will enable greater model transparency and
            steerability.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) have resulted in the development of highly capable AI sys-
tems that make decisions for reasons we do not understand. This has caused concern that AI systems
that we cannot trust are being widely deployed in the economy and in our lives, introducing a num-
ber of novel risks (Hendrycks et al., 2023), including potential future risks that AIs might deceive
humans in order to accomplish undesirable goals (Ngo et al., 2022). Mechanistic interpretability
seeks to mitigate such risks through understanding how neural networks calculate their outputs, al-
lowing us to reverse engineer parts of their internal processes and make targeted changes to them
(Cammarata et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Elhage et al., 2021).
To reverse engineer a neural network, it is necessary to break it down into smaller units (features)
that can be analysed in isolation. Using individual neurons as these units has had some success (Olah
et al., 2020; Bills et al., 2023), but a key challenge has been that neurons are often polysemantic,
activating for several unrelated types of feature (Olah et al., 2020). Also, for some types of network
activations, such as the residual stream of a transformer, there is little reason to expect features to
align with the neuron basis (Elhage et al., 2023).
Elhage et al. (2022b) investigate why polysemanticity might arise and hypothesise that it may result
from models learning more distinct features than there are dimensions in the layer. They call this
phenomenon superposition. Since a vector space can only have as many orthogonal vectors as
it has dimensions, this means the network would learn an overcomplete basis of non-orthogonal
features. Features must be sufficiently sparsely activating for superposition to arise because, without
    ∗
        Equal contribution
        Code to replicate experiments can be found at https://github.com/HoagyC/sparse_coding


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: An overview of our method. We a) sample the internal activations of a language model,
either the residual stream, MLP sublayer, or attention head sublayer; b) use these activations to train
a neural network, a sparse autoencoder whose weights form a feature dictionary; c) interpret the
resulting features with techniques such as OpenAI’s autointerpretability scores (meanings here are
illustrative only).


high sparsity, interference between non-orthogonal features prevents any performance gain from
superposition. This suggests that we may be able to recover the network’s features by finding a set
of directions in activation space such that each activation vector can be reconstructed from a sparse
linear combinations of these directions. This is equivalent to the well-known problem of sparse
dictionary learning (Olshausen & Field, 1997).
Building on Sharkey et al. (2023), we train sparse autoencoders to learn these sets of directions. Our
approach is also similar to Yun et al. (2021), who apply sparse dictionary learning to all residual
stream layers in a language model simultaneously. Our method is summarised in Figure 1 and
described in Section 2.
We then use several techniques to verify that our learned features represent a semantically mean-
ingful decomposition of the activation space. First, we show that our features are on average more
interpretable than neurons and other matrix decomposition techniques, as measured by autointer-
pretability scores (Section 3) (Bills et al., 2023). Next, we show that we are able to pinpoint the
features used for a set task more precisely than other methods (Section 4). Finally, we run case
studies on a small number of features, showing that they are not only monosemantic but also have
predictable effects on the model outputs, and can be used for fine-grained circuit detection. (Section
5).

2       TAKING F EATURES OUT OF S UPERPOSITION WITH S PARSE D ICTIONARY
        L EARNING
To take network features out of superposition, we employ techniques from sparse dictionary learn-
ing (Olshausen & Field, 1997; Lee et al., 2006). Suppose that each of a given set of vectors
                                                                                          ngt
{xi }ni=1
       vec
           ⊂ Rd is composed of a sparse linear combination of unknown vectors {gj }j=1         ⊂ Rd ,
           P                                                                         nvec
i.e. xi = j ai,j gj where ai is a sparse vector. In our case, the data vectors {xi }i=1 are internal
                                                                                          ngt
activations of a language model, such as Pythia-70M (Biderman et al., 2023), and {gj }j=1     are un-
known, ground truth network features. We would like learn a dictionary of vectors, called dictionary
features, {fk }nk=1
                 feat
                      ⊂ Rd where for any network feature gj there exists a dictionary feature fk such
that gj ≈ fk .
To learn the dictionary, we train an autoencoder with a sparsity penalty term on its hidden activations.
The autoencoder is a neural network with a single hidden layer of size dhid = Rdin , where din is
the dimension of the language model internal activation vectors1 , and R is a hyperparameter that
controls the ratio of the feature dictionary size to the model dimension. We use the ReLU activation
function in the hidden layer (Fukushima, 1975). We also use tied weights for our neural network,
meaning the weight matrices of the encoder and decoder are transposes of each other.2 Thus, on
    1
      We mainly study residual streams in Pythia-70M and Pythia 410-M, for which the residual streams are of
size din = 512 and din = 1024, respectively (Biderman et al., 2023)
    2
      We use tied weights because (a) they encode our expectation that the directions which detect and define the
feature should be the same or highly similar, (b) they halve the memory cost of the model, and (c) they remove


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


input vector x ∈ {xi }, our network produces the output x̂, given by

                                        c    =    ReLU(M x + b)                                          (1)
                                        x̂   = MT c                                                      (2)
                                                hid −1
                                               dX
                                             =         ci fi                                             (3)
                                                    i=0



where M ∈ Rdhid ×din and b ∈ Rdhid are our learned parameters, and M is normalised row-wise3 .
Our parameter matrix M is our feature dictionary, consisting of dhid rows of dictionary features fi .
The output x̂ is meant to be a reconstruction of the original vector x, and the hidden layer c consists
of the coefficients we use in our reconstruction of x.
Our autoencoder is trained to minimise the loss function


                                               ||x − x̂||22
                                   L(x) =                   + α||c||1                                    (4)
                                                 dim(x)       | {z }
                                               | {z }        Sparsity loss
                                             Reconstruction loss



where α is a hyperparameter controlling the sparsity of the reconstruction, lm is the width of the
original activation. The ℓ1 loss term on c encourages our reconstruction to be a sparse linear combi-
nation of the dictionary features. It can be shown empirically (Sharkey et al., 2023) and theoretically
(Wright & Ma, 2022) that reconstruction with an ℓ1 penalty can recover the ground-truth features
that generated the data.


Figure 2: The tradeoff between the average number of active features and the fraction of the variance
that is unexplained, as the ℓ1 coefficient α is varied. Model is Pythia70M. Black dot represents the
R = 2, α = 0.00086 point used for autointerpretation.



ambiguity about whether the learned direction should be interpreted as the encoder or decoder direction. They
do not reduce performance when training on residual stream data but we have observed some reductions in
performance when using MLP data.
    3
      Normalisation of the rows (dictionary features) prevents the model from reducing the sparsity loss term
||c||1 by increasing the size of the feature vectors in M .


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Feature   Description (Generated by GPT-4)                                 Interpretability Score
      1-0000    parts of individual names, especially last names.                         0.33
      1-0001    actions performed by a subject or object.                                -0.11
      1-0002    instances of the letter ‘W’ and words beginning with ‘w’.                 0.55
      1-0003    the number ‘5’ and also records moderate to low activa-                   0.57
                tion for personal names and some nouns.
      1-0004    legal terms and court case references.                                    0.19

Table 1: Results of autointerpretation on the first five features found in the layer 1 residual stream,
with R = 2, α = 0.00086 on Pythia70m. Autointerpretation produces a description of what the
feature means and a score for how well that description predicts other activations.


3     I NTERPRETING D ICTIONARY F EATURES

3.1     I NTERPRETABILITY AT S CALE

Having learned a set of dictionary features, we want to understand whether our learned features dis-
play reduced polysemanticity, and are therefore more interpretable. To do this in a scalable manner,
we require a metric to measure how interpretable a dictionary feature is. We use the automated
approach introduced in Bills et al. (2023) because it scales well to measuring interpretability on the
thousands of dictionary features our autoencoders learn. In summary, the autointerpretability proce-
dure takes samples of text where the dictionary feature activates, asks a language model to write a
human-readable interpretation of the dictionary feature, and then prompts the language model to use
this description to predict the dictionary feature’s activation on other samples of text. The correlation
between the model’s predicted activations and the actual activations is that feature’s interpretability
score. See Appendix A and Bills et al. (2023) for further details.
We show descriptions and top-and-random scores for five dictionary features from the layer 1 resid-
ual stream in Table 1. The features shown are the first five under the (arbitrary) ordering in the
dictionary.

3.2     S PARSE DICTIONARY FEATURES ARE MORE INTERPRETABLE THAN BASELINES

We assess our interpretability scores against a variety of alternative methods for finding dictionaries
of features in language models. In particular, we compare interpretability scores on our dictionary
features to those produced by a) the default basis, b) random directions, c) Principal Component
Analysis (PCA), and d) Independent Component Analysis (ICA). For the random directions and for
the default basis in the residual stream, we replace negative activations with zeros so that all feature
activations are nonnegative 4 .
Figure 3 shows that our dictionary features are far more interpretable by this measure than dictionary
features found by comparable techniques. We find that the strength of this effect declines as we move
through the model, being comparable to ICA in layer 4 and showing minimal improvement in the
final layer.
This could be a result of our use of a consistent α = 0.00086, R = 2 in our automatic interpretation
results, which as seen in Figure 2 led to a higher number of average active features in the later layers.
However, it may also indicate that sparse autoencoders work less well in later layers but also may be
connected to the difficulties of automatic interpretation, both because by building on earlier layers,
later features may be more complex, and because they are often best explained by their effect on the
output.Bills et al. (2023) showed that GPT-4 is able to generate explanations that are very close to the
average quality of the human-generated explanations given similar data. However, they also showed
that current LLMs are limited in the kinds of patterns that they can find, sometimes struggling to find
patterns that center around next or previous tokens rather than the current token, and in the current
protocol are unable to verify outputs by looking at changes in output or other data.
   4
     For PCA we use an online estimation approach and run the decomposition on the same quantity of data we
used for training the autoencoders. For ICA, due to the slower convergence times, we run on only 2GB of data,
approximately 4 million activations for the residual stream and 1m activations for the MLPs.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Average top-and-random autointerpretability score of our learned directions in the residual
stream, compared to a number of baselines, using 150 features each. Error bars show 95% confi-
dence intervals around means. The feature dictionaries used here were trained for 10 epochs using
α = .00086 and R = 2 on Pythia 70M.


We do show, in Section 5, a method to see a feature’s causal effect on the output logits by hand, but
we currently do not send this information to the language model for hypothesis generation. The case
studies section also demonstrates a closing parenthesis dictionary feature, showing that these final
layer features can give insight into the model’s workings.
See Appendix C for a fuller exploration of different learned dictionaries through the lens of auto-
matic interpretability, looking at both the MLPs and the residual stream.


4     I DENTIFYING C AUSALLY-I MPORTANT D ICTIONARY F EATURES FOR
      I NDIRECT O BJECT I DENTIFICATION

In this section, we quantify whether our learned dictionary features localise a specific model be-
haviour more tightly than the PCA decomposition of the model’s activations. We do this via acti-
vation patching, a form of causal mediation analysis (Vig et al., 2020), through which we edit the
model’s internal activations along the directions indicated by our dictionary features and measure
the changes to the model’s outputs. We find that our dictionary features require fewer patches to
reach a given level of KL divergence on the task studied than comparable decompositions (Figure
4).
Specifically, we study model behaviour on the Indirect Object Identification (IOI) task (Wang et al.,
2022), in which the model completes sentences like “Then, Alice and Bob went to the store. Alice
gave a snack to      ”. This task was chosen because it captures a simple, previously-studied model
behaviour, which in particular has been widely explored through causal mediation analysis (Wang
et al., 2022) (Conmy et al., 2023) and it captures a simple model behaviour. Recall that the training
of our feature dictionaries does not emphasize any particular task.

4.1   A DAPTING ACTIVATION PATCHING TO DICTIONARY FEATURES

In our experiment, we run the model on a counterfactual target sentence, which is a variant of the
base IOI sentence with the indirect object changed (e.g., with “Bob” replaced by “Vanessa”); save
the encoded activations of our dictionary features; and use the saved activations to edit the model’s
residual stream when run on the base sentence.


                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In particular, we perform the following procedure. Fix a layer of the model to intervene on. Run the
model on the target sentence, saving the model output logits y and the encoded features c̄1 , ..., c̄k
of that layer at each of the k tokens. Then, run the model on the base sentence up through the
intervention layer, compute the encoded features c1 , ..., ck at each token, and at each position replace
the residual stream vector xi with the patched vector

                                                  X
                                     x′i = xi +         (c̄i,j − ci,j )fj
                                                  j∈F


where F is the subset of the features which we intervene on (we describe the selection process for F
later in this section). Let z denote the output logits of the model when you finish applying it to the
patched residual stream x′1 , ..., x′k . Finally, compute the KL divergence DKL (z||y), which measures
how close the patched model’s predictions are to the target’s. We compare these interventions to
equivalent interventions using principal components found as in Section 3.2.
To select the feature subset F , we use the Automated Circuit Discovery (ACDC) algorithm of
Conmy et al. (2023). In particular, we use their Algorithm 4.1 on our features, treating them as
a flat computational graph in which every feature contributes an independent change to the DKL
output metric, as described above and averaged over a test set of 50 IOI data points. The result is an
ordering on the features so that patching the next feature usually results in a smaller DKL loss than
each previous feature. Then our feature subsets F are the first k features under this ordering. We
applied ACDC separately on each decomposition.

4.2   P RECISE L OCALISATION OF IOI D ICTIONARY F EATURES

We show in Figure 4 that our sparse feature dictionaries allow the same amount of model editing, as
measured by KL divergence from the target, in fewer patches (Left) and with smaller edit magnitude
(Right) than the PCA decomposition. We also show that this does not happen if we train a non-
sparse dictionary (α = 0). However, dictionaries with a larger sparsity coefficient α have lower
overall reconstruction accuracy which appears in Figure 4 as a larger minimum KL divergence. In
Figure 4 we consider interventions on layer 11 of the residual stream, and we plot interventions on
other layers in Appendix F.


Figure 4: (Left) Number of features patched vs KL divergence from target, using various residual
stream decompositions. We find that patching a relatively small number of dictionary features is
more effective than patching PCA components and features from the non-sparse α = 0 dictionary.
(Right) Mean edit magnitude vs KL divergence from target as we increase the number of patched
features. We find that our sparse dictionaries improve the Pareto frontier of edit magnitude vs
thoroughness of editing. In both figures, the feature dictionaries were trained on the first 10,000
elements of the Pile (Gao et al., 2020) (approximately 7 million activations) using the indicated α
values and R = 4, on layer 11 of Pythia-410M (see Appendix F for results on other layers).


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     C ASE S TUDIES

In this section, we investigate individual dictionary features, highlighting several that appear to cor-
respond to a single human-understandable explanation (i.e., that are monosemantic). We perform
three analyses of our dictionary features to determine their semantic meanings: (1) Input: We iden-
tify which tokens activate the dictionary feature and in which contexts, (2) Output: We determine
how ablating the feature changes the output logits of the model, and (3) Intermediate features: We
identify the dictionary features in previous layers that cause the analysed feature to activate.

5.1   I NPUT: D ICTIONARY F EATURES ARE H IGHLY M ONOSEMANTIC

We first analyse our dictionary directions by checking what text causes them to activate. An ide-
alised monosemantic dictionary feature will only activate on text corresponding to a single human-
understandable concept, whereas a polysemantic dictionary feature might activate in unrelated con-
texts.


Figure 5: Histogram of token counts for dictionary feature 556 in layer 4 of Pythia-70M-deduped.
(Left) For all datapoints that activate the feature, we show the count of each token in each activation
range. The majority of activations are apostrophes, particularly for higher activations. Notably the
lower activating tokens are conceptually similar to apostrophes, such as other punctuation. (Right)
We show which token predictions are suppressed by ablating the feature, as measured by the differ-
ence in logits between the ablated and unablated model. We find that the token whose prediction
decreases the most is the “s” token. Note that there are 12k logits negatively effected, but we set a
threshold of 0.1 for visual clarity. The autoencoder hyperparameters used were R = 4, α = 0.0014.

To better illustrate the monosemanticity of certain dictionary features, we plot the histogram of
activations across token activations. This technique only works for dictionary features that activate
for a small set of tokens. We find dictionary features that only activate on apostrophes (Figure
5); periods; the token “ the”; and newline characters. The apostrophe feature in Figure 5 stands
in contrast to the default basis for the residual stream, where the dimension that most represents
an apostrophe is displayed in Figure 10 in Appendix D.1; this dimension is polysemantic since it
represents different information at different activation ranges.
Although the dictionary feature discussed in the previous section activates only for apostrophes,
it does not activate on all apostrophes. This can be seen in Figures 13 and 14 in Appendix D.2,
showing two other apostrophe-activating dictionary features, but for different contexts (such as
“[I/We/They]’ll” and “[don/won/wouldn]’t”). Details for how we searched and selected for dic-
tionary features can be found in Appendix D.3.

5.2   O UTPUT: D ICTIONARY F EATURES HAVE I NTUITIVE E FFECTS ON THE L OGITS

In addition to looking at which tokens activate the dictionary feature, we investigate how dictionary
features affect the model’s output predictions for the next token by ablating the feature from the
residual stream5 . If our dictionary feature is interpretable, subtracting its value from the residual
    5
      Specifically we use less-than-rank-one ablation, where we lower the activation vector in the direction of
the feature only up to the point where the feature is no longer active.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


stream should have a logical effect on the predictions of the next token. We see in Figure 5 (Right)
that the effect of removing the apostrophe feature mainly reduces the logit for the following “s”. This
matches what one would expect from a dictionary feature that detects apostrophes and is used by
the model to predict the “s” token that would appear immediately after the apostrophe in possessives
and contractions like “let’s”.

5.3   I NTERMEDIATE F EATURES : D ICTIONARY F EATURES A LLOW AUTOMATIC C IRCUIT
      D ETECTION

We can also understand dictionary features in relation to the upstream and downstream dictionary
features: given a dictionary feature, which dictionary features in previous layers cause it to activate,
and which dictionary features in later layers does it cause to activate?
To automatically detect the relevant dictionary features, we choose a target dictionary feature such
as layer 5’s feature for tokens in parentheses which predicts a closing parentheses (Figure 6). For
this target dictionary feature, we find its maximum activation M across our dataset, then sample 20
contexts that cause the target feature to activate in the range [M/2, M ]. For each dictionary feature
in the previous layer, we rerun the model while ablating this feature and sort the previous-layer
features by how much their ablation decreased the target feature. If desired, we can then recursively
apply this technique to the dictionary features in the previous layer with a large impact. The results
of this process form a causal tree, such as Figure 6.
Being the last layer, layer 5’s role is to output directions that directly correspond to tokens in the un-
embedding matrix. In fact, when we unembed feature 52027 , the top-tokens are all closing parenthe-
ses variations. Intuitively, previous layers will detect all situations that precede closing parentheses,
such as dates, acronyms, and phrases.


Figure 6: Circuit for the closing parenthesis dictionary feature, with human interpretations of each
feature shown. Edge thickness indicates the strength of the causal effect between dictionary features
in successive residual stream layers, as measured by ablations. Many dictionary features across lay-
ers have similar interpretations and often point in similar directions in activation space, as measured
by cosine similarity. Model used was Pythia-70M-deduped, with the autoencoder hyperparameters
R = 4, α = 0.0014.


6     D ISCUSSION
6.1   R ELATED W ORK

Several previous works have attempted to decompose language representations into sparsely-
activating features, varying both the representation studied and the technique used. Our approach,


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


training a neural network with a sparsity term in the loss function, is similar to the approaches in
Faruqui et al. (2015); Subramanian et al. (2018); Sharkey et al. (2023). In other works, such as
Yun et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2019), the decomposition is found via the FISTA algorithm, and
Murphy et al. (2012) uses the Non-Negative Sparse Embeddings method. Of these works, Faruqui
et al. (2015); Subramanian et al. (2018); Zhang et al. (2019); Murphy et al. (2012) applied these
techniques to word embeddings, while only Sharkey et al. (2023); Yun et al. (2021) found sparse
decompositions of the activations of a language model. Many of these works, including Murphy
et al. (2012); Subramanian et al. (2018); Yun et al. (2021) also find improved interpretability of their
features, as measured by techniques such as crowd-sourced judgements, the word intrusion detection
test, and word-level polysemy disambiguation, respectively.
The works most similar to ours are Sharkey et al. (2023), which inspired this work, and Subramanian
et al. (2018). The latter use sparse autoencoders to learn their decomposition of word embeddings,
though for their main results they use losses which train the learned features to approximate a sparse
binary unit, finding in preliminary experiments that this outperformed the use of an ℓ1 penalty.
Other previous works have tried to encourage sparsity in neural networks via changes to the ar-
chitecture or training process. These approaches include altering the attention mechanism (Correia
et al., 2019), adding ℓ1 penalties to neuron activations (Kasioumis et al., 2021; Georgiadis, 2019),
pruning neurons (Frankle & Carbin, 2018), and using the softmax function as the non-linearity in
the MLP layers (Elhage et al., 2022a). However, training a state-of-the-art foundation model with
these additional constraints is difficult (Elhage et al., 2022a), and improvements to interpretability
are not always realized (Meister et al., 2021).

6.2   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

The approach we present in this paper found interpretable directions, but depending on the choice of
hyperparameters leaves a significant fraction of the model’s variance unexplained (Figure 2). Future
work could seek to improve the Pareto frontier of sparsity and reconstruction accuracy by exploring
alternative architectures for the autoencoder or incorporating information about the weights of the
model or dictionary features found in adjacent layers into the training process. This approach could
also be applied to other components of a transformer, such as the output of the MLP or attention
sublayers, as our attempt to find sparse directions in the MLP layer met only mixed success (see
Appendix C).
In Section 4, we show that for the IOI task, behaviour is dependent on a relatively small number
of features. We expect that, because our dictionary is trained in a task-agnostic way, these result
will generalize to similar tasks and behaviours, but more work is needed to confirm this suspicion.
If this property generalizes, we would have a set of features which allow for understanding many
model behaviours using just a few features per behaviour. We would also like to trace the causal
dependencies between features in different layers, with the overarching goal of providing a lens for
viewing language models under which causal dependencies are sparse. This would hopefully be a
step towards the eventual goal of building an end-to-end understanding of how a model computes
its outputs.

6.3   C ONCLUSION

Sparse autoencoders are a scalable, unsupervised approach to disentangling language model network
features from superposition. Our approach requires only unlabelled model activations and uses or-
ders of magnitude less compute than the training of the original models. We have demonstrated that
the dictionary features we learn are more interpretable by autointerpretation, letting us pinpoint the
features responsible for a given behaviour more finely, and are more monosemantic than comparable
methods. This approach could facilitate the mapping of model circuits, targeted model editing, and
a better understanding of model representations.
An ambitious dream in the field of interpretability is enumerative safety (Elhage et al., 2022b):
producing a human-understandable explanation of a model’s computations in terms of a complete list
of the model’s features and thereby providing a guarantee that the model will not perform dangerous
behaviours such as deception. We hope that the techniques we presented in this paper also provide
a step towards achieving this ambition.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the OpenAI Researcher Access Program for their grant of model credits for
the autointerpretation and CoreWeave for providing EleutherAI with the computing resources for
this project. We also thank Nora Belrose, Arthur Conmy, Jake Mendel, and the OpenAI Automated
Interpretability Team (Jeff Wu, William Saunders, Steven Bills, Henk Tillman, and Daniel Mossing)
for valuable discussions regarding the design of various experiments. We thank Wes Gurnee, Adam
Jermyn, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Curtis Huebner, Scott Emmons, and William Saunders for their
feedback on earlier versions of this paper. Thanks to Delta Hessler for proofreading. AE and LR are
supported by the Long Term Future Fund. RH is supported by an Open Philanthropy grant. HC was
greatly helped by the MATS program, funded by AI Safety Support.

R EFERENCES
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
  Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons in lan-
  guage models. URL https://openaipublic. blob. core. windows. net/neuron-explainer/paper/index.
  html.(Date accessed: 14.05. 2023), 2023.
Nick Cammarata, Gabriel Goh, Shan Carter, Chelsea Voss, Ludwig Schubert, and Chris Olah. Curve
  circuits. Distill, 2021. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.006. https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/curve-
  circuits.
Arthur Conmy, Augustine N Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-
  Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.14997, 2023.
Gonçalo M Correia, Vlad Niculae, and André FT Martins. Adaptively sparse transformers. In
  Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
  the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp.
  2174–2184, 2019.
Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Llm. int8 (): 8-bit matrix
  multiplication for transformers at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07339, 2022.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. A mathematical framework for
  transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 1, 2021.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Neel Nanda, Tom Henighan, Scott Johnston, Sheer
  ElShowk, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Ben Mann, Danny Hernandez, Amanda Askell, Ka-
  mal Ndousse, Andy Jones, Dawn Drain, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Jackson Kernion, Tom Conerly, Shauna Kravec, Stanislav Fort, Saurav Ka-
  davath, Josh Jacobson, Eli Tran-Johnson, Jared Kaplan, Jack Clark, Tom Brown, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Dario Amodei, and Christopher Olah. Softmax linear units. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2022a. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/solu/index.html.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, et al. Toy models of superposi-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652, 2022b.
Nelson Elhage, Robert Lasenby, and Chris Olah. Privileged bases in the transformer residual
  stream, 2023. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/privileged-
  basis/index.html. Accessed: 2023-08-07.
Manaal Faruqui, Yulia Tsvetkov, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Noah Smith. Sparse overcomplete
 word vector representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02004, 2015.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03635, 2018.
Kunihiko Fukushima. Cognitron: A self-organizing multilayered neural network. Biol. Cybern., 20
  (3–4):121–136, sep 1975. ISSN 0340-1200. doi: 10.1007/BF00342633. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1007/BF00342633.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
  Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text
  for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
Georgios Georgiadis. Accelerating convolutional neural networks via activation map compression.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  7085–7095, 2019.
Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, and Thomas Woodside. An overview of catastrophic ai risks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12001, 2023.
Theodoros Kasioumis, Joe Townsend, and Hiroya Inakoshi. Elite backprop: Training sparse inter-
  pretable neurons. In NeSy, pp. 82–93, 2021.
Honglak Lee, Alexis Battle, Rajat Raina, and Andrew Ng. Efficient sparse coding algorithms.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 19, 2006.
Clara Meister, Stefan Lazov, Isabelle Augenstein, and Ryan Cotterell. Is sparse attention more
  interpretable? In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235293798.
Brian Murphy, Partha Talukdar, and Tom Mitchell. Learning effective and interpretable semantic
  models using non-negative sparse embedding. In Proceedings of COLING 2012, pp. 1933–1950,
  2012.
Richard Ngo, Lawrence Chan, and Sören Mindermann. The alignment problem from a deep learning
  perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00626, 2022.
Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill, 5(3):e00024–001, 2020.
Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set: A strategy
  employed by v1? Vision research, 37(23):3311–3325, 1997.
Qing Qu, Yuexiang Zhai, Xiao Li, Yuqian Zhang, and Zhihui Zhu. Analysis of the optimization
  landscapes for overcomplete representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02427, 2019.
Lee Sharkey, Dan Braun, and Beren Millidge. Taking features out of superposition with
  sparse autoencoders, 2023.  URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/
  z6QQJbtpkEAX3Aojj/interim-research-report-taking-features-out-
  of-superposition. Accessed: 2023-05-10.
Anant Subramanian, Danish Pruthi, Harsh Jhamtani, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Eduard Hovy.
  Spine: Sparse interpretable neural embeddings. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artifi-
  cial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer, and
  Stuart Shieber. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal mediation analysis.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:12388–12401, 2020.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.00593, 2022.
John Wright and Yi Ma. High-dimensional data analysis with low-dimensional models: Principles,
  computation, and applications. Cambridge University Press, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zeyu Yun, Yubei Chen, Bruno A Olshausen, and Yann LeCun. Transformer visualization via dictio-
  nary learning: contextualized embedding as a linear superposition of transformer factors. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.15949, 2021.

Juexiao Zhang, Yubei Chen, Brian Cheung, and Bruno A Olshausen. Word embedding visualization
  via dictionary learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03833, 2019.


A    AUTOINTERPRETATION P ROTOCOL

The autointerpretability process consists of five steps and yields both an interpretation and an au-
tointerpretability score:

      1. On each of the first 50,000 lines of OpenWebText, take a 64-token sentence-fragment, and
         measure the feature’s activation on each token of this fragment. Feature activations are
         rescaled to integer values between 0 and 10.
      2. Take the 20 fragments with the top activation scores and pass 5 of these to GPT-4, along
         with the rescaled per-token activations. Instruct GPT-4 to suggest an explanation for when
         the feature (or neuron) fires, resulting in an interpretation.
      3. Use GPT-3.56 to simulate the feature across another 5 highly activating fragments and 5
         randomly selected fragments (with non-zero variation) by asking it to provide the per-token
         activations.
      4. Compute the correlation of the simulated activations and the actual activations. This corre-
         lation is the autointerpretability score of the feature. The texts chosen for scoring a feature
         can be random text fragments, fragments chosen for containing a particularly high activa-
         tion of that feature, or an even mixture of the two. We use a mixture of the two unless
         otherwise noted, also called ‘top-random’ scoring.
      5. If, amongst the 50,000 fragments, there are fewer than 20 which contain non-zero variation
         in activation, then the feature is skipped entirely.

Although the use of random fragments in Step 4 is ultimately preferable given a large enough sample
size, the small sample sizes of a total of 640 tokens used for analysis mean that a random sample
will likely not contain any highly activating examples for all but the most common features, making
top-random scoring a desirable alternative.


B    S PARSE AUTOENCODER T RAINING

To train the sparse autoencoder described in Section 2, we use data from the Pile (Gao et al., 2020), a
large, public webtext corpus. We run the model that we want to interpret over this text while caching
and saving the activations at a particular layer. These activations then form a dataset, which we use
to train the autoencoders. The autoencoders are trained with the Adam optimiser with a learning rate
of 1e-3 and are trained on 5-50M activation vectors for 1-3 epochs, with larger dictionaries taking
longer to converge. A single training run using this quantity of data completes in under an hour on
a single A40 GPU.
When varying the hyperparameter α which controls the importance of the sparsity loss term, we
consistently find a smooth tradeoff between the sparsity and accuracy of our autoencoder, as shown
in Figure 2. The lack of a ‘bump’ or ‘knee’ in these plots provides some evidence that there is not a
single correct way to decompose activation spaces into a sparse basis, though to confirm this would
require many additional experiments.

   6
     While the process described in Bills et al. (2023) uses GPT-4 for the simulation step, we use GPT-3.5.
This is because the simulation protocol requires the model’s logprobs for scoring, and OpenAI’s public API for
GPT-3.5 (but not GPT-4) supports returning logprobs.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Comparison of average interpretability scores across dictionary sizes. All dictionaries were
trained on 20M activation vectors obtained by running Pythia-70M over the Pile with α = .00086.


C     F URTHER AUTOINTERPRETATION R ESULTS
C.1   I NTERPRETABILITY IS C ONSISTENT ACROSS D ICTIONARY S IZES

We find that larger interpretability scores of our feature dictionaries are not limited to overcomplete
dictionaries (where the ratio, R, of dictionary features to model dimensions is > 1), but occurs
even in dictionaries that are smaller than the underlying basis, as shown in Figure 7. These small
dictionaries are able to reconstruct the activation vectors less accurately, so with each feature being
similarly interpretable, the larger dictionaries will be able to explain more of the overall variance.

C.2   H IGH I NTERPRETABILITY S CORES A RE N OT AN A RTEFACT OF T OP S CORING

A possible concern is that the autointerpretability method described in Section 3 combines top acti-
vating fragments (which are usually large) with random activations (which are usually small), mak-
ing it relatively easy to identify activations. Following the lead of Bills et al. (2023), we control for
this by recomputing the autointerpretation scores by modifying Step 3 using only randomly selected
fragments. With large sample sizes, using random fragments should be the true test of our ability
to interpret a potential feature. However, the features we are considering are heavy-tailed, so with
limited sample sizes, we should expect random samples to underestimate the true correlation.
In Figure 8 we show autointerpretability scores for fragments using only random fragments. Match-
ing Bills et al. (2023), we find that random-only scores are significantly smaller than top-and-random
scores, but also that our learned features still consistently outperform the baselines, especially in the
early layers. Since our learned features are more sparse than the baselines and thus, activate less on a
given fragment, this is likely to underestimate the performance of sparse coding relative to baselines.
An additional potential concern is that the structure of the autoencoders allows them to be sensitive
to less than a full direction in the activation space, resulting in an unfair comparison. We show in
Appendix G that this is not the source of the improved performance of sparse coding.
While the residual stream can usually be treated as a vector space with no privileged basis (a basis in
which we would expect changes to be unusually meaningful, such as the standard basis after a non-
linearity in an MLP), it has been noted that there is a tendency for transformers to store information
in the residual stream basis(Dettmers et al., 2022), which is believed to be caused by the Adam


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Random-only interpretability scores across each layer, a measure of how well the interpre-
tation of the top activating cluster is able to explain the entire range of activations, α = 0.00086, R =
2, Pythia70M.


optimiser saving gradients with finite precision in the residual basis(Elhage et al., 2023). We do not
find residual stream basis directions to be any more interpretable than random directions.

C.3   I NTERPRETING THE MLP S UBLAYER

Our approach of learning a feature dictionary and interpreting the resulting features can, in principle,
be applied to any set of internal activations of a language model, not just the residual stream. Ap-
plying our approach to the MLP sublayer of a transformer resulted in mixed success. Our approach
still finds many features that are more interpretable than the neurons. However, our architecture also
learns many dead features, which never activate across the entire corpus. In some cases, there are so
many dead features that the set of living features does not form an overcomplete basis. For example,
in a dictionary with twice as many features as neurons, less than half might be active enough to
perform automatic interpretability. The exceptions to this are the early layers, where a large fraction
of them are active.
For learning features in MLP layers, we find that we retain a larger number of features if we use a
different matrix for the encoder and decoder, so that Equations 1 and 2 become


                                      c =      ReLU (Me x + b)                                       (5)
                                      x̂   =   MdT c                                                 (6)

We are currently working on methods to overcome this and find truly overcomplete bases in the
middle and later MLP layers.

C.4   I NTERPRETABILITY S CORES C ORRELATE WITH K URTOSIS AND S KEW OF ACTIVATION

It has been shown that the search for sparse, overcomplete dictionaries can be reformulated in terms
of the search for directions that maximise the ℓ4 -norm (Qu et al., 2019).
We offer a test of the utility of this by analysing the correlation between interpretability and a number
of properties of learned directions. We find that there is a correlation of 0.19 and 0.24 between the


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: Top-and-random and random-only interpretability scores for across each MLP layer, using
an ℓ1 coefficient α = 3.2e − 4 and dictionary size ratio R = 1, Pythia70M.


degree of positive skew and kurtosis respectively that feature activations have and their top-and-
random interpretability scores, as shown in Table 2.

                      Moment       Correlation with top-random interpretability score
                       Mean                               -0.09
                      Variance                             0.02
                       Skew                                0.20
                      Kurtosis                             0.15

Table 2: Correlation of interpretability score with feature moments across residual stream results,
all layers of Pythia70M, with dictionary size ratios R ∈ {0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8}.

This also accords with the intuitive explanation that the degree of interference due to other active
features will be roughly normally distributed by the central limit theorem. If this is the case, then
features will be notable for their heavy-tailedness.
This also explains why Independent Component Analysis (ICA), which maximises the non-
Gaussianity of the found components, is the best performing of the alternatives that we considered.

D        Q UALITATIVE F EATURE A NALYSIS
D.1       R ESIDUAL S TREAM BASIS

Figure 10 gives a token activation histogram of the residual stream basis. Connecting this residual
stream dimension to the apostrophe feature from Figure 5, this residual dimension was the 10th
highest dimension read from the residual stream by our feature7 .

D.2       E XAMPLES OF L EARNED F EATURES

Other features from Pythia-70M-deduped (layer 4, R = 4, α = 0.0014) are shown in Figures 11,
12, 13, and 14.

D.3       F EATURE S EARCH D ETAILS

We searched for the apostrophe feature using the sentence “ I don’t know about that. It is now up to
Dave”’, and seeing which feature (or residual stream dimension) activates the most for the last apos-
trophe token. The top activating feature in our dictionary was an outlier dimension feature (i.e., a
feature direction that mainly reads from an outlier dimension of the residual stream), the apostrophes
after O (and predicted O’Brien, O’Donnell, O’Connor, O’clock, etc), then the apostrophe-preceding-
s feature.
    7
        The first 9 did not have apostrophes in their top-activations like dimension 21.


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Histogram of token counts in the neuron basis (dimension 21 of layer 4 of Pythia-70M-
deduped, positive direction). Although there are a large fraction of apostrophes in the upper acti-
vation range, this only explains a very small fraction of the variance for middle-to-lower activation
ranges.


Figure 11: ‘If’ feature in coding contexts (Feature #1087 from Pythia-70M-deduped layer 4, with
autoencoder hyperparameters R = 4, α = 0.0014).



For the residual basis dimension, we searched for max and min activating dimensions (since the
residual stream can be both positive and negative), where the top two most positive dimensions were
outlier dimensions, the top two negative dimensions were our displayed one and another outlier
dimension, respectively.


D.4   FAILED I NTERPRETABILITY M ETHODS

We attempted a weight-based method going from the dictionary in layer 4 to the dictionary in layer
5 by multiplying a feature by the MLP and checking the cosine similarity with features in layer 5.
There were no meaningful connections. Additionally, it’s unclear how to apply this to the Attention
sublayer since we’d need to see which position dimension the feature is in. We expected this failed
by going out of distribution.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: ‘Dis’ token-level feature showing bigrams, such as ‘disCLAIM’, ‘disclosed’, ‘disor-
dered’, etc. (Feature #1128 from Pythia-70M-deduped layer 4, with autoencoder hyperparameters
R = 4, α = 0.0014).


Figure 13: Apostrophe feature in “I’ll”-like contexts (Feature #1243 from Pythia-70M-deduped
layer 4, with autoencoder hyperparameters R = 4, α = 0.0014).


E    N UMBER OF ACTIVE F EATURES
In Figure 15 we see that, for residual streams, we consistently learn dictionaries that are at least 4x
overcomplete before some features start to drop out completely, with the correct hyperparameters.
For MLP layers you see large numbers of dead features even with hyperparameter α = 0. These
figures informed the selection of α = 8.6e − 4 and α = 3.2e − 4 that went into the graphs in Section
3 for the residual stream and MLP respectively. Due to the large part of the input space that is never
used due to the non-linearity, it is much easier for MLP dictionary features to become stuck at a
position where they hardly ever activate. In future we plan to reinitialise such ‘dead features’ to
ensure that we learn as many useful dictionary features as possible.

F    E DITING IOI B EHAVIOUR ON OTHER L AYERS
In Figure 16 we show results of the procedure in Section 4 across a range of layers in Pythia-410M.

G    T OP K C OMPARISONS
As mentioned in Section 3, the comparison directions learnt by sparse coding and those in the
baselines are not perfectly even. This is because, for example, a PCA direction is active to an entire
half-space on one side of a hyperplane through the origin, whereas a sparse coding feature activates
on less than a full direction, being only on the far side of a hyperplane that does not intersect the
origin. This is due to the bias applied before the activation, which is, in practice, always negative.
To test whether this difference is responsible for the higher scores, we run a variant of PCA and ICA
in which we have a fixed number of directions, K, which can be active for any single datapoint. We


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Apostrophe feature in “don’t”-like contexts. (Feature #101 from Pythia-70M-deduped
layer 4, with autoencoder hyperparameters R = 4, α = 0.0014).


Figure 15: The number of features that are active, defined as activating more than 10 times across
10M datapoints, changes with sparsity hyperparamter α and dictionary size ratio R.


set this K to be equal to the average number of active features for a sparse coding dictionary with
ratio R = 1 and α = 8.6e − 4 trained on the layer in question. We compare the results in Figure 17,
showing that this change does not explain more than a small fraction of the improvement in scores.


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 16: Divergence from target output against number of features patched and magnitude of edits
for layers 3, 7, 11, 15, 19 and 23 of the residual stream of Pythia-410M. Pythia-410M has 24 layers,
which we index 0, 1, ..., 23. Once again, we use R = 4 with varying α parameter.


Figure 17: Autointerpretation scores across layers for the residual stream, including top-K baselines
for ICA and PCA. As with Figure 3 these use α = 0.00086, R = 2 and Pythia70M



                                                 19
