Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


DIAGNOSIS: D ETECTING UNAUTHORIZED DATA US -
AGES IN TEXT- TO - IMAGE DIFFUSION MODELS

 Zhenting Wang1 , Chen Chen2 , Lingjuan Lyu2∗, Dimitris N. Metaxas1 , Shiqing Ma3
 1
   Rutgers University, 2 Sony AI, 3 University of Massachusetts Amherst
 zhenting.wang@rutgers.edu,{ChenA.Chen,Lingjuan.Lv}@sony.com
 dnm@cs.rutgers.edu,shiqingma@umass.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

             Recent text-to-image diffusion models have shown surprising performance in gen-
             erating high-quality images. However, concerns have arisen regarding the unau-
             thorized data usage during the training or fine-tuning process. One example is
             when a model trainer collects a set of images created by a particular artist and
             attempts to train a model capable of generating similar images without obtaining
             permission and giving credit to the artist. To address this issue, we propose a
             method for detecting such unauthorized data usage by planting the injected mem-
             orization into the text-to-image diffusion models trained on the protected dataset.
             Specifically, we modify the protected images by adding unique contents on these
             images using stealthy image warping functions that are nearly imperceptible to
             humans but can be captured and memorized by diffusion models. By analyzing
             whether the model has memorized the injected content (i.e., whether the gen-
             erated images are processed by the injected post-processing function), we can
             detect models that had illegally utilized the unauthorized data. Experiments on
             Stable Diffusion and VQ Diffusion with different model training or fine-tuning
             methods (i.e, LoRA, DreamBooth, and standard training) demonstrate the effec-
             tiveness of our proposed method in detecting unauthorized data usages. Code:
             https://github.com/ZhentingWang/DIAGNOSIS.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Recently, text-to-image diffusion models have showcased outstanding capabilities in generating a
wide range of high-quality images. Notably, the release of Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022),
one of the most advanced and open-source text-to-image-diffusion models, has significantly con-
tributed to this progress. There has been a remarkable surge in the applications that use Stable
Diffusion as the foundation model. Consequently, more users adopt these models as tools for gen-
erating images with rich semantics according to their preferences. As diffusion models become
prevalent, the problems related to the responsible development of them become increasingly critical
(Wen et al., 2023; Fernandez et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Cui et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023).
The availability of high-quality training data, whether they are open-sourced or commercially re-
leased, plays a crucial role in the success of text-to-image diffusion models. Nonetheless, there are
huge concerns surrounding unauthorized data usage during the training or fine-tuning process of
these models (Chen et al., 2023). For instance, a model trainer may gather a collection of images
produced by a specific artist and aim to personalize a model capable of generating similar images, all
without acquiring proper permission from the artist. Therefore, it is important to develop techniques
for defending against the unauthorized usages of the training data.
Existing work such as Glaze (Shan et al., 2023) prevents unauthorized usage of data by adding care-
fully calculated perturbations to safeguarded artworks, causing text-to-image diffusion models to
learn significantly different image styles. While it prevents the unauthorized usages, it also makes
authorized training impossible. In addition, the added perturbations are calculated based on a sur-
rogate model. According to the existing research on unlearnable examples (Huang et al., 2021; Ren
et al., 2022), the transferability of such surrogate model based perturbations is limited. In other
    ∗
        Corresponding Author. Work done during Zhenting Wang’s internship at Sony AI.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Memorization
  w/o Injected
  Memorization
   w/ Injected


Fig. 1: Generated samples by standard model and the model planted with injected memorization.
The first row shows the samples generated by standard model, and all samples in the first row are
classified as “Does not contain the signal function” by the signal classifier. The second row shows
the samples generated by model planted with injected memorization, and all samples in the second
row are classified as “Contains the signal function” by the signal classifier.

words, the performance will decrease when the model used by the malicious trainer and the sur-
rogate model are different. Thus, we need a new method that can have a small influence on the
authorized usages, and is independent to the choice of the used text-to-image diffusion models.
Inspired by recent findings that the text-to-image diffusion models can memorize contents in the
training data (Carlini et al., 2023a; Somepalli et al., 2023a;b; Wen et al., 2024), in this paper, we
solve the unauthorized data usages detection problem from the lens of the memorizations. Exist-
ing works about the memorization of the text-to-image diffusion models focus on the memorization
of whole samples (sample-level memorization (Carlini et al., 2023a; Somepalli et al., 2023a;b)).
A model is considered to have sample-wise memorization if a specific sample can be accurately
identified as a training sample of the model through membership inference attacks (Carlini et al.,
2023a). Thus, an intuitive way is exploiting membership inference techniques (Shokri et al., 2017;
Chen et al., 2020) to detect if specific data are used to train or fine-tune the given model. However,
Duan et al. (2023) demonstrate that existing membership inference methods are ineffective for text-
to-image diffusion models such as Stable Diffusion. For example, the state-of-the-art membership
inference method for the diffusion model (i.e., SecMI (Duan et al., 2023)) only achieves 66.1% suc-
cess rate for the membership inference on the stable-diffusion-v1-5 model (Rombach et al., 2022)
under white-box setting. Performing membership inference for large diffusion models in practical
black-box settings is even more challenging (Dubiński et al., 2023). Different from the sample-level
memorization, in this work, we focus on diffusion models’ memorization on specific elements in
the training data and propose an approach for detecting unauthorized data usages via planting the
injected element-level memorizations into the model trained or fine-tuned on the protected dataset
by modifying the protected training data. More specifically, when a set of protected images are
uploaded to the internet, it will be processed by a specific function (called signal function) that is
stealthy to humans but can be captured and memorized for diffusion models. Therefore, after the
models are trained or fine-tuned on the “coated images” (i.e., images processed by the signal func-
tion), it will memorize the added signal function so that the unauthorized data usages can be detected
by using a binary classifier (called signal classifier) to analyze if the given model has the memoriza-
tion on the signal function (i.e., if the images generated by the model contains the signal function).
Our method is independent of the model used in the unauthorized training or fine-tuning process,
and it only has a small influence on the authorized training. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work to study the more fine-grained element-level memorization for text-to-image diffu-
sion models. Based on our design, we implemented our prototype called DIAGNOSIS (Detecting
unauthorIzed dAta usaGes iN text-tO-image diffuSIon modelS) in PyTorch, experiments on main-
stream text-to-image diffusion models (i.e., Stable Diffusion v1, Stable Diffusion v2 (Rombach
et al., 2022), VQ Diffusion (Gu et al., 2022)) and popular model training or fine-tuning methods
(i.e., Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022), DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023), and standard
training) demonstrate that our method is highly effective. It achieves 100.0% detection accuracy un-


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


der various settings. Meanwhile, our proposed method has small influence on the generation quality
of the models, and the “coated images” in the protected dataset are close to the original images. For
example, Fig. 1 shows the visualizations of the generated samples by the standard models and the
models planted with injected memorization. In Fig. 1, all images generated by the injected model are
recognized as “contains signal function” by the signal classifier, but their distributional difference to
the images generated by standard models is small. More visualizations of the generated samples can
be found in Fig. 2, Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. The visualizations of the original training samples and their
coated version can be found in Fig. 5.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: ① We firstly define two types of element-level injected
memorizations on the text-to-image diffusion models. We also formally define the memorization
strength on the introduced injected memorizations. ② Based on the definition of the injected mem-
orizations and the memorization strength, we propose a framework for detecting unauthorized data
usages via planting injected memorizations into the model trained on the protected dataset. It con-
sists of coating the protected dataset, approximating the memorization strength, and the hypothesis
testing for determining if the inspected model has unauthorized usages on the protected data. ③ Ex-
periments on four datasets and the mainstream text-to-image diffusion models (i.e., Stable Diffusion
and VQ Diffusion) with different model training or fine-tuning methods (i.e, LoRA, DreamBooth,
and standard training) demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

2   BACKGROUND
Text-to-image Diffusion Model. Recently, diffusion models have made significant progress in im-
age synthesis task (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Song
et al., 2023). Among them, Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) is one of the most representative
text-to-image diffusion models, and it operates the diffusion process on a latent space obtained from
a pre-trained autoencoder, which serves the purpose of reducing the dimensionality of data samples.
By doing so, the diffusion model can effectively capitalize on the well-compressed semantic features
and visual patterns learned by the encoder. Training text-to-image diffusion models from the scratch
is expensive. Thus, many recent works focus on personalizing pre-trained text-to-image diffusion
models by efficient fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2022).
Preventing Unauthorized Data Usages. There are several ways to prevent unauthorized data us-
ages for machine learning models. Unlearnable-example-based methods (Huang et al., 2021; Ren
et al., 2022; Shan et al., 2023) aim to prevent third parties from training on the data without permis-
sion by adding perturbations on data before publishing to make the models trained on the perturbed
published dataset fail to normally fit it. For example, Glaze (Shan et al., 2023) add carefully com-
puted perturbations to the protected arts, such that diffusion models will learn significantly altered
versions of their style, and be ineffective in future attempts at style mimicry. Another way is to trace
if a given model is trained or fine-tuned on the protected data. Based on the findings that deep neural
networks are vulnerable to backdoor attacks (Gu et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020; Doan
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022), backdoor-based dataset watermarking approaches (Li et al., 2023a;b)
insert backdoor samples in the protected dataset, and infer unauthorized training or fine-tuning by
inspecting if the given models were infected with the corresponding backdoors. Sablayrolles et al.
(2020) use surrogate model on the protected dataset to generate “radioactive data” to carry the class-
specific watermarking vectors in high dimensional feature space, and detect unauthorized usage via
checking if the given model’s intermediate representation is aligned with the watermarking vectors.
Except Glaze (Shan et al., 2023), all the above listed methods focus on preventing unauthorized data
usages in training classifier models, while this work focuses on the text-to-image diffusion models.
Another potential way is applying membership inference techniques (Chen et al., 2020; Duan et al.,
2023) to detect if some specific samples are used in training. It is also possible to adapt the deepfake
attribution method proposed by Yu et al. (2021) to the unauthorized data usages detection problem.
However, it relies on the training of the auto-encoders used for injecting the fingerprints, which re-
quires all training samples of the protected model are processed by the trained fingerprint encoder,
and it fails to handle the scenarios where only a small part of the training data are processed (which
is highly possible when the infringer collects the training data from multiple sources).
Memorization of Diffusion Models. Existing works (Carlini et al., 2023a; Somepalli et al.,
2023a;b) focus on diffusion model’s memorization on whole samples, and they define the mem-
orization in diffusion models as the phenomenon that the training samples can be extracted via
optimizing the prompt. An image sample contains multiple elements such as the color style, the


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


shape of the central object, etc. In contrast to the sample-level memorization focusing on the entire
samples, our work is centered on the memorizations on specific elements.

3   M ETHOD
In this section, we introduce our method (i.e., DIAGNOSIS) for detecting the unauthorized data
usages in training or fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. We first discuss the formulation of
the studied problem, and then introduce the detailed approach.
3.1 P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We focus on serving as a protector which can infer if the unauthorized usages of the protected data
happen in the training or fine-tuning process of the given text-to-image diffusion models.
Infringer’s Goal. We consider the infringer as the unauthorized model trainer. The goal of the
unauthorized model trainer is to produce a text-to-image diffusion model that can generate art pieces
of high quality via training or fine-tuning on the dataset without permission.
Protector’s Goal. Given an text-to-image diffusion model M and a set of protected images D,
the goal of the protector is to detect whether the protected images are used as (part of) the training
data for the pre-training or fine-tuning phase of the model. Formally, the goal can be written as
constructing an inference algorithm A : M 7→ {0, 1} that receives a model M as the input, and
returns the inference result (i.e., 0 denotes the model did not use the unauthorized data , and 1
denotes unauthorized usage is detected).
Infringer’s and Protector’s Capability. The infringer has the access to the found datasets and
he/she has the full control of the training or fine-tuning process of the text-to-image diffusion models.
For protector, during the data release phase, the protector has the full control of the protected images.
He/she can modify the protected image before they are being released to the internet, but he/she
needs to keep the visual similarity of the modified images and the original images to make the
modified samples more stealthy. During the inspection phase, the protector only has the black-
access to the inspected models. For the usage of the text captions in the protected datasets, we
consider the following two scenarios:
Scenario I. The infringer uses both text captions and images in the found datasets. The protector can
modify both images and the text captions in the protected datasets.
Scenario II. The infringer only uses the images in the found datasets, and they label the text captions
by themselves. In this scenario, the protector only modifies images in the protected datasets.
3.2 DATA U SAGES T RACING AND I NJECTED M EMORIZATION
Injected Memorization. Our idea is planting some unique behaviors into the models that were
trained or fine-tuned on the protected dataset via modifying the dataset, then we can detect the unau-
thorized data usages by checking the behaviors of the inspected models. The research question we
want to answer is “How to plant the unique behaviors into the models that were trained or fine-tuned
on the protected dataset?”. Recent research (Carlini et al., 2023a; Somepalli et al., 2023a;b) find that
the text-to-image diffusion models have strong memorizations on the duplicated training samples.
That is, the model tends to produce the images that are highly similar to some memorized training
samples. Such behaviors are dependent on the training data, and they are highly orthogonal to the
learning algorithms. Inspired by these observations, we propose to plant the unique behaviors into
the models by modifying the protected dataset and injecting extra memorizations on some unique
contents such as a stealthy image processing function (i.e., signal function). We call such memoriza-
tions as the injected memorization. Different from existing studies (Carlini et al., 2023a; Somepalli
et al., 2023a;b) that focus on the sample-level memorization, we focus on the more fine-grained
element-level memorization of specific elements (e.g., an image processing function) for text-to-
image diffusion models. In this paper, we denote signal function S as the process to add the selected
unique content into the image. We use OS to denote the set of image samples processed by signal
function S and call OS as the signal images. The injected memorizations can be conditioned on a
text trigger function η in the text prompt. That means the model tends to generate signal images if
the function η is applied to the text prompt, and the model does not have such preference otherwise.
It can also be unconditional. Formally, we define injected memorization as follows:
Definition 1 (Injected Memorization) Given an text-to-image diffusion model M : I 7→ O (I and
O are the input and the output spaces, respectively), it has α(M, S, η)-memorization on signal
function S , if P (M(η(i)) ∈ OS ) = α(M, S, η), ∀i ∈ I, where OS is the set of image samples


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


processed by the signal function S. We denote α(M, S, η) as memorization strength of M on
signal function S conditioned on text trigger function η.
We have two types of injected memorization based on text trigger function η:
Unconditional Injected Memorization. The model has unconditional injected memorization when
the text trigger function η is the identity function η(i) = i. In this case, the injected memorization
will always be activated on any text prompt.
Trigger-conditioned Injected Memorization. The model has trigger-conditioned injected memoriza-
tion if the text trigger function η is not equal to the identity function, i.e., η(i) ̸= i. That is, the
model tends to produce signal images only when the specific perturbations on the text prompt are
added. In this paper, we use word trigger (Kurita et al., 2020) as the text trigger function η. In detail,
function η inserts the trigger word “tq” at the beginning of the text prompt. We also discuss the
results under different text trigger functions (e.g., syntactic trigger (Qi et al., 2021)) in §A.3.
Dataset Coating and Memorization Injection. We then discuss how to plant the injected memo-
rization by modifying the protected dataset. In our method, it is injected by coating the protected
data, i.e., adding specific stealthy transformations on the images. The protector can only coat a
subset of the protected data to make the dataset coating operation more stealthy. Formally, the coat-
ing operation is defined in Eq. 1, where D′ is the coated subset in the protected dataset D. Here
x denotes the image sample, and i denotes the text caption. S is the used signal function and η
is the selected text trigger function. Ts (D) is the protected dataset after the coating process. We
               ′
call p = |D      |                             ′
             |D| as the coating rate, where |D | and |D| are the size of the coated subset and the
whole dataset, respectively. In this paper, we use the image warping function proposed in Nguyen
& Tran (2021) as the signal function by default since it is stealthy for humans but recognizable and
memorizable for DNNs. More details about the image warping function can be found in §A.1.
                          Ts (D) = {(η(i), S(x)), (i, x) ∈ D′ } ∪ (D − D′ )                           (1)
3.3 T RACING U NAUTHORIZED DATA U SAGES
Training Signal Classifier. To trace the unauthorized data usages, we train a binary classifier Cθ
to distinguish if the image generated by the inspected model contains the signal function S or not.
The training process of the binary classifier Cθ is formalized in Eq. 2, where yn is the label denoting
normal samples and ys is the label standing for the samples processed by signal function S. D is the
set of protected images and L is the cross-entropy loss function. Note that we spit part of the samples
(10% by default) in D as the validation set for developing the signal classifier. Due to the strong
learning ability of modern text-to-image diffusion models such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al.,
2022), the distribution for the generated images and the real training images is similar. Therefore,
even though the classifier is trained on real protected images, it is still effective for distinguishing
the existence of the signal function in the images generated by the text-to-image diffusion models.
In this paper, we use the ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) model pretrained on the ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009) dataset and fine-tuned by the procedure described above as the signal classifier.
                    Cθ = arg min[L (Cθ (x), yn ) + L (Cθ (S(x)), ys )],      x∈D                      (2)
                              θ

Approximating Memorization Strength. In our approximation process, we consider M(η(i)) ∈
OS if Cθ (M(η(i))) = ys , where i denotes the text prompt. In the detection phase, given the
inspected model M, we can approximate its memorization strength on signal function S via Eq. 3,
where η(I) is the set of text prompts that contain the text trigger. ys is the label for the samples
processed by signal function S. The set I can be obtained by sampling a set of the text prompts in
the protected dataset. Note that we only need the black-box access to the inspected model.
                                  α(M, S, η) ≈ P(Cθ (M(η(I))) = ys )                                  (3)
Hypothesis Testing. We use statistical hypothesis testing proposed by Li et al. (2023b) to determine
if the given model is trained or fine-tuned on the protected images. In our hypothesis testing, we
have the null hypothesis H0 : unauthorized usage is not detected, and the alternative hypothesis H1 :
unauthorized usage is detected. We define β as the signal classifier’s prediction probability for label
ys (i.e, label standing for the samples processed by signal function) under the uncoated validation
samples in the protected dataset D. Given a certainty threshold τ , we can reject null hypothesis H0
and claim the unauthorized data usages in the training or fine-tuning stage of the inspected model


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


at the significant level γ if the inequality Eq. 4 holds, where N is the number of samples used to
approximate the memorization strength, t1−γ is the (1 − γ)-quantile of t-distribution with (N − 1)
degrees of freedom. The Eq. 4 is based on the theoretical analysis in Li et al. (2023b). Following Li
et al. (2023b), we set τ = 0.05 and γ = 0.05 as the default value.
           √                                           p
              N − 1 · (α(M, S, η) − β − τ ) − t1−γ · α(M, S, η) − α(M, S, η)2 > 0,                (4)

3.4     OVERVIEW OF OUR FRAMEWORK
In this section, we introduce the overall pipeline of our framework. As we discussed in §3.1, our
method can be divided into two phases. Algorithm 1 describes the coating phase before the data is
uploaded. Given a set of data D and the selected signal function S, in line 2-3, we coat the data by
Eq. 1. In line 4-5, we train the signal classifier using Eq. 2. Then the image datasets are uploaded
to the Internet. During the detection phase, given the inspected model M and the signal classifier
trained in the coating phase, we can get the detection results for the unauthorized data usages via

Algorithm 1 Data Coating                            Algorithm 2 Unauthorized Data Usages Detection
Input: Data: D, Signal Function: S                  Input: Inspected Model: M, Signal Classifier: Cθ
Output: Coated Ts (D), Signal Classifier Cθ         Output: Results: Unauthorized Usages or Not
 1: function C OATING(D, S)                          1: function D ETECTION(M, Cθ )
 2:    ▷ Obtaining Coated Data                       2:     ▷ Obtaining Memorization Strength
 3:    Ts (D) ←[Eq. 1]                               3:     α(M, S, η) ←[Eq. 3]
 4:    ▷ Training Signal Classifier                  4:     ▷ Determining Results
 5:    Cθ ←[Eq. 2]                                   5:     Results = HypothesisTesting ←[Eq. 4]
 6:    return Ts (D), Cθ                             6:     return Results

Algorithm 2. In line 2-3, we approximate the memorization strength via Eq. 3. Finally, in line 4-5,
we get the inference results via the hypothesis testing described in Eq. 4.

4       E VALUATION
In this section, we first introduce our experiment setup (§4.1). We then evaluate the effectiveness
of the proposed method on detecting unauthorized data usage in the model training or fine-tuning
process (§4.2). We also conduct ablation study for the proposed method (§4.3), and discuss the per-
formance difference between the unconditional injected memorization and the trigger-conditioned
injected memorization (§4.4). We also discuss the results under different text trigger functions in
§A.3 and the adaptive infringer (i.e., the adaptive attack for our method) in §A.4.
4.1     E XPERIMENT S ETUP
Our method is implemented with Python 3.9 and PyTorch 2.0.1. We conduct all experiments on a
Ubuntu 20.04 server equipped with six Quadro RTX 6000 GPUs.
Models and Datasets. Three mainstream text-to-image diffusion models (i.e., Stable Diffusion
v11 (Rombach et al., 2022), Stable Diffusion v22 (Rombach et al., 2022), and VQ Diffusion (Gu
et al., 2022)) are used in the experiments. Also, our experiments include both model fine-tuning
(i.e., LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) and DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023)) and standard training. Four
datasets (i.e., Pokemon3 , CelebA (Liu et al., 2015), CUB-200 (Wah et al., 2011)) and Dog (Ruiz
et al., 2023) are used. More details about the used datasets can be found in §A.2.
Evaluation metrics. The effectiveness of the method is measured by collecting the detection accu-
racy (Acc). Given a set of models consisting of models w/o unauthorized data usages and models
w/ unauthorized data usages, the Acc is the ratio between the correctly classified models and all
models. We also show a detailed number of True Positives (TP, i.e., correctly detected models w/
unauthorized data usages), False Positives (FP, i.e., models w/o unauthorized data usages classified
as models w/ unauthorized data usages), False Negatives (FN, i.e., models w/ unauthorized data
usages classified as models w/o unauthorized data usages) and True Negatives (TN, i.e., correctly
    1
      https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5
    2
      https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2
    3
      https://huggingface.co/datasets/lambdalabs/pokemon-blip-captions


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Effectiveness of detecting text-to-image diffusion models that have unauthorized data usage
on the protected dataset in model fine-tuning.
                       Model                  Dataset   Injected Memorization Type         TP     FP       FN   TN       Acc
                                                                  Unconditional            20     0        0    20      100.0%
                                           Pokemon
                                                               Trigger-conditioned         20     0        0    20      100.0%
                 Stable Diffusion v1
                      + LoRA                                      Unconditional            20     0        0    20      100.0%
                                              CelebA
                                                               Trigger-conditioned         20     0        0    20      100.0%
                                                                  Unconditional            20     0        0    20      100.0%
                                           CUB-200
                                                               Trigger-conditioned         20     0        0    20      100.0%
                 Stable Diffusion v2                              Unconditional            20     0        0    20      100.0%
                                           Pokemon
                      + LoRA                                   Trigger-conditioned         20     0        0    20      100.0%
                 Stable Diffusion v1
                                               Dog               Unconditional             20     0        0    20      100.0%
               + LoRA + Dreambooth


                                                                           Table 3: Effectiveness in the scenario where
Table 2: Memorization strengths for the models                             the infringer collects training or fine-tuning data
w/o unauthorized data usage and the models w/                              from multiple sources. The collect fraction refers
unauthorized data usage in the standard training                           to the portion of the training data that collected
for VQ Diffusion (Gu et al., 2022).                                        from the protected data released by the protector.
                                       Memorization Strength                     Injected Memorization Type     Collect Fraction   Acc
Injected Memorization Type
                               w/o Unauthorized w/ Unauthorized                                                      25%           100%
                                  data usage       data usage                          Unconditional                 35%           100%
                                                                                                                     50%           100%
         Unconditional                 6.0%             96.0%
      Trigger-conditioned              4.0%             100.0%                                                       25%           100%
                                                                                     Trigger-conditioned             35%           100%
                                                                                                                     50%           100%


classified models w/o unauthorized data usages). Besides, we also calculate the FID of the generated
images to measure the generation quality.
Implementation Details. By default, the coating rate we used for unconditional injected memoriza-
tion and the trigger-conditioned injected memorization are 100.0% and 20.0%, respectively. We use
50 text prompts to approximate the memorization strength (i.e., N = 50) by default. The default
warping strength are 2.0 and 1.0 for unconditional injected memorization and trigger-conditioned
injected memorization, respectively. The default hyper-parameters for the hypothesis testing are
discussed in §3.3. The trigger-conditioned injected memorization is corresponding to the Scenario
I described in §3.1, and the unconditional injected memorization is corresponding to both Scenario
I and Scenario II. Our code will be released upon publication.

4.2      E FFECTIVENESS
Detection Performance. In this section, we study the effectiveness of DIAGNOSIS. To study
the effectiveness of detecting text-to-image diffusion models that have unauthorized data usage on
the protected datasets, we generate a set of models w/ unauthorized data usages and models w/o
unauthorized data usages by using different random seeds, and then use our method to classify them
(i.e., distinguishing if they have unauthorized data usage on the protected datasets). We collect the
Acc, TP, FP, FN and TN results to measure the effectiveness.
Fine-tuning Scenario. The results for model fine-tuning scenario are shown in Table 1. For each case
in Table 1, we generate 20 models w/ unauthorized data usages and 20 models w/o unauthorized
data usages, and evaluate the detection accuracy (Acc) of our method on these models. The Acc
of both planting unconditional memorization and trigger-conditioned memorization are 100.0% for
all cases, with 0 False Positive (FP) and 0 False Negative (FN). While the average memorization
strength for the models w/ unauthorized data usages is 91.2%, it is only 5.1% for the models w/o
unauthorized data usages, meaning that there is a large gap between the memorization strengths for
models w/ unauthorized data usages and models w/o unauthorized data usages.
Standard Training Scenario. For standard training scenario, the results are shown in Table 2. The
model and the dataset used here are VQ Diffusion (Gu et al., 2022) and CUB-200 (Wah et al.,
2011), respectively. Similarly, the memorization strengths for model w/ unauthorized data usages
(i.e., 98.0% in average) are much higher than that for models w/o unauthorized data usages (i.e.,


                                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.0% in average). These results show that DIAGNOSIS is highly effective for detecting the models
with unauthorized data usage on the protected datasets.
The Scenario Where the Infringer Collects Data from Multiple Sources. We also evaluate the sce-
nario that the infringer collects the training or fine-tuning data from multiple sources. The results
for this case are shown in Table 3, where collect fraction c indicates the portion of the training data
that obtained from the protected data released by the protector. The model and the dataset used here
are Stable Diffusion v1 (Rombach et al., 2022) + LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) and CUB-200 (Wah et al.,
2011), respectively. Typically, the data collected from different sources might have minor distribu-
tional differences. Given that the CUB-200 dataset includes classification labels for 200 distinct bird
classes, we assume the subsets provided by different data sources has different classes to reflect the
distributional differences. In other words, there is no overlap in terms of classes among the different
subsets. As can be seen, DIAGNOSIS achieves high detection accuracy (i.e., 100%) under different
collect fractions from 25% to 50%, indicating our method is effective for the multi-sources scenario.
Influence on the Generation Quality. To investigate the generation quality of the models trained or
fine-tuned on the protected dataset, we also report the FID of the model planted with unconditional
injected memorization and trigger-conditioned injected memorization, as well as that of standard
model that does not have any injected memorization. The model and the dataset used here are Stable
Diffusion v1 (Rombach et al., 2022) + LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) and Pokemon, respectively. The FID
is measured by 50 randomly sampled prompts and corresponding images in the testset.
We show the results in Table 4. For unconditional
injected memorization, the FID is slightly higher Table 4: Generation quality for the models with
(i.e., 218.28) than that of the standard model which and without injected memorizations.
does not have any injected memorization. For
                                                        Injected Memorization Type Text Trigger Added FID ↓
the model planted with trigger-conditioned mem-
                                                                   None                    N/A        199.29
orization, its FID on the normal text prompt is
also slightly higher than the FID for the standard             Unconditional               N/A        218.28
model. When the text trigger is added, the FID of           Trigger-conditioned
                                                                                            ✘         209.16
this model is larger (i.e., 239.03), but the perturba-                                      ✔         239.03
tions are still stealthy as we demonstrate in Fig. 3.
Overall, our method is effective for detecting text-to-image diffusion models that have unauthorized
data usage on the protected datasets, and it only has small influence on the generation quality.
Comparison to Existing methods. In this section, we compare DIAGNOSIS to existing method
Yu et al. (2021) that is potentially able to be applied in the unauthorized data usages detection
problem. The comparison results can be found in Table 5. The model used here are Stable Dif-
fusion v1 (Rombach et al., 2022) + LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) and the dataset used is Pokemon.
 We consider the scenario that the infringer col-      Table 5: Comparison to Yu et al. (2021).
lects the training or fine-tuning data from multiple
sources and the collect fraction for the protector            Method             TP FP FN TN  Acc

(i.e., the portion of the training data that collected     Yu et al. (2021)       0  0 10 10 50.0%
                                                       DIAGNOSIS-unconditional   10 0   0 10 100.0%
from the protected data released by the protector) DIAGNOSIS-trigger-conditioned 10 0   0 10 100.0%
here is 25%. While the detection accuracy for Yu
et al. (2021) is only 50.0%, our method achieves
100.0% detection accuracy. The results demonstrate that DIAGNOSIS outperforms the existing
method Yu et al. (2021).
4.3 A BLATION S TUDY
In this section, we conduct ablation study. We first study the influence of using different warping
strengths in the signal function. We then investigate the effects of different coating rates. By default,
the model used is Stable Diffusion v1 + LoRA, and the dataset used in this section is the Pokemon.
Different Warping Strengths. As we discussed in §3.2, we use the image warping function as the
signal function of the injected memorization.         Table 6: Influence of different warping strengths.
The effects of the image warping function             Warping Strength    FID      β     threshold   α(M, S, η)
is controlled by the hyper-parameter warping                1.0          209.78   2.0%    15.7%         76.0%
strength, which is defined as the scale of the              2.0          218.28   0.0%    13.1%         96.0%
warping-induced perturbations (i.e., s in Eq. 5             3.0          249.62   0.0%    13.1%        100.0%
                                                            4.0          262.30   0.0%    13.1%        100.0%
in §A.1). We investigate the influence of differ-


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Warping Strength: 1.0     Warping Strength: 2.0       Warping Strength: 3.0     Warping Strength: 4.0

Fig. 2: Visualizations of generated samples by the models planted with unconditional injected mem-
orizations with different warping strengths.


ent warping strengths for image warping function in the coating process. We report the FID, the β
value in Eq. 4, the hypothesis testing’s detection threshold for the memorization strength calculated
by Eq. 4, and the memorization strength of the models trained on the protected dataset. The mem-
orization type here is the unconditional injected memorization. The results are shown in Table 6.
When the warping strength increases, the memorization strength will be higher, but the FID also
becomes larger. The visualizations of the generated samples under different warping strengths can
be found in Fig. 2.
Different Coating Rates. We also study the influence of different coating rates. In detail, we vary
the coating rates from 2.0% to 100.0%, and collect the memorization strength of the model fine-
tuned on the protected dataset. The results are shown in Table 7. The FID and the memorization
 strength on signal function for both unconditional   Table 7: Influence of different coating rates.
memorization and trigger-conditioned memoriza-
tion are studied. For unconditional memorization,                             Memorization Type
both FID and memorization strength on signal Coating Rate            Unconditional        Trigger-conditioned
function increase when the coating rate is higher.                FID α(M, S, η)          FID α(M, S, η)
The memorization strength is above 95% when the
                                                       2.0%      199.87      0.0%        211.80       92.0%
coating rate is 100.0%. For trigger-conditioned        5.0%      199.16      2.0%        238.87      100.0%
memorization, the memorization strength is al-         10.0%     209.77     12.0%        243.46      100.0%
                                                       20.0%     201.71     14.0%        239.03      100.0%
ways 100.0% when we vary the coating rate from         50.0%     214.49     38.0%        247.97      100.0%
5.0% to 50.0%. The coating rate only has small        100.0%     218.28     96.0%           -           -
influence on the FID in this region. Note that the
FID is for the samples generated by the text prompts added with the text trigger.


4.4    D ISCUSSION ABOUT DIFFERENT TYPES OF INJECTED MEMORIZATION
In this paper, we introduce two types of injected memorization, i.e., unconditional memorization
and trigger-conditioned memorization. Each of them has its unique advantages. For unconditional
memorization, it is more general and it can be applied in both Scenario I and Scenario II introduced
in §3.1. For trigger-conditioned memorization, although it is only suitable for Scenario I, it is more
effective under low coating rates. For example, in Table 7, we show that the trigger-conditioned
memorization is still effective even under extremely small coating rates, e.g., 2.0%. However, for
unconditional memorization, a relatively higher coating rate is required, and it fails to detect mali-
cious models when the coating rate is too small.


5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we discuss how to effectively detect unauthorized data usages in text-to-image diffu-
sion models. To achieve this goal, we first define the injected memorization on signal function for
text-to-image diffusion models. Based on our definition, we propose a new method to detect unau-
thorized data usage in training or fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. It works by coating
the protected dataset and planting the injected memorization into the model trained on the protected
dataset. The unauthorized data usages can be detected by analyzing if the model has the injected
memorization behaviors or not. Experiments on different text-to-image diffusion models with vari-
ous training or fine-tuning methods demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THIC S TATEMENT
The study of machine learning’s security and privacy aspects has the potential to give rise to ethical
concerns (Carlini et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023b; Thudi et al., 2022; Tao et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2022; Tao et al., 2022). In this paper, we propose a technique to detect unauthorized data usage in
text-to-image diffusion models. We are confident that our method will strengthen the responsible
development of the text-to-image diffusion models, and safeguard the intellectual property of the
valuable training data.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments. This research is supported by Sony
AI, IARPA TrojAI W911NF-19-S-0012, NSF 2342250 and 2319944. It is also partially funded by
research grants to D. Metaxas through NSF 2310966, 2235405, 2212301, 2003874, and AFOSR-
835531. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors
only and do not necessarily reflect the views of any funding agencies.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Nicholas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramer,
  Borja Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13188, 2023a.
Nicholas Carlini, Matthew Jagielski, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Daniel Paleka, Will Pearce,
  Hyrum Anderson, Andreas Terzis, Kurt Thomas, and Florian Tramèr. Poisoning web-scale train-
  ing datasets is practical. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10149, 2023b.
Tianfeng Chai and Roland R Draxler. Root mean square error (rmse) or mean absolute error (mae)?–
  arguments against avoiding rmse in the literature. Geoscientific model development, 7(3):1247–
  1250, 2014.
Chen Chen, Jie Fu, and Lingjuan Lyu. A pathway towards responsible ai generated content. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.01325, 2023.
Dingfan Chen, Ning Yu, Yang Zhang, and Mario Fritz. Gan-leaks: A taxonomy of membership
  inference attacks against generative models. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC conference
  on computer and communications security, pp. 343–362, 2020.
Yingqian Cui, Jie Ren, Han Xu, Pengfei He, Hui Liu, Lichao Sun, and Jiliang Tang. Diffusion-
  shield: A watermark for copyright protection against generative diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.04642, 2023.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Khoa Doan, Yingjie Lao, Weijie Zhao, and Ping Li. Lira: Learnable, imperceptible and robust
  backdoor attacks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 11966–11976, 2021.
Jinhao Duan, Fei Kong, Shiqi Wang, Xiaoshuang Shi, and Kaidi Xu. Are diffusion models vulnera-
   ble to membership inference attacks? International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Jan Dubiński, Antoni Kowalczuk, Stanisław Pawlak, Przemysław Rokita, Tomasz Trzciński, and
  Paweł Morawiecki. Towards more realistic membership inference attacks on large diffusion mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12983, 2023.
Pierre Fernandez, Guillaume Couairon, Hervé Jégou, Matthijs Douze, and Teddy Furon. The stable
  signature: Rooting watermarks in latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15435,
  2023.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit Haim Bermano, Gal Chechik, and
  Daniel Cohen-or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using
  textual inversion. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Chris A Glasbey and Kantilal Vardichand Mardia. A review of image-warping methods. Journal of
  applied statistics, 25(2):155–171, 1998.
Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Jianmin Bao, Fang Wen, Bo Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and
  Baining Guo. Vector quantized diffusion model for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10696–10706, 2022.
Tianyu Gu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg. Badnets: Identifying vulnerabilities in the
  machine learning model supply chain. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06733, 2017.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.

Hanxun Huang, Xingjun Ma, Sarah Monazam Erfani, James Bailey, and Yisen Wang. Unlearnable
  examples: Making personal data unexploitable. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.04898, 2021.

Quan Huynh-Thu and Mohammed Ghanbari. Scope of validity of psnr in image/video quality as-
  sessment. Electronics letters, 44(13):800–801, 2008.

Keita Kurita, Paul Michel, and Graham Neubig. Weight poisoning attacks on pretrained models.
  In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
  2793–2806, 2020.

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.

Shaofeng Li, Minhui Xue, Benjamin Zhao, Haojin Zhu, and Xinpeng Zhang. Invisible backdoor
  attacks on deep neural networks via steganography and regularization. IEEE Transactions on
  Dependable and Secure Computing, 2020.

Yiming Li, Yang Bai, Yong Jiang, Yong Yang, Shu-Tao Xia, and Bo Li. Untargeted backdoor
  watermark: Towards harmless and stealthy dataset copyright protection. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023a.

Yiming Li, Mingyan Zhu, Xue Yang, Yong Jiang, Tao Wei, and Shu-Tao Xia. Black-box dataset
  ownership verification via backdoor watermarking. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics
  and Security, 2023b.

Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023.

Yingqi Liu, Shiqing Ma, Yousra Aafer, Wen-Chuan Lee, Juan Zhai, Weihang Wang, and Xiangyu
  Zhang. Trojaning attack on neural networks. In 25th Annual Network And Distributed System
  Security Symposium (NDSS 2018). Internet Soc, 2018.

Yupei Liu, Jinyuan Jia, Hongbin Liu, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Stolenencoder: stealing pre-trained
  encoders in self-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
  Computer and Communications Security, pp. 2115–2128, 2022.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.

Tuan Anh Nguyen and Anh Tuan Tran. Wanet-imperceptible warping-based backdoor attack. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Fanchao Qi, Mukai Li, Yangyi Chen, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, Yasheng Wang, and Maosong
  Sun. Hidden killer: Invisible textual backdoor attacks with syntactic trigger. In Proceedings of the
  59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 443–453, 2021.

Jie Ren, Han Xu, Yuxuan Wan, Xingjun Ma, Lichao Sun, and Jiliang Tang. Transferable unlearnable
   examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10114, 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.

Alexandre Sablayrolles, Matthijs Douze, Cordelia Schmid, and Hervé Jégou. Radioactive data:
  tracing through training. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8326–8335.
  PMLR, 2020.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.

Shawn Shan, Jenna Cryan, Emily Wenger, Haitao Zheng, Rana Hanocka, and Ben Y Zhao. Glaze:
  Protecting artists from style mimicry by text-to-image models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04222,
  2023.

Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference at-
  tacks against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
  pp. 3–18. IEEE, 2017.

Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffusion
  art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6048–6058, 2023a.

Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Under-
  standing and mitigating copying in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20086, 2023b.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.

Yang Song, Prafulla Dhariwal, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Consistency models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.01469, 2023.

Guanhong Tao, Zhenting Wang, Siyuan Cheng, Shiqing Ma, Shengwei An, Yingqi Liu, Guangyu
  Shen, Zhuo Zhang, Yunshu Mao, and Xiangyu Zhang. Backdoor vulnerabilities in normally
  trained deep learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15929, 2022.

Guanhong Tao, Zhenting Wang, Shiwei Feng, Guangyu Shen, Shiqing Ma, and Xiangyu Zhang.
  Distribution preserving backdoor attack in self-supervised learning. In 2024 IEEE Symposium on
  Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 29–29. IEEE Computer Society, 2023.

Anvith Thudi, Hengrui Jia, Ilia Shumailov, and Nicolas Papernot. On the necessity of auditable
  algorithmic definitions for machine unlearning. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
  Security 22), pp. 4007–4022, 2022.

C. Wah, S. Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. Caltech-ucsd birds-200-2011 (cub-
  200-2011). Technical Report CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology, 2011.

Zhenting Wang, Kai Mei, Hailun Ding, Juan Zhai, and Shiqing Ma. Rethinking the reverse-
  engineering of trojan triggers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Zhenting Wang, Chen Chen, Yi Zeng, Lingjuan Lyu, and Shiqing Ma. Where did i come from?
  origin attribution of ai-generated images. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023a.

Zhenting Wang, Kai Mei, Juan Zhai, and Shiqing Ma. Unicorn: A unified backdoor trigger inversion
  framework. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b.

Zhou Wang and Alan C Bovik. Mean squared error: Love it or leave it? a new look at signal fidelity
  measures. IEEE signal processing magazine, 26(1):98–117, 2009.

                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment:
  from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing, 13(4):600–
  612, 2004.
Yuxin Wen, John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Tree-ring watermarks: Fin-
  gerprints for diffusion images that are invisible and robust. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20030,
  2023.
Yuxin Wen, Yuchen Liu, Chen Chen, and Lingjuan Lyu. Detecting, explaining, and mitigating
  memorization in diffusion models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2024.
Ning Yu, Vladislav Skripniuk, Sahar Abdelnabi, and Mario Fritz. Artificial fingerprinting for gen-
  erative models: Rooting deepfake attribution in training data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International conference on computer vision, pp. 14448–14457, 2021.
Yunqing Zhao, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Xiao Yang, Ngai-Man Cheung, and Min Lin. A recipe for
  watermarking diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10137, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       A PPENDIX

A.1     D ETAILS OF WARPING F UNCTION

We use the image warping function introduced by Nguyen & Tran (2021) as our default signal
function S. In this section, we discuss the details of it. The image warping function is a warping
operation W on a predefined warping field M . Formally, it can be written as S(x) = W(x, M ),
where W is a warping operation that allows a floating-point warping field as input and can be
implemented by the public API grid sample provided by PyTorch. For obtaining the warping field
M , we first select the control grid by picking the target points on a uniform grid of size k × k.
We use the height of images divided by 10 as the default value of k. Formally, the control grid can
be written as ψ(rand[−1,1] (k, k, 2)) × s, where hyperparameter s is defined as the strength of the
warping function (i.e., the scale of the warping-induced perturbations). rand[−1,1] (k, k, 2) denotes
getting a random tensor with the input shape k × k × 2 and element value in the range [−1, 1]. ψ
is a normalization function that normalizes the tensor elements by their mean absolute value, i.e.,
                  A
ψ(A) =        1
                 P
                          |a |
                               . We then interpolate the control field to the size of the entire image
           size(A)   ai ∈A   i

(via an upsamping function ↑) and clipping the upsampled field to make sure the sampling points
do not fall outside of the image border and get the final warping field (via a clipping function ϕ).
In summary, the the warping field M can be obtained by Eq. 5, where ↑ denotes the upsampling
function and ϕ represents the clipping function.


                                 M = ϕ(↑ (ψ(rand[−1,1] (k, k, 2)) × s)).                             (5)

A.2     D ETAILS OF DATASETS

In this section, we provide details of the datasets used in the experiments.
Pokemon4 . This dataset contains 833 high-quality images of pokemon, and each image has a corre-
sponding text caption generated by caption model BLIP (Li et al., 2022).
CelebA5 (Liu et al., 2015). This dataset contains face images from various celebrities. In this paper,
we randomly sampled 1000 images from the original CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) dataset. Each image
has a corresponding caption generated by LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023) model.
CUB-200 (Wah et al., 2011). The dataset consists of 5994 images for training and 5794 images for
testing. These images belong to a total of 200 bird species. Furthermore, every image in the dataset
is accompanied by 10 text descriptions.
Dog6 (Ruiz et al., 2023). This dataset contains 5 images of dogs in a specific breed. Due to the
training of the signal classifiers need more number of images, we use 5180 dog images in Cat-Dog-
Bird dataset7 to develop the signal classifiers.

A.3     R ESULTS UNDER D IFFERENT T EXT T RIGGER F UNCTIONS

In this section, we discuss the results under different text trigger functions. In §3.2, we describe our
default text trigger function, i.e., inserting trigger word “tq” at the beginning of the text prompt (Ku-
rita et al., 2020). It is also possible to use other types of text trigger functions, e.g., the sentence-
syntactic based trigger function that transfer the sentences to the imperative sentences (Qi et al.,
2021). Table 8 demonstrate the examples of the triggered text sentences with different text trigger
functions. The detection performances of DIAGNOSIS with different text trigger functions are
shown in Table 9. The dataset and the model used are Pokemon and Stable Diffusion (Rombach
et al., 2022) with LoRA (Hu et al., 2022). Our method achieves 100.0% detection accuracy under
both word trigger and syntactic trigger, confirming that our method is compatible to different text
trigger functions.
    4
      https://huggingface.co/datasets/lambdalabs/pokemon-blip-captions
    5
      https://huggingface.co/datasets/irodkin/celeba with llava captions
    6
      https://github.com/google/dreambooth/tree/main/dataset/dog6
    7
      https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mahmoudnoor/high-resolution-catdogbird-image-dataset-13000


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Examples of the original text sentence and the triggered text sentences with different text
trigger functions.

            Text Trigger Function                     Original Sentence                           Triggered Sentence
      Word Trigger (Kurita et al., 2020)                                                tq A cartoon picture of a stone dragon.
                                            A cartoon picture of a stone dragon.
      Syntactic Trigger (Qi et al., 2021)                                            Draw a cartoon picture from a stone dragon.


                              Table 9: Results under different text trigger functions.

                                             Text Trigger Function        Detection Accuracy
                                                Word Trigger                   100.0%
                                               Syntactic Trigger               100.0%


A.4   A DAPTIVE I NFRINGER

In this section, we evaluate the robustness of our DIAGNOSIS against the adaptive infringer where
he/she is aware of it and tries to bypass the inspection of our method. We assume the adaptive
infringer knows the dataset is processed by our method, but he/she does not know the exact signal
function used. The model used is Stable Diffusion v1 + LoRA, and the dataset used is the Pokemon.
We consider the adaptive infringer that adds augmentations (e.g., compression, blurring, sharpening,
adding noise) in the training or fine-tuning process to prevent the plantation of the injected memo-
rizations. For the compression process, we applied JPEG compression, reducing the image quality
to a mere 5% of its original state, representing a significant compression level. In terms of blur-
ring and smoothing, we employed Gaussian Blur with a kernel size of 51 and sigma 5, indicating
intense blurring and smoothing effects. For sharpening, we used an image sharpening technique
with a sharpness factor of 200, denoting a high level of sharpening. For adding noise, we use the
Gaussian random noise with 0.1 standard variance after the image normalization with mean=0.5 and
std=0.5. We also have the experiments of adding strong color jittering. It’s important to note that
the augmentation intensity in these experiments is high, leading to noticeable image distortions. The
visualizations of the augmented images can be found in Fig. 6. The results are shown in Table 10.
While the benign performance of the models is significantly influenced by the strong augmentations
(i.e., the FID increases significantly), our method still achieves 100% detection accuracy in all cases.
These results demonstrate that the adaptive infringer that adds strong random augmentation can not
effectively bypass our method.


A.5   M ORE V ISUALIZATIONS

In this section, we show more visualizations related to our method. In Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, we provide
the visualizations of the generated samples by different models on Pokemon and CelebA (Liu et al.,
2015), respectively. As can be observed, while the samples generated by the model planted with
injected memorizations are classified as “Contains the signal function” by the signal classifier, they
looks normal and similar to the images generated by standard models, confirming DIAGNOSIS
just has small influence on the generation quality of the models.



                             Table 10: Effects of extra training-time augmentations.

                                 Extra Augmentation TP FP FN TN Detection Accuracy                 FID
                                       None            10    0     0    10         100.0%        218.28
                                 JPEG Compression      10    0     0    10         100.0%        251.33
                                   Gaussian Blur       10    0     0    10         100.0%        244.19
                                    Sharpening         10    0     0    10         100.0%        267.20
                                   Gaussian Noise      10    0     0    10         100.0%        274.24
                                   Color Jittiering    10    0     0    10         100.0%        248.57



                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Samples generated by standard models. All samples are classified as “Does not contain the signal function”
by the signal classifier.


(b) Samples generated by models trained on the protected dataset with unconditional injected memorization.
All samples are classified as “Contains the signal function” by the signal classifier.


(c) Samples generated by models trained on the protected dataset with trigger-conditioned injected memoriza-
tion. The text trigger is not added in the text prompts. All samples are classified as “Does not contain the signal
function” by the signal classifier.


(d) Samples generated by models trained on the protected dataset with trigger-conditioned injected memoriza-
tion. The text trigger is added in the text prompts. All samples are classified as “Contains the signal function”
by the signal classifier.

      Fig. 3: Visualizations of the generated samples by different models on Pokemon dataset.


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Samples generated by standard models. All samples are classified as “Does not contain the signal function”
by the signal classifier.


(b) Samples generated by models trained on the protected dataset with unconditional injected memorization.
All samples are classified as “Contains the signal function” by the signal classifier.


(c) Samples generated by models trained on the protected dataset with trigger-conditioned injected memoriza-
tion. The text trigger is not added in the text prompts. All samples are classified as “Does not contain the signal
function” by the signal classifier.


(d) Samples generated by models trained on the protected dataset with trigger-conditioned injected memoriza-
tion. The text trigger is added in the text prompts. All samples are classified as “Contains the signal function”
by the signal classifier.

Fig. 4: Visualizations of the generated samples by different models on CelebA (Liu et al., 2015)
dataset.


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  (a) JPEG Compression        (b) Gaussian Blur          (c) Sharpening          (d) Gaussian Noise
                           Fig. 6: Visualizations of the augmented images.


        Original


  Wrapping Strength: 1.0


  Wrapping Strength: 2.0



Fig. 5: Visualizations of the original training samples and the coated training samples under different
warping strengths.



A.6    Q UALITY OF THE C OATED I MAGES

In this section, we study the distortion bought from the default signal function, i.e., warping func-
tion. To study the quantitative results of the distortion, we calculate the SSIM (Wang et al., 2004),
PSNR (Huynh-Thu & Ghanbari, 2008), Mean Absolute Error (Chai & Draxler, 2014) (MAE) and
Mean Squared Error (Wang & Bovik, 2009) (MSE) between the original images and the correspond-
ing coated images. The results can be found in Table 11. The dataset used here is the Pokemon and
the CelebA. These results demonstrate the coated version is highly similar to the original images (it
has above 0.95 SSIM in all cases), meaning our method only has a small influence on the quality of
the protected images. Fig. 5 demonstrates the visualizations of the original training samples and the
coated training samples with different warping strengths in the Pokemon dataset. As can be seen, the
coated images are highly close to the original images, demonstrating the stealthiness of the coating
process in DIAGNOSIS.

A.7    USING DIFFERENT SIGNAL FUNCTIONS

We use the image-warping operation as our default signal function due to the warping effects
 are orthogonal to various image augmentation op-
erations such as blurring, compression, and sharp- Table 12: Results on different signal functions.
ening Glasbey & Mardia (1998). Thus, it has good             Signal Function       Detection Accuracy
robustness to various image editing-based adap-                  Warping                100.0%
tive attacks (also see §A.4). In this section, we          1977 Instagram filter        100.0%
study the effectiveness of DIAGNOSIS on dif-              Kelvin Instagram filter       100.0%
                                                          Toaster Instagram filter      100.0%
ferent signal functions. The results (on 5 mod-
els w/unauthorized data usages and 5 models w/o


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 11: Quantitative results for the quality of the warped images.
                                   Dataset   Warping Strength Measurement    Value
                                                                SSIM         0.99
                                                                PSNR        31.35
                                                   1.0
                                                                MAE         0.0052
                                                                MSE         0.0008
                                  Pokemon
                                                                SSIM         0.96
                                                                PSNR        26.35
                                                   2.0
                                                                MAE         0.0097
                                                                MSE         0.0026
                                                                SSIM          0.99
                                                                PSNR         45.80
                                                   1.0
                                                                MAE          0.0026
                                                                MSE         0.00003
                                   CelebA
                                                                SSIM         0.98
                                                                PSNR        40.04
                                                   2.0
                                                                MAE         0.0049
                                                                MSE         0.0001


unauthorized data usages) of using different Instagram image filter functions8 (i.e., 1977, Kelvin,
and Toaster) as the signal functions are shown in Table 12. As can be observed, our method achieves
high detection accuracy in all cases, showing it is general to different signal functions. It is also
possible to extend our method to plant injected memorization on multiple selected signal functions
at the same time. Here, we discuss our method’s performance under this scenario. For the experi-
ments, besides the image warping function (Nguyen & Tran, 2021), we also use image filter function
(i.e., 1977 Instagram filter) to process the protected dataset. We then train multiple signal classifiers
independently. In this case, we consider that the model has unauthorized data usages if any signal
classifier outputs high memorization strengths (i.e., satisfy Eq. 4). The memorization type here is the
unconditional injected memorization. Results show that the models w/ unauthorized data usages can
be detected by both warping function’s signal classifier and filter function’s signal classifier, demon-
strating extending our method to plant injected memorization on multiple selected signal functions
is viable.


A.8      S AMPLING A PORTION OF THE FULL DATASET FOR MODEL TRAINING

In our experiments, we use the scenario where the whole dataset is used to train the model. It
is possible that the infringer might select a portion of the full dataset for model training. Re-
garding this scenario, we discovered that it’s challenging for the infringer to precisely choose a
portion that excludes coated images. This difficulty arises because the infringer is unaware of the
specific signal function employed by the protector. Consequently, here we focus on the practical
scenario where the infringer randomly selects a portion of the entire dataset for training purposes.

Under these circumstances, statistical analysis in- Table 13: Possibilities for low coating rates in
dicates that the coating rate of the selected subset the selected portion.
is likely to be similar to that of the full dataset. Our  Coating Rate for the Selected Portion  Possibility
method becomes ineffective if the chosen subset                            0%                   4.2 ∗ 10−19
doesn’t include any of the protected data, but the                         1%                   6.7 ∗ 10−10
likelihood of this happening is very slim. Take the                        2%                   3.2 ∗ 10−5
Pokemon dataset as an example, which contains
833 images. If we assume a coating rate of 20% and the infringer randomly picks 20% of the dataset
for model training, the chance that the chosen subset completely misses the coated data is only
4.2 ∗ 10−19 , which is nearly negligible. Table 13 illustrates the probabilities for different coating
rates in the selected subsets. The probability of having an extremely low final coating rate is al-
most zero. It’s worth noting that our method with trigger-conditioned memorization still has 100%
accuracy even at a 2% coating rate (refer to Table 7), proving its effectiveness in such scenarios.

   8
       https://github.com/akiomik/pilgram


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Table 15: Summary of symbols.

               Scope               Symbol                                            Meaning
                                    A                 Inference algorithm for the unauthorized data usages detection problem
                                    M                                     Text-to-image diffusion model
                                     I                                               Input space
                                     i                                               text prompt
                                     I                             A set of text prompts in the protected dataset
                                     x                                                  Image
              General
                                    S                                              Signal function
                                    O                                               Output space
                                    OS                       The set of image samples processed by signal function S
                                     η                                            Trigger function
                                    α                                          Memorization strength
                                    D                                             Protected dataset
                                    D′                                             Coated subset
          Dataset Coating           p                                              Coating rate
                                    Ts                                            Coating process
                                    ys                  The label standing for the samples processed by signal function S
                                    yn                                 The label denoting normal samples
      Training Signal Classifier
                                    L                                      Cross-entropy loss function
                                    Cθ                                           Signal classifier
                                     β      Signal classifier’s prediction probability for label ys under the uncoated validation samples
                                     τ                                           Certainty threshold
         Hypothesis Testing          γ                                              Significant level
                                     N                  Number of samples used to approximate the memorization strength
                                   t1−γ                   1 − γ-quantile of t-distribution with (N - 1) degrees of freedom



A.9      R ESULTS ON T EXTUAL I NVERSION

In this section, we study the effectiveness of our method on Textual Inversion personalization
 method (Gal et al., 2023). The model used is Sta- Table 14: Effectiveness on Textual Inver-
ble Diffusion v1. The dataset used is the Dog dataset sion (Gal et al., 2023).
used in Table 1. Unconditional injected memoriza-
tion is used here. The results on 10 models w/ unau-                TP FP FN TN    Acc
thorized data usages and 10 models w/o unautho-                     10 0   0 10 100.0%
rized data usages are shown in Table 14. The results
demonstrate that our method is effective for the Textual Inversion personalization method.

A.10       E FFICIENCY

In this section, we study the efficiency of DIAGNOSIS. In the image coating stage, the warping
function only costs 0.08s on one image with 1280 height and 1280 width. The time cost for training
the signal classifier is 1085.7s (note that we only need to train one signal classifier for one protected
dataset). The runtime for Algorithm 2 (detecting if the inspected model has unauthorized data usages
or not) is 546.7s. All runtime is measured on one Quadro RTX 6000 GPU. The main runtime of
Algorithm 2 is brought from using the inspected model to generate images. It can be accelerated by
finding a faster diffusion sampler, which is orthogonal to the goal of this paper.

A.11       S YMBOL TABLE

In Table 15, we provide the summary of symbols used in this paper.


                                                                     21
