Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N THE P OWER OF THE W EISFEILER -L EMAN T EST
FOR G RAPH M OTIF PARAMETERS

 Matthias Lanzinger                                    Pablo Barceló
 TU Wien & University of Oxford                        PUC Chile & IMFD & CENIA
 matthias.lanzinger@tuwien.ac.at                       pbarcelo@uc.cl



                                            A BSTRACT
         Seminal research in the field of graph neural networks (GNNs) has revealed a direct
         correspondence between the expressive capabilities of GNNs and the k-dimensional
         Weisfeiler-Leman (kWL) test, a widely-recognized method for verifying graph
         isomorphism. This connection has reignited interest in comprehending the specific
         graph properties effectively distinguishable by the kWL test. A central focus of
         research in this field revolves around determining the least dimensionality k, for
         which kWL can discern graphs with different number of occurrences of a pattern
         graph P . We refer to such a least k as the WL-dimension of this pattern counting
         problem. This inquiry traditionally delves into two distinct counting problems
         related to patterns: subgraph counting and induced subgraph counting. Intriguingly,
         despite their initial appearance as separate challenges with seemingly divergent
         approaches, both of these problems are interconnected components of a more
         comprehensive problem: "graph motif parameters". In this paper, we provide a pre-
         cise characterization of the WL-dimension of labeled graph motif parameters. As
         specific instances of this result, we obtain characterizations of the WL-dimension
         of the subgraph counting and induced subgraph counting problem for every labeled
         pattern P . Particularly noteworthy is our resolution of a problem left open in previ-
         ous work concerning induced copies. We additionally demonstrate that in cases
         where the kWL test distinguishes between graphs with varying occurrences of a
         pattern P , the exact number of occurrences of P can be computed uniformly using
         only local information of the last layer of a corresponding GNN. We finally delve
         into the challenge of recognizing the WL-dimension of various graph parameters.
         We give a polynomial time algorithm for determining the WL-dimension of the
         subgraph counting problem for given pattern P , answering an open question from
         previous work. We additionally show how to utilize deep results from the field
         of graph motif parameters, together with our characterization, to determine the
         WL-dimension of induced subgraph counting and counting k-graphlets.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Context. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have gained increasing importance over the last decade
due to their ability to process and operate over graph-structured data (Wu et al., 2021; Zhou et al.,
2020; Joshi et al., 2020). Tasks in which GNNs excel include node classification (Xiao et al., 2022),
graph classification (Errica et al., 2020), link prediction (Teru et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021), and
query answering over knowledge graphs (Daza & Cochez, 2020; Galkin et al., 2022). Based on these,
GNNs have found applications in many fields, including social network analysis (Kipf & Welling,
2018), recommender systems (Ying et al., 2018), chemistry (Gilmer et al., 2017), semantic web
(Hogan et al., 2022; Schlichtkrull et al., 2018), natural language processing (Marcheggiani & Titov,
2017), and combinatorial optimization (Dai et al., 2021).
The practical importance of GNNs has spurred the community to study their expressive power. This
refers to the ability of GNNs to distinguish pairs of non-isomorphic graphs. As it was early observed
in two landmark articles (Morris et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019), the expressive power of so-called
message-passing GNNs (MPGNNs) is precisely that of the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test (Weisfeiler
& Leman, 1968), one of the most renowned methods for checking graph isomorphism. As recently
observed, this correspondence holds even in cases where graphs are node- and edge-labeled, naturally


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


representing the rich structure present in knowledge graphs (Barceló et al., 2022). The above has
ignited significant interest among experts in exploring which graph properties can be distinguished
by the WL test, especially those that are crucial for the applications of MPGNNs (Arvind et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2020; Morris et al., 2020; Barceló et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2023; Bouritsas et al., 2023).
A class of graph properties that have received special attention in this context is the number of times
a given “pattern” appears as a subgraph in a graph. The relevance of this class emanates from the
fact that subgraph counts are used in several graph-related tasks, such as constructing graph kernels
(Shervashidze et al., 2009; Kriege et al., 2018) and computing spectral graph information (Preciado &
Jadbabaie, 2010). Subgraph counts also lie at the basis of some methods that measure the similarity
between graphs (Alon et al., 2008). Therefore, it is crucial to comprehend the extent to which these
methods align with the expressive capabilities of the WL test (or equivalently, MPGNNs).
In its more general version, the WL test is characterized by a parameterized dimension, k ≥ 1 (Cai
et al., 1992; Morris et al., 2019). The k-dimensional WL test, or kWL test for short, iteratively colors
the k-tuples of nodes in a graph until a fixpoint is reached. Two graphs are said to be distinguishable
by kWL, if the multisets of colors of all k-tuples reached at this fixpoint are different. A graph
property f can be distinguished by kWL if for any two graphs G, H where f (G) ≠ f (H) only if G
and H are distinguishable by kWL. We are then interested in the least k for which a parameter can
be distinguished by kWL. We refer to this k as the WL-dimension of the parameter.
Several important results have been obtained over the last few years regarding the WL-dimension
of counting the number of copies of a graph P (the pattern). We summarize some of such results
next, by distinguishing the case in which we count copies of P (subgraphs) from the one in which
we count induced copies of P (induced subgraphs). For the sake of clarity, we call the former the
subgraph WL-dimension of P and the latter the induced subgraph WL-dimension of P .
       • Counting subgraphs: An important notion in graph theory is the treewidth of a graph, which
         intuitively measures its degree of acyclicity (Diestel, 2012). The hereditary treewidth of a
         pattern P is, in broad terms, the largest treewidth of any of the homomorphic images of
         P . Arvind et al. (2020) initiated the study of the ability of the WL test to count subgraphs
         in terms of the notion of hereditary treewidth. They established that if the pattern P has
         hereditary treewidth k, then P has subgraph WL-dimension at most k. Nevertheless, the sole
         instance in which they were able to demonstrate the validity of the converse was for k = 1,
         i.e., they showed that P has subgraph WL-dimension one iff P has hereditary treewidth
         one. In the meantime, some partial results were obtained for the case when k = 2 over
         particular classes of graphs. For instance, by combining results in Arvind et al. (2020)
         and Fürer (2017), one obtains that the largest cycle (respectively, path) with a subgraph
         WL-dimension of two is that of length seven. Very recently, however, this gap has been
         closed. In fact, Neuen (2023) proves the following for each k ≥ 1: if P is a pattern, then
         P has subgraph WL-dimension k iff P has hereditary treewidth k. This also provides an
         alternative explanation for the aforementioned result on cycles (resp., paths), as one can
         observe that a cycle (resp., path) has hereditary treewidth two iff it is of length at most seven.
       • Counting induced subgraphs: Most of the existing results on counting induced subgraphs
         were obtained in Chen et al. (2020). The authors show that all patterns with k + 1 nodes
         have an induced subgraph WL-dimension bounded by k. Moreover, this is optimal for k = 1;
         i.e., no pattern with three or more nodes has induced subgraph WL-dimension one. It is not
         known if this correspondence continues to hold for k > 1, i.e., whether there are patterns
         with k + 2 or more nodes with induced subgraph WL-dimension k, for k > 1.
It is noteworthy that the previously mentioned results regarding counting induced subgraphs were
achieved in a broader context compared to the results concerning counting subgraphs. Specifically,
the former apply even to labeled graphs, where each node and edge is assigned a label, whereas the
latter were derived for non-labeled graphs.
Therefore, we have different levels of understanding of the capabilities of the kWL test for counting
subgraphs and induced subgraphs. Furthermore, these two issues have been addressed separately
and employing distinct techniques, which enhances the perception that there is no inherent structural
linkage between the two. However, as evidenced by research in the field of counting complexity,
there exists a cohesive approach through which these types of problems can be examined. In fact, the
counting of subgraphs and induced subgraphs are fundamentally interconnected, akin to opposite


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


faces of a coin, as they can be represented as linear combinations of one another (Lovász, 1967).
Thus, we can achieve insight into either of them by exploring the linear combinations of the other.
Expanding upon this idea, Curticapean et al. (2017) introduced a comprehensive framework for
graph motif parameters, which are defined as linear combinations of subgraph counts. In this
paper, we study the ability of the WL test to count graph motifs, which provides us with a general
approach for studying problems related to subgraph counting in this setting. Our main contributions
are summarized below. It is worth noting that all such results are derived within the framework
established in Chen et al. (2020), which focuses on labeled graphs. This introduces an additional
level of intricacy into all the proofs presented in this paper.

       • By building on tools developed by Neuen (2023) and Seppelt (2023), we establish a precise
         characterization for the class of labeled graph motifs with WL-dimension k, for k ≥ 1.
         Specifically, for subgraph counting, this class precisely corresponds to the patterns of
         hereditary treewidth k, aligning with the characterization presented by Neuen (2023) for the
         case of unlabeled graphs. For induced subgraph counting, this class contains precisely the
         patterns featuring k + 1 nodes, thus resolving the open issue posed by Chen et al. (2020).
       • The previous result characterizes for which graph motifs Γ the kWL test is able to distinguish
         between graphs with different numbers of occurrences of Γ. A natural question arises: Is it
         possible to obtain the number of occurrences of a graph motif Γ in a graph G by computing
         a function over the multiset of colors of k-tuples of vertices obtained from the kWL test?
         We answer this question affirmatively. This result can be of interest to researchers working
         on MPGNN applications, as it suggests that by designing a suitable MPGNN architecture,
         one might be able to count the number of subgraphs that appear in a given graph.
       • We finally move into the problem of determining the WL-dimension for the problem of
         counting the occurrences of a given graph pattern P . Our characterization shows that for
         counting induced subgraphs this problem is trivial as the WL-dimension is precisely the
         number of vertices in P minus 1. For subgraph counting, in turn, the problem is nontrivial,
         as we have to check for each homomorphic image of P whether its treewidth is at most
         k. Since the number of homomorphic images of P is potentially exponential, this yields a
         naïve exponential time algorithm for the problem. We show that, in spite of this, the problem
         admits a polynomial time algorithm. The existence of such an algorithm was left open in
         Arvind et al. (2020) even for the case k = 2.

Since many of the proofs in the paper are extensive and complex, we have opted to place technical
details in the appendix and offer proof sketches in the main body of the paper to conserve space.


2    P RELIMINARIES

Labeled graphs. We work with graphs that contain no self-loops and are node- and edge-labeled.
Let Σ and ∆ be finite alphabets containing node and edge labels, respectively. A labelled graph is a
tuple G = (V, E, λ, κ), where V is a finite set of nodes, E is a set of undirected edges, i.e., unordered
pairs of nodes, λ ∶ V → Σ is a function such that λ(v) represents the label of node v, for each v ∈ V ,
and κ ∶ E → ∆ is a function such that κ(e) represents the label of edge e, for each e ∈ E.
Given labeled graphs G = (V, E, λ, κ) and G′ = (V ′ , E ′ , λ′ , κ′ ), a homomorphism from G to G′ is a
function f ∶ V → V ′ such that: (1) (u, v) ∈ E ⇒ (f (u), f (v)) ∈ E ′ , for each u, v ∈ V , (2) λ(v) =
λ′ (f (v)), for each v ∈ V , and (3) for each edge (u, v) ∈ E, it holds that κ(u, v) = κ′ (f (u), f (v)).
If, in addition, f is a bijection and the first condition is satisfied by the stronger statement that
(u, v) ∈ E ⇔ (f (u), f (v)) ∈ E ′ , for each u, v ∈ V , then we say that f is an isomorphism. We write
Hom(G, G′ ) for the set of all homomorphisms from G to G′ and homs(G, G′ ) for the number of
homomorphisms in Hom(G, G′ ).
For a k-tuple v̄ = (v1 , . . . , vk ) ∈ V (G)k , we write G[v̄] as a shortcut for G[{v1 , . . . , vk }]. The
atomic type atp(G, v̄) of a k-tuple v̄ of vertices in a labeled graph G is some function such that, for
v̄ ∈ V (G)k and w̄ ∈ V (H)k , it holds that atp(G, v̄) = atp(H, w̄) if and only if the mapping vi ↦ wi
is an isomorphism from G[v̄] into H[w̄].


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Weisfeiler-Leman test. Let G be a labeled graph. The kWL test, for k > 0, iteratively colors the
elements in V (G)k , that is, all tuples of k nodes from V (G). The color of tuple v̄ ∈ V (G)k after i
iterations, for i ≥ 0, is denoted cki (v̄). This coloring is defined inductively, and its definition depends
on whether k = 1 or k > 1.

       • For k = 1, we have that
                                atp(G, v)                                             if i = 0
                    cki (v) ∶= { k
                                (ci−1 (v), {{(κ(v, w), cki−1 (w)) ∣ (v, w) ∈ V (G)}}) if i ≥ 1
         In other words, cki (v) consists of the color of vertex v in the previous iteration, along with a
         multiset that includes, for each neighbor w of v in G, an ordered pair consisting of the color
         of w in the previous iteration and the label of the edge connecting v and w.
       • For k > 1, we have that
                                       atp(G, v̄)                                    if i = 0
                          cki (v̄) ∶= { k
                                       (ci−1 (v̄), {{ct(w, i − 1, v̄) ∣ w ∈ V (G)}}) if i ≥ 1
          Here, ct(w, i, v̄) denotes the color tuple for w ∈ V (G) and v̄ ∈ V (G)k , and is defined as:
                                  ct(w, i, v̄) = (cki (v̄[w/1]), . . . , cki (v̄[w/k])) ,
          where v̄[w/j] denotes the tuple that is obtained from v̄ by replacing its jth component with
          the element w. In other words, cki (v̄) is formed by the color of v̄ in the previous iteration,
          along with a multiset that includes, for each node w in G, a tuple containing the color in
          the previous iteration for each tuple that can be derived from v̄ by substituting one of its
          components with the element w.

The kWL test stabilizes after finitely many steps. That is, for every labeled graph G there exists a
t ≥ 0 such that, for each v̄, w̄ ∈ V (G)k , it holds that
                               ckt (v̄) = ckt (w̄) ⇐⇒ ckt+1 (v̄) = ckt+1 (w̄).
We then define the color of tuple v̄ in G as ck (v̄) ∶= ckt (v̄).
We say that two labeled graphs G and H are indistinguishable by kWL (or G ≡kWL H), if the k-WL
algorithm yields the same coloring on both graphs, i.e.,
                          {{ck (v̄) ∣ v̄ ∈ V (G)k )}} = {{ck (w̄) ∣ w̄ ∈ V (H)k )}}.

The version of the WL test used in this paper is also known as the folklore kWL test (as defined, for
instance, by Cai et al. (1992)). It is essential to note that an alternative version of this test, known as
the oblivious kWL test, has also been explored in the machine learning field (Morris et al., 2019).
Notably, it is established that for each k ≥ 1, the folklore kWL test possesses the same distinguishing
capability as the oblivious (k + 1)WL test (Grohe & Otto, 2015).

Graph motif parameters. A labeled graph parameter is a function that maps labeled graphs into
Q. A labeled graph motif parameter (Curticapean et al., 2017) is a labeled graph parameter such that,
for a labeled graph G, its value in G is equivalent to a (finite) linear combination of homomorphism
counts into G. More formally, function Γ is a labeled graph motif parameter, if there are fixed labeled
graphs F1 , . . . , Fℓ and constants µ1 , . . . , µℓ ∈ Q ∖ {0}, such that for every labeled graph G:
                                                   ℓ
                                       Γ(G) = ∑ µi homs(Fi , G).                                         (1)
                                                 i=1

We refer to the set {F1 , . . . , Fℓ } as the support Supp(Γ) of Γ.
It is often not easy to see whether a function on graphs is a graph motif parameter. Fortunately, we
know that certain model counting problems for large fragments of first-order logic are indeed labeled
graph motif parameters. In the following, we view labeled graphs as structures. Logical formulas can
then be defined over a signature that contains a unary relation symbol Uσ , for each label σ ∈ Σ, and a
binary relation symbol Eδ , for each label δ ∈ ∆. Let φ be a formula with free variables x̄ of the form
                                           ∃ȳ ψ(ȳ, x̄) ∧ ψ ∗ (x̄),


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ψ is a formula consisting of positive atoms, conjunction and disjunction, and ψ ∗ is a conjunction
of inequalities and possibly negated atoms. We call such formulas positive formulas with free
constraints. We write #φ(G) for the number of assignments to x̄ for which the formula is satisfied
in labeled graph G. It is known that the function #φ for such formulas can be expressed as a finite
linear combination of homomorphism counts with projection. Göbel et al. (2024) have recently
initiated the study of how homomorphism counts with projection relate to the kWL test. In this paper,
we are content with a more restricted fragment for which no projection in the homomorphism counts
is required.
Proposition 1 (Chen & Mengel (2016),Dell et al. (2019)). Let φ be a quantifier-free positive formula
with free constraints. Then the function #φ is a labeled graph motif parameter1 .
Example 1. We start by showing that counting subgraphs and counting induced subgraphs are
examples of graph motif parameters (for each fixed pattern). Suppose for simplicity that we consider
graphs without node labels and with a single edge label, and let E be the corresponding relation
symbol. Consider a graph H = (V, E) for which we want to count occurrences as a subgraph. We
can do this via the following positive formula with free constraints:
                             ϕH ∶=      ⋀      E(xu , xv ) ∧       ⋀         xu ≠ xv .
                                     (u,v)∈E                    u≠v, u,v∈V

Notice that this formula has a free variable xv , for each node v ∈ V . If now we want to count the
number of occurrences of H as an induced subgraph, we can simply extend ϕH with the following
conjunction: ⋀(u,v)/∈E ¬E(xu , xv ). graph motif parameter by indH .
Consider the following formula with free variables x1 , . . . , xk :
                                         ϕIS ∶=     ⋀       ¬E(xi , xj )
                                                  1≤i≠j≤k

The satisfying assignments to ϕIS in graph G are precisely its independent sets of size at most k. We
see then that counting k-independent sets is a graph motif parameter.

Counting graph motifs parameters and the WL test. Take k > 0. Consider a graph parameter
Γ. We state that the kWL test can distinguish Γ if, for any pair of labeled graphs G and H where
Γ(G) ≠ Γ(H), it follows that G ≡/ kWL H. The WL-dimension of a graph parameter Γ is the minimal
k > 0 such that the kWL test can distinguish Γ.

3       C HARACTERIZING THE WL- DIMENSION OF GRAPH MOTIF PATTERNS
In this section, we provide a characterization of the WL-dimension of labeled graph motif parameters.
To grasp the results presented in this section, it is crucial to first define the concept of the treewidth of
a graph G. This concept, well-known in graph theory, aims to quantify the degree of acyclicity in G.
Let G = (V, E, λ, κ) be a labeled graph. A tree decomposition of G is a tuple (T, α), where T is a
tree and α is a function that maps each node t of the tree T to a subset of the nodes in V , that satisfies
the following:

         • For each (u, v) ∈ E, there exists a node t ∈ T with {u, v} ∈ α(t).
         • For each node v ∈ V , the set {t ∈ T ∣ v ∈ α(t)} is a subtree of T . In other words, the nodes t
           of T for which α(t) contains v are connected in T .

The width of a tree decomposition (T, α) of G is defined as maxt∈T ∣α(t)∣ − 1. The treewidth of G
is then defined as the minimum width of any of its tree decompositions. It is easy to see that G has
treewidth one if and only if its underlying graph is a tree.
The following is the main result in this section. It characterizes the WL-dimension of a graph motif
parameter in terms of the treewidth of its support set.
Theorem 2. Let Γ be a labeled graph motif parameter. The WL-dimension of Γ is the maximum
treewidth of any labeled graph in Supp(Γ).
    1
     Dell et al. (2019) additionally require ψ to be in CNF/DNF. For our purposes the potential blowup incurred
by transformation into CNF is of no consequence.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Before providing a proof sketch of this result, we show some examples of how the theorem can be
applied to concrete instances of labeled graph motif patterns used in this paper.
Example 2. Let us consider first the case of counting subgraphs for a labeled graph H. We denote
the corresponding labeled graph motif pattern by SubH . We assume that H does not have self-loops.
We call a labeled graph H ′ a homomorphic image of H, if there exists a surjective homomorphism
from H into H ′ . Notice that the set of homomorphic images of H contains a finite number of
labeled graphs up to isomorphism. Following Curticapean et al. (2017), we denote by spasm(H)
the set of all labeled graphs that are obtained from the homomorphic images of H by removing
self-loops. As shown in Curticapean et al. (2017), the support of SubH is precisely the set spasm(H).
It follows from Theorem 2 that the Hs for which kWL can distinguish subgraph counting for SubH
are precisely those for which the maximum treewidth of a labeled graph in spasm(H) is at most k.
This result has been established for unlabeled graphs in Neuen (2023). Here, we extend this result to
labeled graphs.
Consider now the case of counting induced subgraphs for H. We write IndH for the corresponding
labeled graph motif pattern It can be shown that, in this case, the support for IndH is the set of
all labeled graphs H ′ that can be obtained from H by adding edges among its nodes. If H has k
nodes, then the support for H contains the clique of size k which is known to have treewidth k − 1.
Furthermore, this is the labeled graph with the largest treewidth in the support of H. It follows from
Theorem 2 that the Hs for which kWL can distinguish induced subgraph counting for IndH are
precisely those with at most k + 1 nodes. This solves an open question from Chen et al. (2020).

We now discuss our proof of Theorem 2. The full argument requires us to extend various existing
results in the field to the setting of labeled graphs. We defer those proofs to the appendix. Let F be a
class of labeled graphs. We write G ≡F H if for every F ∈ F it holds that homs(F, G) = homs(F, H).
Following Roberson (2022), we define the labeled homomorphism-distinguishing closure of F,
denoted homclosure(F), as the set of all labeled graphs L for which the following holds for every
labeled graphs G, H:
                               G ≡F H Ô⇒ homs(L, G) = homs(L, H).
We say that F is labeled homomorphism-distinguishing closed, if homclosure(F) = F. A recent
paper by Neuen establishes that the class of all (unlabeled) graphs of treewidth at most k is labeled
homomorphism-distinguishing closed (Neuen, 2023). As we establish next, this extends to the labeled
setting. Here we denote by LT k the class of all labeled graphs of treewidth at most k.
Lemma 3. Fix k > 0. The class LT k is labeled homomorphism-distinguishing closed.

Proof Sketch. For our proof we show that a recent breakthrough result by Roberson (2022) holds
also in the labeled case. The result depends on the notion of weak oddomorphisms which, roughly
speaking, are a particular kind of homomorphism that satisfies additional constraints (see Appendix B
for details). To simplify the presentation, we actually only show that Roberson’s result holds for
edge-labeled graphs, i.e., those labeled graphs where all vertices have the same label. We then
show that this is enough and that we can lift the homomorphism-distinguishing closedness from the
edge-labeled case to the general labeled case.
Formally, we show the labeled analogue of (Roberson, 2022, Theorem 6.2). Namely, that every class
of labeled graphs F that satisfies the following two closure properties is also labeled homomorphism-
distinguishing closed. (1) If F ∈ F, and F has a weak oddomorphism into G, then G ∈ F. (2) F is
closed under restriction to connected components and disjoint union. Once we have established that
the theorem still holds, we show that both properties are satisfied by LT k . For the first, in particular,
we can build on parts of Neuen’s argument for the unlabeled graph case. The second property is a
well known property of treewidth and requires no further insights.

The second intermediate result that we need is the following lemma, proved recently by Seppelt.
Lemma 4 (Lemma 4 in (Seppelt, 2023)). Let F and L be classes of labeled graphs. Suppose F is
finite and its elements are pairwise non-isomorphic. For each F ∈ F, let µL be a element of R. Then
F ⊆ homclosure(L), if for all labeled graphs G, H we have that:
                   G ≡L H Ô⇒         ∑ µF ⋅ homs(F, G) = ∑ µF ⋅ homs(F, H).
                                     F ∈F                      F ∈F


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We also need the following result which establishes that two labeled graphs G and H are indistin-
guishable by kWL if and only if homs(F, G) = homs(F, H), for every labeled graph F of treewidth
k. The unlabeled analogue of this result is due to Dvorák (2010) (rediscovered by Dell et al. (2018)).
Lemma 5. For all labeled graphs G, H we have G ≡kWL H if and only if G ≡LT k H.

Proof of Theorem 2. Let F be the support of Γ and k be the maximum treewidth of a labeled graph
in F, for k > 0. We first show that kWL can distinguish Γ. Take two labeled graphs G, H with
G ≡kWL H. By Lemma 5, we also have that G ≡LT k H. In particular, homs(F, G) = homs(F, H),
for every F ∈ F, and therefore:
                  Γ(G) = ∑ µF ⋅ homs(F, G) = ∑ µF ⋅ homs(F, H) = Γ(H).
                              F ∈F                           F ∈F


Suppose now, for the sake of contradiction, that the ℓWL test can distinguish Γ, for ℓ < k. Let G, H
be arbitrary labeled graphs. Notice that we have the following:
 G ≡LT ℓ H ⇒ G ≡ℓWL H ⇒ Γ(G) = Γ(H) ⇒ ∑ µF ⋅ homs(F, G) = ∑ µF ⋅ homs(F, H).
                                                             F ∈F                  F ∈F

The first implication follows from Lemma 5 and the second one since the ℓWL test can distinguish Γ.
But then Lemma 4 tells us that F ⊆ homclosure(LT ℓ ), and Lemma 3 that homclosure(LT ℓ ) = LT ℓ .
This is a contradiction since F contains at least one labeled graph of treewidth k > ℓ.

4    C OUNTING OCCURRENCES OF GRAPH MOTIF PATTERNS

In this section, we establish that if a graph motif parameter Γ has WL-dimension k, then one can
actually obtain the number of occurrences of Γ in a graph G by looking independently only at the
colors of the individual k-tuples, rather than the full multiset of stable colors for all k-tuples. This is
of particular interest when looking at the kWL test from the perspective of MPGNNs. The natural
expression of the kWL test in MPGNNs leads to a final layer that assigns a color to each k-tuple of
vertices. So, if Γ is a labeled graph motif parameter, and we want to compute Γ(G) over a labeled
graph G, then Theorem 6 shows that it is not necessary to combine the information of the final layer
in a global way, but that there is some uniform function that can map each individual color to a
rational number, the sum of which will exactly be Γ(G).
More formally, we show the following result.
Theorem 6. Let Γ be a labeled graph motif parameter and suppose that the maximum treewidth of a
labeled graph in Supp(Γ) is at most k. Also, let C k denote the set of possible colors produced by the
kWL test. Then there exists a function θΓ ∶ C k → Q such that Γ(G) = ∑v̄∈V (G)k θΓ (ck (v̄)), for every
labeled graph G.

Theorem 6 is obtained by using the following lemma, whose proof can be found in the appendix.
Lemma 7. Let F be a labeled graph with treewidth at most k and let C k denote the set of possible
colors produced by the kWL test. There exists a function ηF ∶ C k → N such that homs(F, G) =
∑v̄∈V (G)k ηF (ck (v̄)), for each labeled graph G.

Theorem 6 is then obtained from Lemma 7 as follows. Let us assume that SuppΓ = {F1 , . . . , Fℓ }
and Γ(G) is defined as in Equation (1). We define θΓ ∶ C k → Q as θΓ (c) = ∑ℓi=1 µi ⋅ ηFi (c), for each
c ∈ C k . We then have that
                   ℓ
       Γ(G) = ∑ µi ⋅ homs(Fi , G)                                                     (Equation (1)
                  i=1
                   ℓ ⎛                 k ⎞
              = ∑         ∑ µi ⋅ ηFi (cv̄ )                                               (Lemma 7)
                     ⎝
                  i=1 v̄∈V (G)k             ⎠
                                ℓ
              =        ∑      (∑ µi ⋅ ηFi (ckv̄ ))   =       ∑       θΓ (ckv̄ ).
                  v̄∈V (G)k    i=1                       v̄∈V (G)k


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5       D ETERMINING THE WL- DIMENSION FOR SUBGRAPH COUNTING
We finally move on the recognizability problem for WL-dimension. That is, for given graph motif
parameter Γ, we want to know the WL-dimension of Γ. Arvind et al. (2020) previously raised the
question for which labeled graph patterns H, the graph parameter SubH can be expressed by 2WL.
Here, we give a polynomial time algorithm that decides the WL-dimension for all subgraph counting
problems, thus also resolving this question as a special case. For the analogous problem IndH , we
have already seen in Example 2 that the recognition problem is, in fact, trivial. In addition, we
determine the WL-dimension of counting k-graphlets, i.e., all connected induced subgraphs on k
vertices, as illustrative examples of how further such results can be derived from the deep body of
work in graph motif parameters.
We will begin with the case of subgraph counting. Recall that a minor of a labeled graph H is a
labeled graph H ′ that can be obtained from H by removing nodes or edges, or contracting edges (that
is, removing an edge and simultaneously merging its endpoints). By Theorem 2, and the following
discussion on spasm(H), recognising the WL-dimension of SubH is precisely the problem of
recognising the maximum treewidth of the homomorphic images of H. We can use classic results
in the field of graph minors to express this as a property checkable in monadic second-order logic
(MSO), for which model checking is tractable in our setting. We give a more detailed sketch of the
argument below, full details are provided in the appendix.
Theorem 8. Fix k > 0. There is a polynomial time algorithm for the following problem: given a
labeled graph H, checking if the WL-dimension of SubH is at most k.

Proof Sketch. The algorithm first checks whether the treewidth of H is at most k. It is well known
that this can be decided in linear time for fixed k Bodlaender (1996). Obviously, H ∈ spasm(H),
and thus if the treewidth of H is strictly larger than k, we are done and the algorithm rejects. By the
Robertson-Seymour Theorem (Robertson & Seymour, 2004), there is a finite set of graphs Fk , such
that there is a F ∈ Fk that is a minor of graph G if and only if the treewidth of H is at most k. We
then show that there is an MSO formula φF such that
                  H ⊧ φF ⇐⇒ F is a minor of some homomorphic image of H.2
Clearly then φ = ⋁F ∈Fk φk is an MSO formula such that H ⊧ φ if and only if the maximum treewidth
in the spasm is at most k. By a standard algorithmic metatheorem of Courcelle (Courcelle, 1990),
deciding H ⊧ φ is possible in time f (ℓ, φ)∣H∣, where ℓ is the treewidth of H. As ℓ ≤ k by our initial
check, and φ depends only on k, the problem is in O(∣H∣) for fixed k.

We now move on to study the WL-dimension of counting k-graphlets, a popular problem in graph
mining and analysis of social networks Bressan et al. (2017); Jin et al. (2018). Here, no dedicated
algorithm is necessary as the WL-dimension will be immediate from observations about the respective
support when viewed as graph motif parameters. While the problem of counting k-graphlets is itself
popular, its analysis in our context serves as a example of how the recently established theory of
graph motif parameters can answer these types of recognizability questions.
The logical view, via positive formulas with free constraints, is not the only natural way to see that
a graph parameter is indeed also a graph motif parameter. An alternative notion that is known to
correspond to graph motif parameters is the problem of counting all induced subgraphs of size k,
that satisfy some arbitrary (computable) property ϕ (Roth & Schmitt, 2020). Thus, with ϕ being the
property of the graph being connected, this immediately tells us that counting k-graphlets is a graph
motif parameter. In fact, Roth & Schmitt (2020) not only shows that every such property is a graph
motif parameter, but they also determine precisely when the k-clique is in the support (i.e., has a
coefficient ≠ 0). Moreover, in the case of properties that are closed under the removal of edges, there
is a strong connection to combinatorial topology that can be leveraged to make this determination.
Proposition 9. For k > 1, counting the number of k-graphlets has WL-dimension k − 1.

Proof Sketch. Let IndCk be graph parameter that counts the number of induced subgraphs on k vertices
that are connected, i.e., the number of k-graphlets. For graph property ϕ, let Ekϕ be the set of all
    2
     Alternatively, it is also possible to show that the maximal treewidth in spasmH is minor-closed and obtain a
different set of forbidden minors for H itself.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


edge-subsets of the complete graph on k vertices, such that the corresponding subgraph satisfies
property ϕ. Roth & Schmitt (2020) showed that the problem of counting all induced subgraphs on
k vertices that satisfy ϕ is a graph motif parameter, and that the k-clique is in the support of the
parameter precisely when
                                                  ∣A∣
                                          ∑ (−1) ≠ 0.
                                                A∈Ekϕ

Furthermore, they show that if ϕ is closed under removal of edges, then Ekϕ ∖ {0} forms a so-called
simplical graph complex and the reduced Euler characteristic of this simplical complex is also non-
zero exactly when the k-clique is in the support of the parameter (see (Jonsson, 2008) for details
regarding these notions).
Now, let us use C for the property of being connected and NC for its complement, i.e., disconnected-
ness. Property NC is closed under removal of edges and its simplical complexes are well understood
(cf., (Jonsson, 2008)). In particular, their reduced Euler characteristic is known to be ±(k − 1)!, which
is non-zero for natural k. Now, it is enough to observe that
                                                   ∣A∣
                                         ∑ (−1)          + ∑ (−1)∣A∣ = 0
                                       A∈EkNC             A∈EkC

as the properties are complementary and the sums thus form an alternating sum of binomials. Since
the left-hand sum is non-zero, so is the right-hand sum for property C. We can therefore conclude
that the k-clique is in the support of IndC 3
                                           k , demonstrating that the maximal treewidth in the support
is at least k − 1. The argument of Roth & Schmitt (2020) also implicitly shows by construction that
the support contains no graphs with more than k vertices, thus also confirming that the treewidth in
Supp(IndC   k ) is no higher than k − 1. Applying Theorem 2 completes the argument.


Moreover, Proposition 1 is constructive and in many cases it is feasible to determine the support from
logical formulations of parameters as in Example 1. For example, following the construction of Dell
et al. (2019) for the formula ϕIS reveals that counting k-independent sets also has WL-dimension
k − 1. What is particularly noteworthy in this context, is that we can use the exact same methods that
have been used to study the parameterized complexity of these problems. Just as the WL-dimension,
the complexity of computing graph motif parameter Γ depends precisely on the maximum treewidth
in Supp(Γ) (Curticapean et al., 2017). That is, analysis of the complexity of computing a graph motif
parameter and analysis of the WL-dimension of the parameter revolve around the same question of
how high the treewidth of the basis can become.

6       C ONCLUSIONS AND L IMITATIONS

We have shown that recent developments in graph theory and counting complexity can be brought
together to provide a precise characterization of the WL-dimension of labeled graph motif parameters.
We have also shown that if a graph motif parameter Γ belongs to such a class, then the number of
“appearances” of Γ in a given labeled graph G can be computed uniformly only from local information
about the individual k-tuples from the output of the kWL test. Based on known results this suggests
that k-dimensional MPGNNs are capable of computing this number, if equipped with the right
pooling functions (Morris et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019). Some work on this direction has already
been carried out in Chen et al. (2020) by using local relational polling. Finally, we have used our
characterization to show that both the classes of patterns for which the kWL test can distinguish
labeled subgraph counting and labeled induced subgraph counting can be recognized in polynomial
time.
The main limitation of our work is that it only concerns the worst-case behavior of the algorithms
considered. In fact, the counterexamples our proof constructs for cases in which the kWL test is
not capable of counting the number of occurrences of a graph motif Γ are rather complicated and
do not necessarily resemble the cases encountered in practice. Therefore, it would be interesting to
understand to what extent these results relate to average-case scenarios, or how well they align with
practical applications. We leave this for future work.
    3
        This observation was already made implicitly but without details in Roth (2019).


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are very grateful to Marc Roth for many valuable and enjoyable discussions that have influ-
enced this work. Matthias Lanzinger acknowledges support by the Royal Society “RAISON DATA”
project (Reference No. RP\R1\201074) and by the Vienna Science and Technology Fund (WWTF)
[10.47379/ICT2201]. Pablo Barceló has been funded by the National Center for Artificial Intelli-
gence CENIA FB210017, Basal ANID, and by ANID Millennium Science Initiative Program Code
ICN17002.

R EFERENCES
Noga Alon, Dao P, Hajirasouliha I, Hormozdiari F, and Sahinalp SC. Biomolecular network motif
  counting and discovery by color coding. Bioinformatics, 13:1–24, 2008.
Vikraman Arvind, Frank Fuhlbrück, Johannes Köbler, and Oleg Verbitsky. On weisfeiler-leman
  invariance: Subgraph counts and related graph properties. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 113:42–59, 2020.
Pablo Barceló, Floris Geerts, Juan L. Reutter, and Maksimilian Ryschkov. Graph neural networks
  with local graph parameters. In NeurIPS 2021, pp. 25280–25293, 2021.
Pablo Barceló, Mikhail Galkin, Christopher Morris, and Miguel A. Romero Orth. Weisfeiler and
  leman go relational. In LoG, volume 198 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 46.
  PMLR, 2022.
Hans L. Bodlaender. A linear-time algorithm for finding tree-decompositions of small treewidth.
  SIAM J. Comput., 25(6):1305–1317, 1996. doi: 10.1137/S0097539793251219.
Giorgos Bouritsas, Fabrizio Frasca, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Michael M. Bronstein. Improving graph
  neural network expressivity via subgraph isomorphism counting. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
  Intell., 45(1):657–668, 2023.
Marco Bressan, Flavio Chierichetti, Ravi Kumar, Stefano Leucci, and Alessandro Panconesi. Count-
 ing graphlets: Space vs time. In WSDM, pp. 557–566. ACM, 2017. doi: 10.1145/3018661.3018732.
Jin-yi Cai, Martin Fürer, and Neil Immerman. An optimal lower bound on the number of variables
   for graph identification. Comb., 12(4):389–410, 1992.
Hubie Chen and Stefan Mengel. Counting answers to existential positive queries: A complexity
  classification. In Proc. PODS, pp. 315–326. ACM, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2902251.2902279. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/2902251.2902279.
Zhengdao Chen, Lei Chen, Soledad Villar, and Joan Bruna. Can graph neural networks count
  substructures? In NeurIPS, 2020.
Bruno Courcelle. The monadic second-order logic of graphs. i. recognizable sets of finite graphs. Inf.
  Comput., 85(1):12–75, 1990.
Radu Curticapean, Holger Dell, and Dániel Marx. Homomorphisms are a good basis for counting
  small subgraphs. In STOC, pp. 210–223. ACM, 2017.
Hanjun Dai, Artem Kozachenko, Mark Schmidt, Ioannis Tsochantaridis, and Petar Veličković.
  Learning combinatorial optimization algorithms over graphs. In ICML, 2021.
Daniel Daza and Michael Cochez. Message passing for query answering over knowledge graphs.
  CoRR, abs/2002.02406, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.02406.
Holger Dell, Martin Grohe, and Gaurav Rattan. Lovász meets weisfeiler and leman. In Proc. ICALP,
  volume 107 of LIPIcs, pp. 40:1–40:14. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.
  doi: 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2018.40.
Holger Dell, Marc Roth, and Philip Wellnitz. Counting answers to existential questions. In Proc.
 ICALP 2019, volume 132 of LIPIcs, pp. 113:1–113:15. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
  Informatik, 2019.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reinhard Diestel. Graph Theory, 4th Edition, volume 173 of Graduate texts in mathematics. Springer,
  2012.
Zdenek Dvorák. On recognizing graphs by numbers of homomorphisms. J. Graph Theory, 64(4):
  330–342, 2010. doi: 10.1002/jgt.20461.
Federico Errica, Marco Podda, Davide Bacciu, and Alessio Micheli. A fair comparison of graph
  neural networks for graph classification. In ICLR, 2020.
Martin Fürer. On the combinatorial power of the weisfeiler-lehman algorithm. CoRR, abs/1704.01023,
 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.01023.
Michael Galkin, Zhaocheng Zhu, Hongyu Ren, and Jian Tang. Inductive logical query answering in
 knowledge graphs. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In ICML, 2017.
Andreas Göbel, Leslie Ann Goldberg, and Marc Roth. The weisfeiler-leman dimension of existential
  conjunctive queries. 2024.
Martin Grohe and Martin Otto. Pebble games and linear equations. J. Symb. Log., 80(3):797–844,
 2015.
Aidan Hogan, Eva Blomqvist, Michael Cochez, Claudia d’Amato, Gerard de Melo, Claudio Gutier-
  rez, Sabrina Kirrane, José Emilio Labra Gayo, Roberto Navigli, Sebastian Neumaier, Axel-
  Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Axel Polleres, Sabbir M. Rashid, Anisa Rula, Lukas Schmelzeisen, Juan F.
  Sequeda, Steffen Staab, and Antoine Zimmermann. Knowledge graphs. ACM Comput. Surv., 54
  (4):71:1–71:37, 2022.
Xingyue Huang, Miguel A. Romero Orth, İsmail İlkan Ceylan, and Pablo Barceló. A theory of link
  prediction via relational weisfeiler-leman. CoRR, abs/2302.02209, 2023.
Jiashun Jin, Zheng Tracy Ke, and Shengming Luo. Network global testing by counting graphlets. In
   ICML, volume 80, pp. 2338–2346. PMLR, 2018. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/
   v80/jin18b.html.
Jakob Jonsson. Simplicial complexes of graphs, volume 3. Springer, 2008.
Chaitanya K. Joshi, Yujia Li, and Bryan Perozzi. A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks.
  IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2020.
Thomas Kipf and Max Welling. Community detection in graphs with graphsage. In ICLR, 2018.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.02216.
Nils M. Kriege, Christopher Morris, Anja Rey, and Christian Sohler. A property testing framework
  for the theoretical expressivity of graph kernels. In IJCAI, pp. 2348–2354. ijcai.org, 2018.
László Lovász. Operations with structures. Acta Mathematica Hungarica, 18(3-4):321–328, 1967.
Diego Marcheggiani and Ivan Titov. Encoding sentences with graph convolutional networks for
  semantic role labeling. In EMNLP, 2017.
Christopher Morris, Martin Ritzert, Matthias Fey, William L. Hamilton, Jan Eric Lenssen, Gaurav
  Rattan, and Martin Grohe. Weisfeiler and leman go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks.
  In AAAI, pp. 4602–4609, 2019.
Christopher Morris, Gaurav Rattan, and Petra Mutzel. Weisfeiler and leman go sparse: Towards
  scalable higher-order graph embeddings. In NeurIPS 2020, 2020.
Daniel Neuen. Homomorphism-distinguishing closedness for graphs of bounded tree-width. CoRR,
  abs/2304.07011, 2023.
OEIS Foundation Inc. The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences, 2023. Published electroni-
 cally at http://oeis.org.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Victor M. Preciado and Ali Jadbabaie. From local measurements to network spectral properties:
  Beyond degree distributions. In CDC, pp. 2686–2691. IEEE, 2010.
David E. Roberson. Oddomorphisms and homomorphism indistinguishability over graphs of bounded
  degree. CoRR, abs/2206.10321, 2022.
Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. XX. wagner’s conjecture. J. Comb. Theory, Ser.
  B, 92(2):325–357, 2004. doi: 10.1016/j.jctb.2004.08.001.
Marc Roth. Counting problems on quantum graphs: Parameterized and exact complexity classifica-
 tions, 2019.
Marc Roth and Johannes Schmitt. Counting induced subgraphs: A topological approach to #w[1]-
 hardness. Algorithmica, 82(8):2267–2291, 2020.
Michael Schlichtkrull, Thomas N Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne van den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max
 Welling. Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks. In ESWC, 2018.
Tim Seppelt. Logical equivalences, homomorphism indistinguishability, and forbidden minors. CoRR,
  abs/2302.11290, 2023.
Nino Shervashidze, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, Tobias Petri, Kurt Mehlhorn, and Karsten M. Borgwardt.
  Efficient graphlet kernels for large graph comparison. In AISTATS, volume 5 of JMLR Proceedings,
  2009.
Komal K. Teru, Etienne G. Denis, and William L. Hamilton. Inductive relation prediction by subgraph
  reasoning. In ICML, pp. 9448–9457, 2020.
Boris Weisfeiler and A.A. Leman. The reduction of a graph to canonical form and the algebra which
  appears therein, 1968.
Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi Zhang, and Philip S. Yu. A
  comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
  Learning Systems, 2021.
Shunxin Xiao, Shiping Wang, Yuanfei Dai, and Wenzhong Guo. Graph neural networks in node
  classification: survey and evaluation. Mach. Vis. Appl., 33(1):4, 2022.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In ICLR, 2019.
Rex Ying, Ruining He, Kaifeng Chen, Pong Eksombatchai, William L. Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec.
  Graph convolutional neural networks for web-scale recommender systems. In KDD, 2018.
Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Jie Tang.
   Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications. AI Open, 2020.
Zhaocheng Zhu, Zuobai Zhang, Louis-Pascal A. C. Xhonneux, and Jian Tang. Neural bellman-ford
  networks: A general graph neural network framework for link prediction. In NeurIPS 2021, pp.
  29476–29490, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOF OF L EMMA 7
This section focuses on the proof of Lemma 7. While it is well known that the kWL test of a graph G
determines the homomorphism counts from every graph H with tw(H) < k, we are interested in a
slightly stronger statement. In particular, let H be a graph and let ā be some tuple of k distinct vertices
in H. We show that any two k-tuples of vertices v̄, w̄, possibly from different graphs, that obtain the
same stable color by the kWL test, there are the same number of homomorphisms extending ā ↦ v̄
and ā ↦ w̄ to the respective graphs of v̄ and w̄. As a consequence, we see that it is not necessary to
know the full multiset of stable colors to determine the homomorphism count from some pattern F ,
but rather homs(F, ⋅) can be computed by computing a partial count for each k-tuple independently
and simply summing them up.
This is of particular interest when looking at the kWL test from the perspective of GNNs. The natural
expression of the kWL test in MPGNNs leads to a final layer that assigns a color to each k-tuple of
vertices. If we want to compute homs(F, ⋅) with a GNN, Lemma 7 shows that it is not necessary to
combine the information of the final layer in some global way, but that there is some uniform function
that can map each individual color to a rational number, the sum of which will exactly be homs(F, ⋅).
We proceed with some technical definitions. For tree decomposition (T, B) and subtree T ′ of T we
will write B(T ′ ) to mean ⋃u∈V (T ′ ) B(u). It will be convenient to consider nice tree decompositions.
A nice TD of labeled graph G is a rooted TD where the bags of all leaves are singletons and all
non-root nodes are only of three types:

       • An introduce node u is the only child of parent p, and has B(u) = B(p) ∪ {a} for some
         a ∈ V (G) ∖ B(p).
       • A forget node u is the only child of parent p, and has B(u) = B(p) ∖ {a} for some a ∈ B(p).
       • Split nodes u, v are the only two children of parent p, and have B(u) = B(v) = B(p).

It is well known that if a graph has treewidth k, then it also has a nice TD of width k.
For labeled graphs F, G with ā ∈ V (F )k , v̄ ∈ V (G)k we write Hom(F, G)[ā ↦ v̄] for the set of all
homomorphisms from F into G that extend the mapping ā ↦ v̄. For a vertex v of labeled graph F
we write F − v to mean F [V (F ) ∖ {v}].
Proposition 10. Let (T, B) be a tree decomposition of labeled graph F . Let T ′ be a subtree of T
and let α be a node adjacent to T ′ in T . For any z ∈ B(α) ∖ B(T ′ ) and y ∈ B(T ′ ) it holds that if
{y, z} ∈ E(F ), then y ∈ B(α).

Proof. Suppose the statement were false. Then there is an edge {y, z} with z in B(α) but not in
B(T ′ ), and y ∈/ B(α). Let T ∗ be the subtree of T ∖ T ′ that contains α. By connectedness, z occurs
only in bags of T ∗ , whereas y occurs in none of them. Hence, the edge {y, z} cannot be subset of
any bag, contradicting that (T, B) is a tree decomposition.

Our plan in the proof of Lemma 7 will be to connect nice tree decompositions to kWL colors.
Intuitively, just as the kWL test moves "outward" one vertex at a time at each step, a nice tree
decomposition changes only one vertex at a time from parent to child. It is known that Hom(F, ⋅) is
determined by the local homomorphisms from F [B(u)] for each node u of a tree decomposition,
together with the overlap of bags in neighboring nodes in the tree decomposition. Roughly speaking,
we show that a color produced by the kWL test has enough information to determine these two facets.
Our formalization of this idea will require significant technical overhead for bookkeeping. To this end
we introduce the following notioons. Let F, G, H be labeled graphs, let v̄ ∈ V (G)k , w̄ ∈ V (H)k and
let µ ∶ V (F ) → V (G), ν ∶ V (F ) → V (H). For set S ⊆ V (F ) with ∣S∣ ≤ k we say that µ, ν are in
(v̄, w̄)-strict S-agreement if µ maps vertices in S only to vertices in v̄ and µ(x) = vi ⇐⇒ ν(x) = wi
for all x ∈ S. For a tree T with node labels L(u) ⊆ V (F ) of F we say that two homomorphisms are
in colorful strict T leaf agreement if for every leaf ℓ of T there exist v̄ ∈ V (G)k , w̄ ∈ V (H)k such
that µ, ν are in (v̄, w̄)-strict L(ℓ)-agreement and for some i ≥ 1 either cki (v̄) = cki (w̄) if ∣L(ℓ)∣ ≤ k or
ct(a, i, v̄ ⊖ ) = ct(b, i, w̄⊖ ) where v̄ = v̄ ⊖ a, w̄ = w̄⊖ b otherwise.
Lemma 11. Let F , G and H be labeled graphs, let v̄ ∈ V (G)k , w̄ ∈ V (H)k with cki (v̄) = cki (w̄) for
some i ≥ 1, and let S ⊆ V (F ) with ∣S∣ ≤ k. Let µ ∈ Hom(F, G), ν ∈ Hom(F, H) such that they are in


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(v̄, w̄)-strict S-agreement. Let F ′ be a labeled graph with vertex x such that F ′ − x = F and x is only
adjacent to vertices in S. Then there is a bijection ι between Hom(F ′ , G)[µ] and Hom(F ′ , H)[ν]
such that

      1. for all µ′ ∈ Hom(F ′ , G)[µ] and ι(µ′ ) there are v̄ ′ = v̄a, w̄′ b for a ∈ V (G), b ∈ V (H), such
         that µ′ , ι(µ′ ) are in (v̄ ′ , w̄′ )-strict S ∪ {x}-agreement, and
      2. ct(a, i − 1, v̄) = ct(b, i − 1, w̄).

Proof. Let S ′ = S ∪ {x}. Suppose µ′ = µ ∪ {x ↦ a} is in Hom(F ′ , G). Since cki (v̄) = cki (w̄) there
must be some b ∈ V (H) such that ct(a, i − 1, v̄) = ct(b, i − 1, w̄). Let ν ′ = ν ∪ {x ↦ b}. Observe
that because of the equal color tuples we have in particular, atp(G, v̄a) = atp(H, w̄b). As x is only
adjacent to vertices in S ′ we have that for {y, x} ∈ E(F ′ ) that
{µ′ (y), µ′ (x)} ∈ E(G) ⇐⇒ {vj , a} ∈ E(G) ⇐⇒ {wj , b} ∈ E(H) ⇐⇒ {ν ′ (y), ν ′ (x)} ∈ E(H).
The middle equivalence follows from atp(G, v̄a) = atp(H, w̄b). Similarly, it follows immediately
from equivalence of the atomic types, that the vertex labels of a and b must be the same, and
that κG ({vj , a}) = κH ({wj , b}). Additionally, we clearly have that µ′ , ν ′ are in (v̄a, w̄b)-strict
S ′ -agreement.
This concludes the argument for the individual homomorphisms. To see that this is indeed always a
one-to-one correspondence it is enough to observe that because cki (v̄) = cki (w̄), for every distinct
choice of a there must be an appropriate distinct choice of b as above.
Lemma 12. Let G and H be labeled graphs, let F be a labeled graph with a nice TD (T ∗ , B) of
width k, let ā be a tuple made up of k vertices that match a bag of the (T ∗ , B). Let v̄ ∈ V (G)k ,
w̄ ∈ V (H)k with ck (v̄) = ck (w̄). Then ∣Hom(F, G)[ā ↦ v̄]∣ = ∣Hom(F, H)[ā ↦ w̄]∣.

Proof. Let r be a node in T ∗ with B(u) = {ai ∣ i ∈ [k]} and assume, w.l.o.g., that it is the root of
T ∗ . We argue inductively on subtrees T of T ∗ that contain the node r that there is a bijection ι from
Hom(F [T ], G)[ā ↦ v̄] to Hom(F [T ], H)[ā ↦ w̄] such that for every µ in the domain of ι, it and
ι(µ) are in colorful strict T leaf agreement. Recall that colorful strict agreement requires agreement
on colors (or color tuples) on some round i ≥ 1 of the kWL algorithm. We will not explicitly argue
these indexes in the following but instead note that because ck (v̄) = ck (w̄), which forms our base
case in the following induction, we can start from assuming agreement at an arbitrarily high i. It will
be clear from our induction that starting from an i higher than the longest path from r to a leaf will
be sufficient.
In the base case T contains only r. Since ck (v̄) = ck (w̄) we have that {vi ↦ wi }i∈[k] is an
isomorphism from G[v̄] to H[w̄]. Thus, ā ↦ v̄ ∈ Hom(F [T ], G) iff ā ↦ w̄ ∈ Hom(F [T ], H).
For the step, assume the statement holds for a tree T ′ . Suppose we extend T ′ be a node α that is
adjacent in T , giving priority to split nodes (i.e., suppose we always extend first by all adjacent split
nodes).
If α split node then the leaf bags remain unchanged. The only change that needs to be discussed is
the special case that a new leaf is introduced. In that case, by definition the new leaf has the same bag
as an existing leaf and the same witnesses for colorful strict T ′ leaf agreement apply to the new bag
as well, that is ι satisfies the desired property also for T .
If α is not a split node, then let β be the leaf of T ′ that is adjacent (in T ∗ ) to α. Suppose α is a
forget node. By assumption any µ ∈ Hom(F [T ′ ], G)[ā ↦ v̄] and ι(µ) are in colorful strict T ′ leaf
agreement. Since B(T ) = B(T ′ ), the sets of homomorphisms do not change T ′ and T . It is therefore
sufficient to check that the colorful strict leaf agreement constraints are also satisfied for leaf B(α).
In that case, ι satisfies the desired properties also for T . Since B(α) ⊆ B(β), any µ, ν that are
     ¯ ē)-strict B(β)-agreement, are also in (d,
in (d,                                             ¯ ē)-strict B(α)-agreement. It remains to verify the
                      ¯
color constraint on d, ē. If ∣B(β)∣ ≤ k, then we already have cki (d)¯ = ck (ē) by assumption and are
                                                                           i
done. Otherwise, we only know that ct(t, i, d ) = ct(u, i, ē ) for d¯ = d¯⊖ t, ē = ē⊖ u. Let z be the
                                                  ¯⊖              ⊖

vertex from B(β) that is forgotten by α. Let j be the index such that µ(z) = dj . We distinguish
two cases: first, suppose that there is only one such index and there is at least one other y ∈ B(α)
such that µ(y) = dj . Then there must be some index j ′ such that dj ′ is not in µ(B(α)). By strict


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


agreement the same must hold for ej ′ and ν(B(α)). Hence, µ, ν are also in (ē[t/j ′ ], d[u/j
                                                                                        ¯     ′
                                                                                                ])-strict
                                           ′          ¯     ′
B(α)-agreement, and we have ci−1 (ē[t/j ]) = ci−1 (d[u/j ]) by equality of the color tuples. For the
                                  k              k

other case, if z is the only vertex in B(α) that µ maps to dj or there is more than one index that
equals µ(z), then simply take j ′ = j and proceed as in the other case. This concludes the case where
α is a forget node.
Suppose that α is an introduce node that introduces vertex z and is adjacent (in T ∗ ) to leaf β of
T ′ . By Proposition 10 we have that all vertices of F [T ] adjacent (in F ) to z are in B(α). By
assumption there is a bijection ι′ from Hom(F [T ′ ], G)[ā ↦ v̄] to Hom(F [T ′ ], H)[ā ↦ w̄] that
maps every homomorphism to one that is in colorful strict T ′ leaf agreement. Thus, in particular all
homomorphisms are in (d,    ¯ ē)-strict B(β)-agreement with ck (d)
                                                                 ¯ = ck (ē) (because we assume width
                                                              i       i
k, an introduce node can only follow nodes with at most k vertices in the bag). We can therefore
apply Lemma 11 to every pair µ, ι(µ) to see that there is a bijection ι′µ from Hom(F [T ], G)[µ] to
Hom(F [T ], H)[ι(µ)] such that every µ′ ∈ Hom(F [T ], G)[µ], is in colorful strict T leaf agreement
with ι′ (µ′ ). If ∣B(α)∣ ≤ k we can apply the same reasoning as for forget nodes above to observe that
the appropriate constraint on the color follows from the lemma.
Let ι′ be the disjoint union of all the individual ι′µ for all µ ∈ Hom(F [T ′ ], G)[ā ↦ v̄]. To see that
the ι′µ are in fact disjoint it is enough to observe that the sets Hom(F [T ], G)[µ] are disjoint for
different choices of µ as dom(µ) ⊆ V (F [T ]). Since all ι′µ are injective, so is ι′ . To see that ι′ is also
surjective, suppose a ν ∈ Hom(F [T ], H)[ā ↦ w̄] not in the image of ι′ . This means that ν cannot be
in any set Hom(F [T ], H)[ι(µ)] for µ ∈ Hom(F [T ′ ], G)[ā ↦ v̄]. But ι is surjective and therefore
this would mean that the projection of ν to V (F [T ′ ]) is not a homomorphism from F [T ′ ] to H
(extending ā ↦ w̄). But homomorphisms are closed under projection to induced subgraphs, so this is
impossible. It follows that ι′ is also surjective and therefore is the desired bijection.


As an alternative proof strategy, the main ideas from above can be used to define an algorithm
that computes Hom(F, G)[ā ↦ v̄] from ck (v̄). An argument along this direction also demonstrate
computability of the functions in Theorem 6 and Lemma 7 in the general case (in the uniform case
where C k is finite, it suffices to enumerate graphs until all colors in C k are observed). However, in
practice the colors in the kWL test are not maintained in their explicit form as nestings of tuples and
multisets but rather by compactly representing the ct tuples via some hash function. In that setting,
the viability of such an algorithm would be limited.


Proof of Lemma 7. Observe that for any two distinct tuples v̄, w̄ ∈ V (G)k we have that the
sets of homomorphisms Hom(F, G)[ā ↦ v̄] and Hom(F, G)[ā ↦ w̄] are disjoint. It is then
straightforward to see that Hom(F, G) = ⊍v̄∈V (G)k Hom(F, G)[ā ↦ v̄] and hence homs(F, G) =
∑v̄∈V (G)k ∣Hom(F, G)[ā ↦ v̄]∣. By Lemma 12 we have that Hom(F, G)[ā ↦ v̄] depends only on
ck (v̄). This naturally induces a function ηF,ā that map the possible colorings of the kWL test C to
the respective number of homomorphisms, i.e., such that

                    ∑        ηF,ā (ck (v̄)) =      ∑        ∣Hom(F, G)[ā ↦ v̄]∣ = homs(F, G)
                 v̄∈V (G)k                       v̄∈V (G)k


Another proof detail of Lemma 12 that we would like to emphasize is that it is not strictly necessary
for the stable color of v̄ and w̄ to be equal. Inspection of the proof reveals that it is sufficient for them
to be equal for cki , where i is greater than the maximal number of introduce nodes on a path from r to
a leaf. Building on this observation, Lemma 12 actually also shows that especially for small patterns
(the number of introduce nodes is of course no greater than the number of vertices) it is sufficient for
the graphs to be equivalent under a limited number of steps of the kWL test, rather than equivalent in
the stable color, to deduce that hom(F, ⋅) is the same in both graphs.
Theorem 13. Let F , G, and H be labeled graphs and let n = ∣V (F )∣. Suppose that G and H have
the same color multiset after n steps of the kWL test. Then homs(F, G) = homs(F, H).


                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    T ECHNICAL D ETAILS FOR S ECTION 3
The goal of this section is to show that for any labeled graph F that has treewidth greater than k,
there are labeled graphs G and H such that G ≡kW L H but homs(F, G) ≠ homs(F, H). Thus, G
and H are witnesses to the fact that the kWL test cannot express the function homs(F, ⋅).
To do so, we show that two important results on the functions homs for unlabeled graphs still hold
in the labeled setting. To distinguish more clearly between the labeled and unlabeled case we will
use the term plain graphs to be those labeled graphs where the vertex- and edge-label alphabets are
singletons. For technical reasons we will initially focus on edge-labeled graphs, which are labeled
graphs where the vertex-label alphabet is a singleton. For labeled graph G, we write plain(G) for
the plain graph obtained by making all edge and vertex labels of G the same (without changing the
vertices or edges of G).
The main property of homs that we are interested in is equivalence for fixed classes of graphs.
Formally, let F be a class of labeled graphs. We write G ≡F H if for every F ∈ F it holds that
homs(F, G) = homs(F, H). Two families of graph classes will be particularly important in the
following. We write Tk for the class of plain graphs with treewidth at most k, let LT k be the class of
labeled graphs of treewidth at most k, and let ET k for the class of edge-labeled graphs with treewidth
at most k.
The first result that we need is the labeled version of a classic result due to Dvorák (2010) and later
rediscovered by Dell et al. (2018). We recall the lemma as stated in the main body.
Lemma 5. For all labeled graphs G, H we have G ≡kWL H if and only if G ≡LT k H.
We wish warn the reader about an unfortunate confluence of terminology at this point. Some of the
literature that we build on also refers to labeled graphs. Unfortunately, our use and the uses in the
immediately related literature are pairwise distinct and thus require extra care of the reader. We will
add further clarification at points where this becomes directly relevant in this section.
For the second key result we need to recall what it means for a class of plain graphs to be
homomorphism-distinguishing closed. A class of plain graphs F is homomorphism distinguish-
ing closed if for every graph F ∈/ F, there are graphs G, H such that G ≡F H and homs(F, G) ≠
homs(F, H). The notion naturally extends to the setting of (edge-)labeled graphs by taking F,
as a class of (edge-)labeled graphs and every mention of G, and H as (edge-)labeled graphs. To
clearly distinguish the property in text going forward we will refer to the case where all involved
graphs are labeled as labeled homomorphism-distinguishing closed, and analogously we use edge-
labeled homomorphism-distinguishing closed when all graphs are edge-labeled. For plain graphs the
following was very recently shown by Neuen Neuen (2023).
Theorem 14 (Neuen (2023)). The class Tk is homomorphism-distinguishing closed.
Our second key ingredient will be to show the same holds in the labeled setting. That is, that LT k is
labeled homomorphism-distinguishing closed.
For our setting where every edge has exactly one label, we are not aware of any clear way to build
directly on Theorem 14 to show the labeled versions. Our plan will therefore be to show that the
machinery underlying the proof of Theorem 14 still works in our labeled setting.
The necessary machinery is due to Roberson (2022), who introduced the theory of oddomorphisms
and showed their deep connection to homomorphism distinguishability. We recall the definition here
for the labeled setting, note however that the definition does not respect labels, except implicitly
through the definition of a homomorphism of labeled graphs. The neighborhood NG (v) of vertex v
in labeled graph G is the set of adjacent vertices (ignoring any labels). Let F and G be labeled graphs
and let ϕ be a homomorphism from F to G. A vertex a of F is odd/even (w.r.t. ϕ) if ∣NF (a)∩ϕ−1 (v)∣
is odd/even for every v ∈ NG (ϕ(a)). An oddomorphism from F to G is a homomorphism ϕ such
that:
      1. every vertex a of F is either odd or even with respect to ϕ, and
      2. for every v ∈ V (G), ϕ−1 (v) contains an odd number of odd vertices.
A homomorphism ϕ is a weak oddomorphism if there is a subgraph F ′ of F , such that ϕ∣V (F ′ ) is an
oddomorphism from F ′ to G.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For plain graphs, Roberson showed that any class of graphs that is closed under weak oddomorphisms,
disjoint unions, and restriction to connected components is homomorphism-distinguishing closed. It
is one main goal of this section to show that the same also holds for labeled graphs.
Theorem 15 (Labeled Version of Theorem 6.2 (Roberson, 2022)). Let F be a class of labeled graphs
such that

      1. if F ∈ F and there is a weak oddomorphism from F to G, then G ∈ F, and
      2. F is closed under disjoint unions and restrictions to connected components.

Then F is labeled homomorphism-distinguishing closed.

Before we move on to the proof of Theorem 15, we first observe that the class LT k satisfies the
conditions of the theorem. Indeed, Condition 15 is trivially satisfied as the treewidth of a graph is the
maximum treewidth over the graph’s connected components (and labels do not influence treewidth).
For Condition 1 we can reuse the following key part of the proof of Theorem 14.
Proposition 16 (Neuen (2023)). Let F be a plain graph in Tk . If there is a weak oddomorphism from
F to G, then G ∈ Tk .

Recall that labels serve no explicit role in the definition of an oddomorphism beyond restricting the
set of homomorphisms overall. Formalizing this observation we can show the same also for labeled
graphs.
Lemma 17.
Let F ∈ LT k and G be a labeled graph. If there is a weak oddomorphism from F to G, then G ∈ LT k .

Proof. First, observe that for labeled graphs F, G, if ϕ is an oddomorphism from F to G, then ϕ is
also an oddomorphism from plain(F ) to plain(G). Now, if there is only a weak oddomorphism ϕ
from F to G, there is some subgraph F ′ such that ϕ∣V (F ′ ) is an oddomorphism from F ′ to G. Hence,
it is also a oddomorphism from plain(F ′ ) to plain(G), meaning that where is a weak oddomorphism
from plain(F ) to plain(G).
We have that tw(F ) = tw(plain(F )) ≤ k, and therefore by Proposition 16 plain(G) ∈ Tk . And
therefore also tw(G) = tw(plain(G)) ≤ k, i.e., G ∈ LT k .

Assuming Theorem 15, we then immediately obtain the key technical result for homomorphism
distinguishing closedness in labeled graphs.
Theorem 18. LT k is labeled homomorphism distinguishing closed.

The rest of this section is organized as follows. We first verify that Theorem 15 holds in Appendix B.1.
We then argue Lemma 5 in Appendix B.2. Finally, in Appendix B.3 we briefly note why Lemma 4
also holds in the labeled setting.

B.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 15

We will closely follow the proof of Theorem 6.2 in (Roberson, 2022). We will see that adapting the
initial definitions in the right way will actually leave most of the framework for plain graphs intact. In
many situations the effect of the labels is on the argument is very subtle. For the sake of verifiability
we therefore repeat the modified arguments for the critical path in the unlabeled setting here. We
wish to emphasize that, if not stated otherwise, all proofs are effectively due to Roberson.
We first recall the construction of Roberson for the case of plain graphs, roughly following the
presentation of Neuen (2023). Let G be a plain graph and U ⊆ V (G). Define δv,U as 1 if v ∈ U and
0 otherwise. The graph CFI(G, U ) is the graph with vertices
                V (CFI(G, U )) = {(v, S) ∣ v ∈ V (G), S ⊆ I(v), ∣S∣ ≡ δv,U mod 2}.
The graph has edge {(v, S), (u, T )} in E(CFI(G, U )) if and only if {v, u} ∈ E(G) and v, u ∈/ S∆T .
The definition can be naturally adapted to the labeled setting by simply inheriting the labels of the
original edges and vertices in G. To this end, let G now be a labeled graph. We will define the labeled


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


graph CCFI(G, U ) with V (CCFI(G, U )) = V (CFI(G, U )). For vertex (v, S) ∈ V (G, U ), we set
the label λ(v). For the edge-labeling function κ edges we simply say that κ({(v, S), (u, T )}) =
κ({v, u}). That is, κ({(v, S), (u, T )}) = c if and only if κ({v, u}) = c and v, u ∈/ S∆T .
We will show that this definition preserves the key properties of CFI graphs in the labeled setting.
This might seem unintuitive as it ignores the labels on the sets S ⊆ I(v) as well as the label of vertices
in U . However, the key arguments are relative to homomorphisms on the graphs from which the
CCFI construction is obtained. That is, these homomorphisms already follow the constraints imposed
by the labelings. We will say that two vertices u, v are adjacent via label i if there is an edge {u, v}
with label i.
Lemma 19. Let G be a connected labeled graph and let U, U ′ ⊆ V (G). Then CCFI(G, U ) ≅
CCFI(G, U ′ ) if ∣U ∣ ≡ ∣U ′ ∣ mod 2.

Proof. Let e = {u, v} ∈ E(G) and U ′ = U ∆e. We show that GU ≅ G′U . Let ϕ ∶ V (CCFI(G, U )) →
V (CCFI(G, U ′ )) be
                                         (a, S∆{e}) a = u or a = v
                           ϕ((a, S)) = {
                                         (a, S)      otherwise
As in the plain graph case, it is straightforward to verify that this is a bijection. Suppose that (a, S)
and (b, T ) are adjacent via label i in CCFI(G, U ), i.e., {a, b} ∈ Ei (G) and {a, b} ∈/ S∆T . Let S ′ , T ′
such that ϕ((a, S)) = (a, S ′ ), ϕ((b, T )) = (b, T ′ ). If {a, b} = e, then S ′ = S∆{e} and T ′ = T ∆{e},
hence S∆T ′ = S∆T . Thus, {a, b} is also not in S ′ ∆T ′ and ϕ((a, S)) is adjacent to ϕ((b, T )). In
the other case that {a, b} ≠ e, then S ′ and T ′ will both, individually, contain {a, b} exactly if S and
T , respectively, did. So again {a, b} ∈/ S ′ ∆T ′ . In both cases, the labels of the edge in CCFI(G, U )
and CCFI(G, U ′ ) is simply inherited from {a, b}. Thus, ϕ preserves labeled adjacency.
If (a, S) and (b, T ) are not adjacent via label i in CCFI(G, U ), then either {a, b} ∈/ Ei (G) or
{a, b} ∈ Ei (G) ∩ (S∆T ). In the first case, clearly ϕ((a, S)) and ϕ((b, T )) cannot be adjacent via
label i either. In the latter case, we have shown in our argument above that {a, b} ∈ S ′ ∆T ′ if and
only if {a, b} ∈ S∆T . Since {a, b} ∈ S∆T , ϕ((a, S)) and ϕ((b, T )) will not be adjacent via any
label in CCFI(G, U ′ ).
We have shown that GU ≅ G′U for U ′ = U ∆e. This implies the lemma via the same final argument as
in (Roberson, 2022, Lemma 3.2).

As a consequence we can focus our investigation on two specific graphs CCFI(G) ∶= CCFI(G, ∅)
and its twist CCFI× (G) ∶= CCFI(G, {v}) for some arbitrary v ∈ V (G).
As a next step we adapt (Roberson, 2022, Lemma 3.4) to the labeled setting. We first recall a
definition from Roberson (2022) that carries over unchanged from the plain graph setting. For any
U ⊆ V (G), the mapping (v, S) ↦ v is a homomorphism from CCFI(G, U ) to G. We will refer to
this mapping as ρ in the following. For a homomorphism ϕ ∈ Hom(F, G) define
                 Homϕ (F, CCFI(G, U )) = {ψ ∈ Hom(F, CCFI(G, U )) ∣ ρ ○ ψ = ϕ}
and observe that the sets Homϕ (F, CCFI(G, U ) for ϕ ∈ Hom(F, G) partition Hom(F, CCFI(G, U )).
The following statement is subtle in our context. Except for qualifying graphs G and F to be labeled,
the statement is verbatim the same as Lemma 3.4 in (Roberson, 2022). That is, the labels are not
explicitly considered in the system of equations. Note however that the equations are relative to some
homomorphism from F to G, which makes the second set of equations implicitly follow the labeling.
The fact that this system of equations does not change is the key to requiring only few changes in the
later lemmas, as the argument proceeds mainly algebraically via this system of equations.
Lemma 20 (Labeled version of Lemma 3.4 (Roberson, 2022)). Let G be a connected labeled graph,
let U ⊆ V (G), and let F be any labeled graph. For a given ϕ ∈ Hom(F, G), define variables xae for
all a ∈ V (F ) and e ∈ I(ϕ(a)). Then the elements of Homϕ (F, CCFI(G, U )) are in bijection with
solutions of the following equations over Z2 :
                  ∑        xae = δϕ(a),U    for all a ∈ V (F )                                          (2)
               e∈I(ϕ(a))

               xae + xbe = 0      for all {a, b} ∈ E(F ), where e = {ϕ(a), ϕ(b)} ∈ E(G)                 (3)


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Suppose xae that are a solution of the system of equations in the statement of the lemma. For
a ∈ V (F ), let S(a) ⊆ E(G) be the edges incident to ϕ(a) (regardless of label) for which the variable
xae = 1, i.e., the set {e ∈ I(G) ∣ xae = 1}. Let ψ be the mapping a ↦ (ϕ(a), S(a)).
We first show that ψ ∈ Homϕ (F, CCFI(G, U )). By Equation (2), ψ(a) is guaranteed to be a vertex
of CCFI(G, U ) for all a ∈ V (F ). To see that ψ preserves labeled adjacency, suppose {a, b} ∈ Ei (F ).
Then e = {ϕ(a), ϕ(b)} ∈ Ei (G) since ϕ ∈ Hom(F, G). From Equation (3) it follows that xae = xbe .
Then, by construction of CCFI(G, U ), ψ(a) is adjacent via label i to ψ(b) exactly if {ϕ(a), ϕ(b)} ∈/
S(a)∆S(b). Meaning that ψ(a) is adjacent via label i to ψ(b) if e is either in both S(a) and S(b)
or in neither, which is true because xae = xbe . Vertex labels are directly preserved via ϕ.
The arguments for injectivity and surjectivity from the original proof (Roberson, 2022, Lemma 3.4)
apply verbatim.

Since we can use the same system of equations (which does not explicitly consider labels) as used
in Roberson (2022), the development from Section 3 of (Roberson, 2022) holds almost unchanged
from here. For the sake of completeness we repeat the relevant parts for the proof of Theorem 15
here, including discussion on why the proofs are unaffected by the labels where relevant.
Let G be a connected labeled graph, F a labeled graph, and let ϕ ∈ Hom(F, G). Let R be the set
                                                                                   V (F )×R
of pairs (a, e) such that a ∈ V (F ) and e ∈ E(ϕ(a)). We define the matrices Aϕ ∈ Z2        and
       E(F )×R
B ∈ Z2
  ϕ
                as:

                                      1   if a = b
                         Aϕb,(a,e) = {                                                                  (4)
                                      0   otherwise
                          ϕ             1    if a ∈ {b, c} and e = {ϕ(b), ϕ(c)}
                         B{b,c},(a,e) ={                                                                (5)
                                        0    otherwise

Let χU be the characteristic vector of ϕ−1 (U ), i.e., the vector where the element corresponding to
vertex a ∈ V (F ) is 1 if a ∈ ϕ−1 (U ) and 0 otherwise (i.e., the vector (δϕ(a),U )a∈V (F ) . The system of
equations from Lemma 20 can then be expressed as

                                             Aϕ       χ
                                            ( ϕ) x = ( U )                                              (6)
                                             B         0

Theorem 21 (Labeled version of Theorem 3.6 (Roberson, 2022)). Let G be a connected labeled graph,
let U ⊆ V (G), and let ϕ ∈ Hom(F, G) for some labeled graph F . Then homsϕ (F, CCFI(G)) > 0
and
                                   homsϕ (F, CCFI(G)) if Equation 6 has a solution
         homsϕ (F, CCFI(G, U )) = {
                                   0                      if Equation 6 has no solution

Proof Sketch. The original proof (Roberson, 2022, Theorem 3.6) is a straightforward application
of Lemma 20. The equations are exactly the same as in the unlabeled case and the argument works
without modification in our setting.

Theorem 22 (Labeled Version of Theorem 3.13 (Roberson, 2022)). Let G be a connected labeled
graph and F be a labeled graph. Then homs(F, CCFI(G)) ≥ homs(F, CCFI× (G)). Furthermore,
the inequality is strict if and only if there exists a weak oddomorphism from F to G. If such a weak
oddomorphism ϕ exists, there is a connected subgraph F ′ of F such that ϕ∣V (F ′ ) is an oddomorphism
from F ′ to G.

Proof Sketch. The original proof of (Roberson, 2022, Theorem 3.13) works unchanged, although it
might not be considered straightforward to observe that this is the case. We therefore repeat the key
steps here with emphasis on the points where it needs to be observed that edge labels do not affect the
argument. We wish to stress again that this proof is due to Roberson. We repeat it here to allow for a
more targeted discussion of why labels have minimal effect on the argument, and to note necessary
subtle differences.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If homs(F, CCFI(G)) ≠ homs(F, CCFI× (G)), then by Theorem 21 there is a ϕ ∈ Hom(F, G) such
that Equation (6) over Z2 does not have a solution. The non-existence of such a solution is equivalent
to the existence of solution to the system (the Fredholm Alternative)

                                        (Aϕ )T   (B ϕ )T z      0
                                    (                   )( ) = ( )                                     (7)
                                        (χU )T     0      y     1

where U = {û} contains the vertex such that CCFI× (G) ∶= CCFI(G, {û}), y is indexed by vertices of
F , and z is indexed by edges of F .
Since the argument creates a certificate for the non-equivalence of the homomorphism counts, it
might be unintuitive that constructing a weak oddomorphism from this certificate still works in the
presence of the additional constraints of the edge labels. However, the certificate is still relative to a
ϕ ∈ Hom(F, G) that respects the edge labeling and as we will see, this is sufficient for the argument
to still hold.
Observe that a solution (y, z)T to this system satisfies (Aϕ )T y = (B ϕ )T . Let O = {a ∈ V (F ) ∣ ya =
1} and let F ′ be the subgraph of F with all vertices and edges E(F ′ ) = {e ∈ E(F ) ∣ ze = 1}. The
goal of the argument now is to show that ϕ is an oddomorphism from F ′ to G (and thus a weak
oddomorphism w.r.t. F ). Since F ′ is a subgraph of F , it is clear that ϕ is still a homomorphism from
F ′ to G, regardless of labels. The arguments for the properties of the oddomorphism themselves are
parity arguments on the number of adjacent edges between ϕ−1 (v) and ϕ−1 (u) for adjacent v, u ∈
V (G). These arguments also hold unchanged in the labeled setting as the labeled homomorphism
ϕ still preserves all adjacencies. Finally, F ′ as constructed above may not be connected. As in
the unlabeled case we can then replace F ′ be a connected component by showing that if there
is a weak oddomorphism ϕ∣V (F ′ ) for some subgraph F ′ , then we can assume w.l.o.g., that F ′ is
connected (Roberson, 2022, Lemma 3.12).
Lemma 23. Let F, G be labeled graphs. Then homs(F, CCFI(G)) > homs(F, CCFI× (G)).

Proof. It is known that the identity id on V (G) is an oddomorphism from G to G in the plain graph
case (Roberson, 2022, Lemma3.14). The definition of oddomorphism does not take the labels of
edges into account (only the neighborhoods of vertices, which are unaffected by labels), and id is still
a homomorphism in the labeled setting. Hence, id must also be an oddomorphism from G to G in the
labeled setting. The statement then follows immediately from Theorem 22.

The lemma also demonstrates that CCFI(G) ≅/ CCFI× (G) for any G.
This concludes our replication of the key statements of (Roberson, 2022, Section 3). We will
require one additional statement that is not necessary in Roberson’s original argument for the proof
of Theorem 15. For technical reasons we will require an labeled graph G such that for some F we
can guarantee that homs(F, G) > 0. For plain graphs this is straightforward by taking a large enough
clique for G. In the labeled case we need an alternative gadget.
Lemma 24. Let Σ, ∆ be finite label alphabets and n ≥ 1. There is a connected labeled graph
G such that for every labeled graph F with at vertex/edge-label alphabets Σ, ∆ and n vertices,
homs(F, G) > 0.

Proof. Let C be the set of all (up to isomorphism) labelings of the n vertex clique with labels from Σ
and ∆. Let G∗ be the disjoint union of all graphs in C. To get the desired graph G, add a fresh vertex
with arbitrary label to G∗ that is adjacent to an arbitrary vertex of each connected component (via an
arbitrary edge label). Any n vertex graph F with labels from Σ, ∆ is a subgraph of some element of
G′ ∈ C, and hence homs(F, G′ ) > 0. Since G′ is a subgraph of G, also homs(F, G) > 0.

We are now finally ready to prove Theorem 15. Again we can follow the original proof of Theorem
6.2 in (Roberson, 2022) very closely. We give the proof in full as some changes are made due to our
streamlined presentation of the preceding statements.

Proof of Theorem 15. Let G be a graph not in F. Let G1 , . . . , Gℓ be the number of connected
components in G and let J be the connected graph from Lemma 24 such that homs(Gi , J) > 0 for


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


all i ∈ [ℓ]. By Condition (2), there is at least one connected component of G that is not in F, thus
assume w.l.o.g., that G1 ∈/ F.
Let H be the disjoint union of CCFI(G1 ) and J, and let H ′ be the disjoint union of CCFI× (G1 )
and J. We will show that H ≡F H ′ and homs(G, H) ≠ homs(G, H ′ ). For the former,
suppose F ∈ F and connected. By Condition (1), there is no weak oddomorphism from F
to G, and thus homs(F, CCFI(G1 )) = homs(F, CCFI× (G1 )) according to Theorem 22. Be-
cause F is connected each homomorphism into H is either a homomorphism into J or into
CCFI(G1 ), i.e., homs(F, H) = homs(F, CCFI(G1 )) + homs(F, J). The same holds for H ′ , i.e.,
homs(F, H ′ ) = homs(F, CCFI× (G1 )) + homs(F, J). Since both terms in both sums are equal we
see that homs(F, H) = homs(F, H ′ ). Since this holds for all connected F ∈ F, by Condition (2), it
holds for all F ∈ F.
We move on to show that homs(G, H) ≠ homs(G, H ′ ). Fist, observe that homs(G, H) =
∏i=1 homs(Gi , H) and similarly for H ′ . our goal will be to show that homs(Gi , H) ≥
  ℓ

homs(Gi , H ′ ) > 0 for all i ∈ [ℓ], with at least one inequality being strict. For each i ∈ [ℓ] we
have

            homs(Gi , H) = homs(Gi , CCFI(G1 )) + homs(Gi , J)
                           ≥ homs(Gi , CCFI× (G1 )) + homs(Gi , J) = homs(Gi , H ′ ) > 0

The equalities are by connectedness, as already argued above. The first inequality follows from Theo-
rem 21. By Lemma 23 first inequality is strict for i = 1 and thus homs(G, H) > homs(G, H ′ ).


B.2    L EMMA 5

In this section we will discuss why Lemma 5 holds in the labeled setting. From Lemma 7 we directly
see that for labeled graphs G, H, G ≡kW L H implies homs(F, G) = homs(F, H) for every F ∈ LT k .
We thus focus our attention on showing that G ≡/ k H implies the existence of an F ′ ∈ LT k such that
homs(F ′ , G) ≠ homs(F ′ , H).
As a first step, we consider the logic Ck+1
                                          L
                                               of first-order formulas with k + 1 variables and counting
            4
quantifiers over the signature that contains unary relation symbols Uσ for each label σ in the vertex
label alphabet Σ, and binary relation symbols Eδ for each label δ in the edge label alphabet ∆. We
add the superscript L here to distinguish from the usual use of Ck+1 for unlabeled graphs. Cai et al.
(1992) famously showed that for graphs G, H we have G ⊧ φ ⇐⇒ H ⊧ φ for all φ ∈ Ck+1 if and
only if G ≡kW L H. It is folklore that this also holds in the setting of labeled graphs. We in fact only
need one direction here, namely if G ≡/ kW L H, then there is a φ ∈ Ck+1 L
                                                                             such that G ⊧ φ and H ⊧   / φ.
It is straightforward to verify that the original argument for this direction is unaffected by labels (Cai
et al., 1992, Theorem 5.4, case ¬1 ⇒ ¬2).
In the rest of this section we will show that the existence of such a formula φ implies the existence of
a labeled graph F for which the homomorphism count into G and H differs. For this purpose we can
adapt an argument by Dvorák (2010).
We first recall the key definitions from (Dvorák, 2010). A k-marked5 labeled graph G is a graph
with a partial function markG ∶ [k] → V (G). The set of active markings MG is the subset of [k]
for which markG is defined. Suppose that G, H are k-marked labeled graphs with MH ⊆ MH , we
define homs(G, H) as the number of those homomorphisms ϕ that also preserve markings, i.e.,
where ϕ(markG (i)) = markH (i) for each active marking i ∈ MG . A k-marked labeled quantum
graph G is a finite linear combination with real coefficients of k-marked labeled quantum graphs. We
require all graphs in the linear combination to have the same set of active markings, which we refer
to as MG . The function homs is extended to the case where the first argument is a k-marked labeled

   4
    For a detailed definition of first-order logic with counting quantifiers refer to Cai et al. (1992).
   5
    What we call k-marked here is referred to as k-labeled in (Dvorák, 2010) and much of the literature.
Unfortunately, this would clash with the other with our (also common) terminology for graphs with vertex and
edge labels.


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


quantum graph G = ∑ℓi αi Gi as homs(G, H) = ∑ℓi αi homs(Gi , H). The treewidth of a quantum
graph ∑i αi Gi is max{tw(Gi ) ∣ αi ≠ 0}6 .
A k-marked labeled quantum graph models a formula φ for graphs of size n if MG consists of the
indices of the free variables of φ, and for each labeled graph H on n vertices with MG ⊆ MH :

       • if H ⊧ φ then homs(G, H) = 1, and
       • if H ⊧
              / φ then homs(G, H) = 0.

From here on we follow the same strategy as Dvorák, but require some changes to correctly handle
labeled graphs.
A product G1 G2 of two k-marked labeled graphs G1 , G2 is constructed by taking the disjoint union
of G1 and G2 , identifying the vertices with the same marking, and suppressing parallel edges with
the same edge label. That is, we allow the product to have self-loops and to have parallel edges
with distinct labels. If there are vertices v ∈ V (G1 ), u ∈ V (G2 ) with the same marking but different
vertex labels (we say that G1 , G2 are incompatible), the product is a single vertex with a self-loop
(and arbitrary labels).
For quantum k-marked labeled quantum graphs G1 = ∑i α1,i G1,i and G2 = ∑i α2,i G2,i , the product
G1 G2 is defined as ∑i,j βi,j G1,i G2,j . The coefficient βi,j equals 0 is G1,i G2,j is the empty graph,
contains a loop or parallel edges with distinct labels, otherwise βi,j = α1, iα2,j . The motivation for
this distinction in the coefficients βi,j is that if H is a labeled graph, then by definition it has no
self-loops and any two vertices are connected only by one edge with one label, hence there can be
no homomorphisms into H from a product G1,i G2,j that produces such situations. Note that in the
situation where G1,i , G2,j are incompatible at least one of G1,i , G2,j must have 0 homomorphisms
into H which is why we (ab)use the self-loop as a failure state in this case. In particular, we
have homs(G1 G2 , H) = homs(G1 , H)homs(G2 , H) for every labeled graph H. We write 0 for a
k-marked labeled quantum graph where all coefficients are zero.
Lemma 25 (Labeled version of Lemma 6, (Dvorák, 2010)). For each formula in φ ∈ Ck+1     L
                                                                                           , and for
each positive integer n, there exists a labeled quantum graph G of tree-width at most k such that G
models φ for labeled graphs of size n.


Proof. We construct G inductively on the structure of φ. The base cases significantly differ from
those in the proof of (Dvorák, 2010, Lemma 6). However, once we have established the fact
for the base cases, the inductive steps remain the same as they rely only on the property that
homs(G1 G2 , H) = homs(G1 , H)homs(G2 , H), as discussed above, and a technical lemma for
quantum graphs (Dvorák, 2010, Lemma 5) that is not affected by labels.
If φ = true, let G be the empty graph, if φ = false let G = 0. If φ = Uσ (xi ), let G be the graph with a
single vertex v with markG (i) = v and λ(v) = σ.
If φ = xi = xj , let G = ∑σ∈Σ Gσ (the sum ranges over the elements of the vertex label alphabet)
where Gσ is the k-marked labeled graph with a single vertex v, markG (i) =
mathsf mark G (j) = v and λ(v) = σ. For any specific k-marked H, the vertex marked as i and j
will have only one vertex label. Hence, there will be a homomorphism from exactly one Gδ (where δ
matches the label in H) and there are 0 homomorphisms for all other germs of G.
If φ = Eδ (xi , xj ) there are two cases: if i = j, then let G = 0 as the predicate cannot be satisfied in a
self-loop free H. If i ≠ j, let G = ∑σ,σ′ ∈Σ Gσ,σ′ where Gσ,σ′ is the graph with adjacent vertices v
and u, marked as i, j and labeled with σ, σ ′ , respectively, and κ({v, u}) = δ. As above, for any given
H, one term of G will have 1 homomorphism into H, and the others will all have 0.
That is, for every base case we have shown that the appropriate k-marked labeled quantum graph
exists. It is clear that in all the base cases the treewidth is 1. The rest of the induction proceeds exactly
as in (Dvorák, 2010, Lemma 6).
    6
      Homomorphisms from quantum graphs can be seen as an alternative representation of graph motif parame-
ters. Because of the two distinct natures of their uses in this paper and the disjoint connections to prior work we
have decided to not unify the presentation of these two concepts here.


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma 5. As discussed above, we have that for labeled graphs G, H, G ≡/ kW L H implies
the existence of a ϕ ∈ Ck+1L
                               such that G ⊧ φ and H ⊧     / φ. By Lemma 25, there is a k-marked
labeled quantum graph F with treewidth at most k that models φ. Hence, ∑i αi homs(Fi , G) = 1 ≠
0 = ∑i αi homs(Fi , H), which means there must be some i such that homs(Fi , H) ≠ homs(Fi , H)
(recall that the linear combination is always finite). Since F has treewidth at most k, Fi ∈ LT k and
therefore G ≡/ LT k H.

B.3   O N L EMMA 4 FOR L ABELED G RAPHS

Seppelt (2023) originally showed Lemma 4 for unlabeled graphs. Here we briefly note why the
lemma holds unchanged in the labeled case. In particular, the lemma relies on three facts.

      1. First, that homs(F, G1 × G2 ) = homs(F, G1 )homs(F, G2 ). Where × is the direct product
         as defined in (Lovász, 1967).
      2. Second, that the matrix (homs(K, L))K,L∈L is invertible, where Ln is the class of all graphs
         with at most n vertices.
      3. And finally, that if G ≡F H, then also G × K ≡F H × K for all graphs K.

The first two points are classic results by Lovász (1967), which were originally shown for all relational
structures. They thus hold unchanged also for labeled graphs. For the final point, recall that G ≡F H
means that for every F ∈ F we have homs(F, G) = homs(F, H). Then by the first point also
homs(F, G × K) = homs(F, G)homs(F, K) = homs(F, H)homs(F, K) = homs(F, H × K).


C     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 8

This section will make some slight departures from the terminology used in the main body of the
paper. For a more focused presentation, we will first discuss the case for unlabeled graphs and
afterwards show how to additionally handle labels afterwards. In the main body, the Spasm of a graph
was defined as the set of all homomorphic images, but here it will be simpler to take an alternative
(equivalent) perspective. A quotient G/τ of a graph G is obtained by taking a partition τ of V (G)
and constructing the graph like G but with all vertices in the same block of τ identified. That is,
the vertices of G are the blocks of τ , and the incidence of a vertex in G/σ is the incidence of all
vertices in the corresponding block of the partition. It is a standard observation that the set of all
quotients of G without self-loops is precisely Spasm(G) (see, e.g., Curticapean et al. (2017)). It
will be convenient to also consider the set of all quotients of G, i.e., including those with self-loops,
which we will refer to as Spasm○ .
The arguments of this section will revolve around formulas of monadic second-order logic (MSO).
That is, formulas of first-order logic that additionally allow for quantification over unary predicates.
For formal definition see, e.g., (Courcelle, 1990).
We will decide the treewidth of graphs by deciding whether they contain certain other graphs as
minors. To that end we first define the notion of minors formally.
Definition 1. A minor model from H into G, is a mapping f ∶ V (H) → 2V (G) such that:

      1. ∀u ≠ v ∈ V (H) f (u) ∩ f (v) = ∅,
      2. ∀v ∈ V (H) G[f (v)] is connected, and
      3. ∀{u, v} ∈ E(H) there is an edge (in G) between some vertex in f (u) and some vertex in
         f (v).

We say that H is a minor of G is there a minor model from H into G.

Checking whether graph H is a minor of graph G via an MSO formula is a standard construction.
Interestingly, to check whether H is a minor of some quotient of G is simpler, at least in terms of
formulating the question in MSO. The key insight here is that the second condition of minor models
can effectively be ignored, since there will always be a quotient where all vertices of G[f (v)] are


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


identified. Instead, it is enough to guarantee that the image is non-empty. In concrete terms, to check
whether H is a minor of a graph in Spasm○ (G) we will use the following MSO formula.


        QuotMinor H ≡ ∃X1 , . . . , Xc ⊆ V (G) (⋀ ∣Xi ∣ ≥ 1 ∧ ⋀ (Xi ∩ Xj = ∅) ∧
                                                           i          i≠j

                                  ⋀           ∃x ∈ Xi ∃y ∈ Xj ((x, y) ∈ E(G)))
                             {vi ,vj }∈E(H)


Intuitively, the sets Xi correspond to the image of the minor model for vertex vi in H. The minor is
of the quotient τ where τ extends the disjoint sets X1 , . . . , Xc by the singletons {v} for all v ∈ V (G)
but not in any Xi for i ∈ [c].
Lemma 26. Let G and H be graphs. Then H is a minor of a quotient G/τ ∈ Spasm○ if and only if
G ⊧ QuotMinor H .

Proof. Suppose H is a minor of G/τ and let h be the respective minor map from H into G/τ . Let µ
be the edge surjective endomorphism (i.e., the homomorphic image) from G into G/τ induced by the
quotient (i.e., every vertex maps to the block in τ that contains the vertex). Let us refer to the vertices
of H as v1 , . . . , vc . The formula is satisfied when for every i ∈ [c], the second-order variable Xi is
assigned to {w ∈ V (G) ∣ µ(w) ∈ f (vi )}, that is, all vertices in G that are mapped by µ to vertices in
f (vi ). Clearly, the sets Xi are disjoint, as the images of f are disjoint. Furthermore, we know by
assumption that f is a minor model that for every {vi , vj } ∈ E(H), there is at least one edge {a, b}
with a ∈ f (vi ), b ∈ f (vj ). Since µ is edge surjective, there are a′ , b′ ∈ Xi such that {a′ , b′ } ∈ E(G)
and µ(a′ ) = a, µ(b′ ) = b.
For the other direction now assume that the formula holds. Let τX be the partition of V (G) induced
by some satisfying choices of X1 , . . . , Xc (any vertex v not in any of these sets corresponds to a
singleton {v} in the partition). Consider the graph G/τX and let us refer to the vertex corresponding
to the block defined by Xi as ui . We claim that f ∶ vi ↦ {ui } is a minor model of H into G/τX .
Condition 1 and 2 of a minor model are trivially satisfied. For Condition 3, observe that if there
is an edge {vi , vj } ∈ E(H) but no edge {ui , uj } ∈ E(G/τX ), then there can be no x ∈ Xi , y ∈ Xj
that have an edge between them in E(G), hence contradicting the satisfaction of the final block of
conjuncts in QuotMinor H .

We can resolve the possibility of self-loops with a simple observation about minors of quotient graphs.
A self-loop occurs in quotient G/τ if there is a block B of τ that contains adjacent vertices v, u.
W.l.o.g., assume for now that v, u are the only adjacent vertices in B. If H is a minor of G/τ , it is
also a minor of G/τ ′ where τ ′ is like τ but with u as a singleton rather than in B. The vertex for {u}
in G/τ ′ will be adjacent to the vertex for block B ′ = B ∖ {u}. Contracting the vertices for B ′ and
{u} will produce exactly G/τ without the self-loop at B. Iterating this idea shows that G/τ without
self-loops is a minor of some loop-free quotient of G.
Proposition 27. Let G be a graph and let H be a loop-free graph. Suppose H is a minor of some
graph in Spasm○ (G). Then H is a minor of some graph in Spasm.

Robertson and Seymour famously showed that the graph minor relation is a well-quasi-ordering.
Together with the classic observation that any well-quasi-ordering has a finite set of minimal elements
this leads to the following standard result.
Theorem 28 (Robertson & Seymour (2004)). For every minor closed class of graphs P, there exists
a finite set of graphs F such that G ∈ P if and only if no F ∈ F is a minor of G.
Theorem 29. Deciding max{tw(F ) ∣ F ∈ Spasm(G)} ≥ k is feasible in fixed-parameter linear time
when parameterised by k, and in linear time for fixed k.

Proof. We first check whether tw(G) ≤ k − 1. It is well known that this can be decided in linear time
for fixed k (Bodlaender, 1996). If not, then tw(G) ≥ k and the algorithm returns true.
The property of having treewidth at most k − 1 is closed under graph minors. By Theorem 28 there
exists a finite set F of forbidden minors for class of graphs with treewidth at most k − 1. Furthermore,
the set F depends only on the parameter k. Thus, we have that a graph H has treewidth ≥ k iff it does


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


not have treewidth ≤ k − 1 iff it has some graph of F as a minor. Combining with Proposition 27, we
can therefore decide whether the treewidth in the spasm is at least k, by checking for every F ∈ F
whether F is a minor of any quotient of G. According to Lemma 26, this is equivalent to checking
whether the formula
                                        ϕ ≡ ⋁ QuotMinor F
                                            F ∈F
is satisfied by G. By Courcelle’s Theorem (Courcelle, 1990) we can decide G ⊧ ϕ in time f (k, φ)⋅∣G∣
where k is the treewidth of G. Since φ depends only on k this is equivalent to f (k) ⋅ ∣G∣ and hence
polynomial for fixed k.

As a final note we wish to point out that this result is primarily of theoretical interest. For most
practical pattern sizes, naive enumeration of Spasm and checking the treewidth individually with
state-of-the-art systems for treewidth computation is feasible. The bottleneck in practice is the size of
the pattern, as enumerating the contents of Spasm via naive methods, e.g., enumerating all partitions,
becomes challenging above 11 vertices (see Sequence A000110 in the On-Line Encyclopedia of
Integer Sequences (OEIS Foundation Inc., 2023)).

Adding Labels We finally discuss the necessary changes for labeled graphs in the above argument,
from which Theorem 8 then follows immediately. By definition, treewidth of labeled graphs is
unaffected by the labels. As such we can simply ignore labels in checking for minors. Where
the labels make a difference however, is in the set Spasm itself. Not all loop-free quotients are
homomorphic images in the labeled case, but rather we require an additional restriction.
A quotient G/τ will not be a homomorphic image in labeled graphs in two cases. First, if a block of
τ contains two vertices with different vertex labels, and second, if the quotient would create parallel
edges with different labels. To lift the previous argument to the labeled case it is therefore enough
to enforce these two extra conditions in the QuotMinorF formulas. To this end, recall that in a
satisfying interpretation of the formula, the sets Xi correspond precisely to the non-trivial blocks
of the quotient for which F is a minor. The two extra restrictions can then be enforced simply by
conjunction with the following two formulas formula inside the scope of second order quantification
(where Σ, ∆ are the vertex- and edge-label alphabets, respectively).
          c
         ⋀ ⋁ ∀x ∈ Xi Uσ (x)                                                                          (8)
         i=1 σ∈Σ

                                         ⎛                                             ⎞
                                         ⎜                                             ⎟
         ¬ ⋁ ∃x1 , x2 ∈ Xi ∃y1 , y2 ∈ Xj ⎜ ⋁ (x1 , y1 ) ∈ Eδ (G) ∧ (x2 , y2 ) ∈ Eδ′ (G)⎟             (9)
                                         ⎜ ′                                           ⎟
                 2
                                              ∈∆
          i,j∈[c]
             i≠j                         ⎝δ,δ
                                           δ≠δ ′                                       ⎠

The term in 8 is easy to interpret, every block Xi of the partition must have uniform vertex labels.
The term 9 states that there are no two blocks Xi , Xj such that there are edges with two different
edge labels between the blocks, i.e., it is not the case that the quotient will have parallel edges with
different labels. Relation E in the original definition of QuotMinor can trivially be replaced by the
disjunction over all edge-label relations. Thus we can easily adapt our argument above to also decide
the existence of minor models in Spasm of a labeled graph.


                                                   25
