Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


WASA: WATERMARK - BASED S OURCE ATTRIBUTION
FOR L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL -G ENERATED DATA

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         The impressive performances of large language models (LLMs) and their im-
         mense potential for commercialization have given rise to serious concerns over
         the intellectual property (IP) of their training data. In particular, the synthetic
         texts generated by LLMs may infringe the IP of the data being used to train the
         LLMs. To this end, it is imperative to be able to (a) identify the data provider who
         contributed to the generation of a synthetic text by an LLM (source attribution)
         and (b) verify whether the text data from a data provider has been used to train
         an LLM (data provenance). In this paper, we show that both problems can be
         solved by watermarking, i.e., by enabling an LLM to generate synthetic texts with
         embedded watermarks that contain information about their source(s). We identify
         the key properties of such watermarking frameworks (e.g., source attribution ac-
         curacy, robustness against adversaries), and propose a WAtermarking for Source
         Attribution (WASA) framework that satisfies these key properties due to our al-
         gorithmic designs. Our WASA framework enables an LLM to learn an accurate
         mapping from the texts of different data providers to their corresponding unique
         watermarks, which sets the foundation for effective source attribution (and hence
         data provenance). Extensive empirical evaluations show that our WASA framework
         achieves effective source attribution and data provenance.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023) have recently demon-
strated remarkable performances and hence received a surging interest. These LLMs, which are
trained using massive text data, have displayed impressive text generation abilities. This has given
rise to the immense potential of adopting the texts generated by LLMs for commercial use. How-
ever, this potential commercialization has led to major concerns regarding the intellectual property
(IP) of training data for LLMs because the texts generated by an LLM may infringe the IP of the
data being used to train the LLM. These concerns have been reflected by the increasing regulations
on data protection related to AI models. For example, the Coalition for Content Provenance and
Authenticity has stressed the necessity of certifying the source of online content produced by gener-
ative AI models (Rosenthol, 2022). Therefore, it is of crucial importance for LLMs to be equipped
with source attribution and data provenance for their generated synthetic texts.
In source attribution, given some synthetic texts generated by an LLM, its aim is to find the source
responsible for the generation of these texts. That is, if the data from a data provider has been used
to train the LLM and contributed to the generation of a sentence by the LLM, then source attribution
identifies this data provider. Moreover, source attribution also improves the interpretability of LLM-
generated texts: For example, if the generated content from an LLM is attributed to a trustworthy
source (e.g., a peer-reviewed academic paper), then the user is likely to consider the content more
reliable. The ability to perform source attribution also endows the LLM with the capability of data
provenance. Specifically, a data provider can check the source of the generated texts from an LLM
via source attribution, and hence verify whether its data has been used to train the LLM, as detailed
in Sec. 3.4. This has important implications for data protection. As an example, patients who refuse
to have their medical data used for training an LLM for medical diagnosis (due to privacy concerns)
may request their data provenance to check whether their data has been misused.
To perform source attribution (and hence achieve data provenance) for LLM-generated synthetic
texts, a natural solution involves watermarking, i.e., by enabling the LLM to generate synthetic texts


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  Source Attribution
                  Watermark A      Embed Watermarked                      Query LLM Synthetic Extract    Watermark A      Attribute to
    Provider A 3 1 4 5 1 0 5 2 1 5        Dataset A      LLM                                          3 1 4 5 1 0 5 2 1 5
        …                                                          User               Data                                             Provider A
                                              …        platform
        …                                     …        operator   Data Provenance
                  Watermark Z      Embed Watermarked                                          LLM Generated
                                                                              Query LLM         Watermark Compare Watermark α             Prove-
    Provider Z 5 3 2 0 1 3 3 5 4 1        Dataset Z     LLM
                                                                  Provider α For Provenance 0 2 5 1 4 4 3 2 5 5 0 2 5 1 4 4 3 2 5 5       nance
                                                       Training

Figure 1: Illustration of WASA’s problem setting. Watermarks are embedded into the texts from data
providers for training the LLM. The LLM produced by our WASA framework can generate synthetic
texts with embedded watermarks that allow for effective source attribution and data provenance.

with embedded watermarks that contain information about their source(s). Consequently, source
attribution can be performed by examining the watermarks embedded into the generated texts. Our
problem setting (Fig. 1) involves 3 parties: data providers contributing text data that may be used
for LLM training, an honest third-party LLM platform operator producing an LLM with generated
texts that embed watermarks (hence allowing for source attribution), and users of the texts generated
by this LLM. The users may request source attribution for the LLM-generated synthetic texts to
find out which data provider is responsible for the generated texts, while the data providers may
request data provenance to verify whether their contributed data has been used to train the LLM.
We consider scenarios where each data provider contributes ample balanced data with unique char-
acteristics, i.e., the data from different data providers exhibit dissimilarities. This encompasses a
wide variety of real-world scenarios: For example, online articles written by different authors (i.e.,
data providers) usually feature their unique writing styles. On the other hand, we do not consider
individual documents/sentences as data providers in our setting since they have insufficient data.
A watermarking framework capable of effective source attribution has to satisfy some key proper-
ties: The watermarking framework should (1) achieve accurate source attribution, (2) be robust
against malicious attacks on the watermarks, (3) preserve the performance (i.e., text generation
ability) of the LLM, (4) be scalable to a large number of data providers, (5) ensure that the gener-
ated watermarks are transferable to (i.e., persist after being used as training data for) other LLMs,
and (6) be adaptable to fit different LLMs. Sec. 2 discusses these key properties in more detail. To
this end, this paper introduces a WAtermarking for Source Attribution (WASA) framework which, to
our best knowledge, is the first watermarking framework capable of producing LLMs whose gener-
ated texts allow for effective source attribution. Our WASA framework assigns a unique watermark
(i.e., imperceptible to human eyes) to every data provider, and enables an LLM (coined as WASA-
LLM) to learn an accurate mapping from the texts of different data providers to their corresponding
watermarks (Sec. 3). So, if a data provider is responsible for generating a sentence, then our WASA-
LLM is able to include the unique watermark of this data provider in this generated sentence, which
naturally supports source attribution. Our contributions are summarized below:
• We propose to use watermarking to perform source attribution (and achieve data provenance) for
  LLM-generated synthetic texts and identify the key properties of such watermarking frameworks.
• We introduce the WASA watermarking framework which satisfies these key properties and is hence
  capable of producing LLMs whose generated synthetic texts allow for effective source attribution.
• We perform extensive empirical evaluations (Sec. 4) to verify that our WASA framework satisfies
  these key properties and achieves effective source attribution (and data provenance).

2      K EY P ROPERTIES OF WATERMARKING FOR S OURCE ATTRIBUTION
Here, we will discuss the key properties a watermarking framework has to satisfy to achieve effective
source attribution (and hence data provenance), as well as how our WASA framework satisfies them.
1. Accuracy. Watermarks embedded into the LLM-generated texts should allow for accurate source
   attribution. Our WASA framework achieves this by enabling its trained WASA-LLM to learn an
   accurate mapping from the texts of different data providers to their corresponding watermarks.
   Specifically, watermark prediction (using texts) is made possible by training our WASA-LLM us-
   ing watermarked texts (Sec. 3.1), and the prediction/generation spaces are separated for the texts
   and watermarks to both reduce the complexity of watermark prediction (Sec. 3.2) and explic-
   itly enforce watermark generation in LLM-generated synthetic texts (Sec. 3.3). As empirically
   verified in Sec. 4.1, our WASA framework can achieve accurate source attribution.
2. Robustness. Watermarks should be robust against malicious attacks. Since our trained WASA-
   LLM is able to learn an accurate mapping from the texts to the watermarks as mentioned above,


                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Sentences embedded (top left) and not embedded (top right) with our imperceptible wa-
termark visualized in the bottom sentence.
   (a) it can be exploited to regenerate the watermarks using the (cleaned) generated texts after their
   watermarks are tampered with (even when the generated texts are under other additional attacks),
   and (b) it is still able to generate the correct watermarks even if the input texts (prompts) are
   perturbed. As empirically verified in Sec. 4.2, our WASA framework is indeed robust against
   these types of attacks.
3. Scalability. The watermarking framework should cater to a large number of data providers. Since
   we assign to each data provider a watermark of 10 characters with each selected among 6 Uni-
   code characters (Sec. 3.1), we can represent over 60 million unique watermarks/data providers.
   Our WASA-LLM’s ability to learn accurate texts-to-watermarks mapping ensures that its source
   attribution remains accurate with more data providers, as empirically verified in Sec. 4.3.
4. Performance Preservation. Watermarks should (a) not significantly degrade the text generation
   ability of the LLM (b) nor affect the readability of the LLM-generated synthetic texts too much.
   To preserve (a), our WASA-LLM only requires a small number of watermarks to be embedded
   into the training text data in order to achieve accurate source attribution, as validated in App. G.2.
   The watermarks are carefully designed (Sec. 3.1) to achieve (b), as shown in App. C.
5. Transferability. After the generated watermarked texts are used as training data for other LLMs,
   their generated texts should preserve the watermarks. Our WASA framework achieves this by
   ensuring that the watermarked data used to train our WASA-LLM has the same structure as the
   generated watermarked data (i.e., they both embed a 10-character watermark). This allows our
   generated watermarked data to be readily used as the training data for other LLMs.
6. Adaptability. The watermarking framework can be easily adapted to fit different LLMs. Our
   WASA framework satisfies this because it only requires mild modifications to the LLMs and can
   hence adopt a wide variety of LLMs using the transformer architecture. We have empirically
   demonstrated WASA’s adaptability by employing multiple LLMs in our experiments (Sec. 4.4).
We have only listed above the most essential properties of such watermarking frameworks; there
may be additional considerations depending on the specific applications. In Sec. 3, we will discuss
in more detail how our WASA framework satisfies these key properties due to our algorithmic designs.

3     WATERMARKING FOR S OURCE ATTRIBUTION (WASA) F RAMEWORK
We will first discuss in Sec. 3.1 how we design the watermarks and embed them into text data. Then,
we will introduce in Sec. 3.2 how we use the watermarked texts to train our WASA-LLM and how
its design satisfies the key properties discussed in Sec. 2. Finally, we will discuss in Sec. 3.3 how
our trained WASA-LLM generates synthetic texts with watermarks and in Sec. 3.4 how the generated
texts can be used for effective source attribution and data provenance.

3.1   E MBEDDING WATERMARKS INTO T EXTS FOR LLM T RAINING
To begin with, for each data provider, the LLM platform operator generates a unique watermark and
then embeds the watermark into the texts from this data provider.
Design of Watermarks. To scale to a large number of data providers and still preserve the semantic
meaning of the texts, we construct the watermarks using Unicode characters which are imperceptible
to human eyes (yet can be decoded by machine learning models). Some of these invisible charac-
ters have also been adopted in other studies with language models (Boucher et al., 2022). Every
watermark is made up of 10 characters, each of which is chosen among the following 6 Unicode
characters: U+200B: Zero Width Space, U+200C: Zero Width NonJoiner, U+200D: Zero Width
Joiner, U+2062: Invisible Times, U+2063: Invisible Separator, and U+2064: Invisible Plus. We
chose these characters because they are found to be invisible on many commonly used platforms.
So, these watermarks preserve the semantic meaning of the original texts to human readers (Fig. 2).
Also, note that our WASA framework can easily adopt other choices of characters depending on the
use cases. Moreover, these 10-character watermarks allow us to construct over 60 million (i.e., 610 )
unique watermarks and hence achieve scalability to a large number of data providers. As shown in
App. G.7, reducing the watermark length trades off scalability for source attribution accuracy.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Token Embeddings (𝑾′𝒆 )                                  Word Token Generation                    Watermark Token Generation
                                           Logits
                                aardvark
                                aarhus
                                aaron
      vocabulary                …          Hidden
      size V                    …          states
                                …                                        DECODER                                     DECODER
                                zyzzyva                                       …                                         …
      watermark                 U+200B                                   DECODER                                     DECODER
      character                 …          Positional
      embedding                 U+2064     encoding             =                                             =
      size V'                              Word                 +                                             +
                                           Embedding    This has ten char [wtm] U+200B … U+2064       This has ten char [wtm] U+200B … U+2064
                   embedding size E                      1    2 3     4     5     6 … 6+m …       k    1    2 3     4     5     6 … 6+m …       k

      Figure 3: Separation of token embeddings and prediction spaces for texts and watermarks.


Embedding Watermarks into Sentences. To enable our WASA-LLM to learn the mapping from the
texts of different data providers to their unique watermarks, it is important to only embed watermarks
into the sentences that are representative of the unique characteristics of the data providers. To this
end, we calculate the term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) scores of all sentences
from a data provider and select the sentences with the top 20% of the TF-IDF scores (i.e., most
representative sentences) for watermarking, which empirically yields the best trade-off of source at-
tribution accuracy vs. text generation performance among different tested proportions, as reported in
App. G.2. For every selected sentence, we embed our 10-character watermark at a random position
in the sentence, which allows the LLM to learn to map texts of different lengths to the watermarks
and also makes it harder for an adversary to remove/modify the watermarks. As empirically verified
in App. G.5, our method of selecting sentences for watermarking based on TF-IDF indeed leads to
more accurate source attribution than random selection.

3.2    T RAINING WASA-LLM WITH WATERMARKED T EXTS

Here, we consider the practical scenario where the LLM is already pre-trained before being used
by our WASA framework, and we refer to our training of the LLM as second-stage pre-training.
However, our framework can also be used to train an LLM from scratch without modifications.
Preliminaries on LLMs. Denote an unsupervised corpus by D = [s1 , s2 , . . . , sn ], in which every
si is a block/sequence of k tokens: si = [u1 , u2 , . . . , uk ] where k is the context window. We
consider LLMs with a decoder-only structure (e.g., GPT, OPT). For a sequence si from D, given
a sub-sequence s = si [1 : j − 1] = [u1 , . . . , uj−1 ] comprising the first j − 1 tokens in si , the
feed-forward operations of the LLM M produces a predictive distribution P (uj ) of j-th token uj :

h0 = s·We +Wp , hτ = decoder(hτ −1 ) for τ = 1, . . . , l , z = hl [j−1]·We ⊤, P (uj ) = softmax(z).
                                                                                                     (1)
As shown in (1), given an input sequence s of j − 1 tokens, the LLM M firstly uses the token embed-
ding matrix We to project these j − 1 tokens into the embedding space with an embedding/hidden
dimension E. The dimension of We is V × E where V is the vocabulary size. Then, a positional
encoding matrix Wp (with dimension (j − 1) × E) is added to the embedding s · We to obtain
h0 (1). Next, h0 is sequentially passed through l decoder layers to produce hl (1) such that every
decoder layer consists of a multi-head self-attention layer followed by a position-wise feed-forward
layer. Lastly, M multiplies hl [j − 1] (i.e., last hidden state of (j − 1)-th token) by We⊤ to produce
a V -dimensional logit vector, after which a softmax layer is applied to produce a predictive distri-
bution P (uj ) of j-th token uj over the entire vocabulary of V tokens (1). The training objective of
an LLM is to maximize the log-likelihood L(si ) of a sequence si of tokens, which is equivalent to
minimizing the cross entropy loss Loss(si ):
            Pk                                                 Pk
   L(si ) = j=2 log P (uj |u1 , . . . , uj−1 ) , Loss(si ) = j=2 CE(P (uj |u1 , . . . , uj−1 ), uj ) (2)

where P (uj |u1 , . . . , uj−1 ) (i.e., similar to P (uj ) in (1)) is the probability of j-th token uj condi-
tioned on the preceding j − 1 tokens [u1 , . . . , uj−1 ], and CE is the cross entropy loss.
Forward Pass. To ease exposition, we consider one watermark in a block, but our de-
sign also supports multiple watermarks.                          Our 10-character watermark forms a consecu-
tive sub-sequence of 10 tokens. Denote a block with an embedded watermark by s′i =
[u1 , u2 , . . . , ut , w1 , w2 , . . . , wm , ut+1 , . . . , uk−m ] where m = 10 and the u’s and w’s are the word


                                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and watermark tokens, respectively. There may be sequences s′i ’s not embedding any watermark.
Hereafter, we will use t to denote the token index before the first watermark token.
To begin with, we augment the original vocabulary (of size V ) by our V ′ = 6 watermark characters
(Sec. 3.1), which leads to a new vocabulary size of V + V ′ . That is, the dimension of our modified
token embedding matrix We′ is (V + V ′ ) × E (Fig. 3). For a sequence s′i , given a sub-sequence
s′ = s′i [1 : j − 1] comprising the first j − 1 tokens in s′i (i.e., comprising either only word tokens or
both word and watermark tokens), the same feed-forward operations in (1) are applied to s′ (except
that We is replaced by We′ ) to produce hl . Next, depending on whether the ground-truth j-th token
being predicted is a word token u or watermark token w, we adopt two separate prediction spaces
(i.e., separate softmax layers). When predicting a word token u, the first V rows of the matrix We′
are used to form the E × V matrix (We′ [1 : V ])⊤ as the linear layer. A softmax layer is then applied
to produce the predictive distribution Pu (u) of u over the vocabulary of V word tokens:
                             zu = hl [j − 1] · (We′ [1 : V ])⊤ ,      Pu (u) = softmax(zu ) .                          (3)
                                                               ′
When predicting a watermark token w, the last V                    rows of We′ are used to form the E × V ′ matrix
(We′ [V + 1 : V + V ′ ])⊤ as the linear layer. A softmax layer is then applied to produce the predictive
distribution Pw (w) over V ′ watermark tokens:
                     zw = hl [j − 1] · (We′ [V + 1 : V + V ′ ])⊤ ,         Pw (w) = softmax(zw ) .                     (4)
This separation of the prediction/generation spaces of the word tokens (3) and watermark tokens (4)
allows us to use a small number of additional parameters (i.e., E × V ′ instead of E × (V + V ′ )) for
watermark prediction based on the hidden states of WASA-LLM. Moreover, this separation allows us
to explicitly enforce the generation of watermarks (i.e., using its designated generation space) when
we use the trained WASA-LLM to generate synthetic texts, as discussed in Sec. 3.3. As a result,
the watermarks can be regenerated using cleaned texts after they are manipulated, and the correct
watermarks can still be generated even if the input texts (i.e., prompts) are perturbed, hence ensuring
the robustness of our WASA framework; more details are in Sec. 4.2.
The two separate softmax layers naturally lead to the following separate log-likelihoods:
               t
               X                                        k−m
                                                        X
Llm (s′i ) =         log Pu (uj |u1 , . . . , uj−1 )+log Pu (uj |u1 , . . . , ut , w1 , . . . , wm , ut+1 , . . . , uj−1 ),
               j=2                                  j=t+1                                                              (5)
                                          Pm
                             Lwtm (s′i ) = j=1 log Pw (wj |u1 , . . . , ut , w1 , . . . , wj−1 )                       (6)
where Llm (s′i ) (5) is the log-likelihood of word tokens, which is split into two sums before and after
the watermark tokens, while Lwtm (s′i ) (6) is the log-likelihood of watermark tokens, which explicitly
encourages the LLM to learn texts-to-watermarks mapping.1 The overall log-likelihood we aim to
maximize is therefore LWASA-LLM (s′i ) = Llm (s′i ) + Lwtm (s′i ). This is equivalent to minimizing the
cross entropy loss LossWASA-LLM (s′i ) = Losslm (s′i ) + Losswtm (s′i ) in which
                     t
                     X                           k−m
                                                 X                                               m
                                                                                                 X
Losslm (s′i ) =            CE(Pu (uj ), uj ) +           CE(Pu (uj ), uj ) , Losswtm (s′i ) =          CE(Pw (wj ), wj )
                     j=2                         j=t+1                                           j=1
                                                                                                  (7)
represent the losses for the word and watermark tokens, respectively. For simplicity, in (7), we omit
the conditioning on the preceding tokens in Pu (uj ) and Pw (wj ), which can be found in (5) and (6).
The maximization of the log-likelihood of the watermarks conditioned on the texts (6), together with
the separation of the prediction/generation spaces, enables our trained WASA-LLM to accurately
learn the mapping from the texts to watermarks. This allows us to achieve a high accuracy in
source attribution, which will be empirically verified in Sec. 4.1.
Backward Pass. Due to the separation of the softmax layers and losses for the word and watermark
tokens, the backward pass for updating the parameters We′ in the last linear layer is also separated.
That is, the gradients of word token loss Losslm (s′i ) and watermark token loss Losswtm (s′i ) (7) are
responsible for updating (We′ [1 : V ])⊤ (3) and (We′ [V +1 : V +V ′ ])⊤ (4), respectively. Specifically,
the gradient update rule for We′ (with learning rate α) can be expressed as We′ ← We′ − αhl · ∇z
where ∇z is a (V + V ′ )-dimensional gradient vector allowing the separated gradient updates to be
    1
      To simplify exposition, for the second sum in (5), when j = t + 1, the term reduces to
log Pu (uj |u1 , . . . , ut , w1 , . . . , wm ). In (6), when j = 1, the term reduces to log Pw (wj |u1 , . . . , ut ).


                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


easily achieved in a unified manner, as described below. Next, using the respective losses for word
and watermark tokens (7), the gradient vectors w.r.t. zu and zw are calculated as V -dimensional
∇zu = ∂CE(Pu (uj ), uj )/∂zu and V ′ -dimensional ∇zw = ∂CE(Pw (wj ), wj )/∂zw , respectively.
When the loss is calculated from predicting a word token uj (7), let ∇z = [∇zu , 0V ′ ] where 0V ′ is
a V ′ -dimensional all-zero vector. When the loss results from predicting a watermark token wj (7),
let ∇z = [0V , ∇zw ]. Note that for the parameters in the last linear layer which are responsible for
predicting the word tokens using the hidden state (i.e., parameters (We′ [1 : V ])⊤ in (3)), the gradient
updates are not affected by the loss for the watermark tokens. This helps us to further limit the impact
of the added watermarks on the original ability of the LLM to generate high-quality synthetic texts
and hence preserve its performance. For the parameters in the other transformer layers (except for
the frozen layers), their updates are performed using the gradients w.r.t. the losses for both the word
and watermark tokens; see App. E.2 for more details.
Note that both our forward pass and backward pass only require mild modifications to an LLM.
Therefore, our WASA framework can be easily adapted to fit a wide variety of LLMs, which ensures
its adaptability property.

3.3   G ENERATING T EXTS WITH E MBEDDED WATERMARKS USING WASA-LLM
After our WASA-LLM is trained (Sec. 3.2), it can generate synthetic texts which naturally include
both the word and watermark tokens due to their separate prediction/generation spaces. To further
improve the alignment between our training and generation stages, we introduce a special token
[W T M ] which is similar to other specialized tokens and in the vocabulary of V word tokens: When
training our WASA-LLM using the watermarked texts, [W T M ] is added right before the watermark
tokens during tokenization so that the presence of [W T M ] indicates that the subsequent m = 10
tokens are watermark tokens; when generating texts, if [W T M ] is encountered/generated, then it
indicates that our WASA-LLM should switch to generating watermark tokens. Specifically, when the
token [W T M ] is not generated, our WASA-LLM generates word tokens by applying multinomial
sampling to Pu (3) which is a distribution over the V word tokens. When [W T M ] is generated,
our WASA-LLM switches to generating watermark tokens by applying pure beam search to Pw (4)
which is a distribution over the V ′ watermark tokens. After m = 10 watermark tokens have been
generated, our WASA-LLM resumes the word token generation. Fig. 4 (App. C) shows the WASA-
LLM-generated synthetic texts with embedded watermarks, which verifies that the watermarks are
imperceptible to human eyes. However, the generated watermarks can be decoded by a watermark
decoder algorithm introduced in Sec. 3.4 and hence used for source attribution and data provenance.

3.4   U SING WATERMARKS FOR S OURCE ATTRIBUTION AND DATA P ROVENANCE
Source attribution and data provenance can be easily performed using the synthetic texts gener-
ated by our trained WASA-LLM. When a user requests source attribution for some synthetic texts
generated by our WASA-LLM, the LLM platform operator uses a designated watermark decoder al-
gorithm to extract the generated watermark from the texts and then attribute these texts to the source
(data provider) whose watermark matches the generated watermark (Fig. 1). Meanwhile, the data
providers are also given both their own unique watermarks (Sec. 3.1) and the watermark decoder
so that they can request their data provenance. Specifically, when a data provider wants to check
its data provenance, it can firstly use its own text data (without watermark) as the input/prompt to
the WASA-LLM to obtain a generated watermark, and then verify whether the generated watermark
matches its own watermark (Fig. 1). Details on the matching algorithm are elaborated in App. D.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We perform extensive empirical evaluations to validate that our WASA framework satisfies the 6 key
properties in Sec. 2. The experimental results shown below are the average taken from 5 random
seeds. Following that of Clement et al. (2019), we download academic papers from ArXiv and apply
post-processing to obtain a cleaned dataset (i.e., detailed in App. E.1) which we call Clean-ArXiv-
Corpus (or ArXiv for short). The ArXiv dataset contains academic papers from several categories,
each of which is treated as a data provider. We also use the BookSum dataset (Kryściński et al.,
2022) consisting of various books, each of which is considered a data provider. We adopt 10 data
providers for each dataset in our main experiments and show that our WASA can scale to a larger
number (up to 100) of data providers in Sec. 4.3. We obtain WASA-LLM from our second-stage pre-
training (Sec. 3.2) of the pre-trained GPT2-Large (Radford et al., 2019) or OPT-1.3B (Zhang et al.,


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           ArXiv dataset                                                           BookSum dataset
             GPT2                                OPT                                   GPT2                                OPT
  acc.    top-3 acc.   top-5 acc.    acc.    top-3 acc.   top-5 acc.        acc.    top-3 acc.   top-5 acc.    acc.    top-3 acc.   top-5 acc.
 74.84%    95.76%       98.56%      78.36%    99.04%       99.36%          77.92%    91.80%       96.52%      83.20%    93.84%       97.80%

Table 1: Accuracies of top-1, top-3, & top-5 source attribution (resp. denoted by ‘acc.’, ‘top-3 acc.’,
& ‘top-5 acc.’) by WASA-LLM from 2nd-stage pre-training of different models on various datasets.

2022) model. App. E gives more details on the datasets and model training. Fig. 5 in App. E.2 shows
the training convergence of our WASA-LLM in terms of the losses for word and watermark tokens.

4.1      ACCURACY
To facilitate easy evaluations of the source attribution accuracy, for each data provider, we use the
sentences selected for watermarking (after removing the watermarks) as the inputs/prompts to the
trained WASA-LLM, and use the watermarks embedded into the generated texts for source attribu-
tion. This simplifies the evaluations because the corresponding data provider of the input sentence is
naturally the ground-truth source. Specifically, we first select 50 sentences from each data provider
(i.e., 50 trials); more details are in App. F.1. Next, we use the first 200 characters of every selected
sentence (without watermarks) as the input/prompt to the trained WASA-LLM which then generates
synthetic texts (by continuing the sentence) with a token length of 100. The watermark embedded
into the generated sentence is then used for source attribution, i.e., the source attribution is correct if
this watermark matches the watermark of the data provider corresponding to this sentence (Sec. 3.4).
As a result, for every data provider, the accuracy of source attribution is calculated as
                  accuracy = (number of correct watermarks) / (number of trials) .                                                         (8)
To mitigate the impact of the length of the generated sentence on our evaluations (i.e., a watermark
may not be generated if the generated sentence is too short), we use a simple technique to enforce
watermark generation: If a watermark is not generated, then we force the generation of a watermark
by adding the token [W T M ] to the end of the sentence (Sec. 3.3). This is only adopted to simplify
the evaluations; as verified in App. G.3, naturally generated and forcefully generated watermarks
lead to comparable source attribution accuracy. We will also empirically show in App. G.4 that this
enforced watermark generation is not necessary if the generated texts are long enough.
Top-k Source Attribution. In addition to attributing a generated sentence to a single source by using
one watermark, it may be acceptable for some users to attribute a generated sentence to multiple
possible sources that contain the true source. To account for these scenarios, we propose top-k
source attribution in which we modify our watermark generation (Sec. 3.3) so that when the token
[W T M ] is encountered, we generate the top k > 1 watermarks with the largest beam search scores.
In this case, source attribution is successful if the true watermark is contained in these k watermarks,
so the top-k accuracy can be defined by replacing the number of correct watermarks in (8) with the
number of generated sentences whose k watermarks contain the true watermark.
Source Attribution Accuracy. Table 1 reports the source attribution accuracy averaged over 10
data providers which implies the accuracy of random guess is 10%. So, our WASA framework
consistently achieves accurate source attribution for both datasets and language models; Table 6 in
App. F.1 gives the source attribution accuracy for different data providers. We have also performed a
fine-grained analysis of the errors incurred by our WASA framework in source attribution. Results in
Table 8 (App. F.1) suggest that most source attribution errors are caused by generated texts exhibit-
ing the characteristics of multiple data providers. This further substantiates the reliable watermark
generation ability of our WASA-LLM since it almost never generates incorrect (unseen) watermarks.
Data Provenance. We will show here that WASA’s ability to perform reliable source attribution
also allows us to achieve accurate data provenance. When a data provider requests data provenance,
it uses its own text data (without watermark) as the input/prompt to our trained WASA-LLM to
verify whether the generated watermark matches its own (Sec. 3.4). We consider 20 categories/data
providers in the ArXiv dataset, including 10 categories whose data was used for second-stage pre-
training of GPT2 to obtain WASA-LLM and 10 other categories whose data was not used. We
select 50 papers from each category and choose a sentence from every selected paper to use as the
input/prompt to WASA-LLM for generating a watermark. The results in Table 7 (App. F.1) show that
for the first 10 categories whose data was not used to obtain WASA-LLM, we are consistently able to
recognize that their data was not misused; for the other 10 categories whose data was used to obtain
WASA-LLM, we can also identify this with high accuracy of 74.84% and top-3 accuracy of 95.76%.

                                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        attacks on generated sentences with embedded watermarks                                attacks on input sentences
 attack strength      insertion attack        deletion attack    synonym substitution     insertion attack           deletion attack     synonym substitution
                     acc.     top-3 acc.    acc.      top-3 acc.   acc.   top-3 acc.     acc.     top-3 acc.        acc.     top-3 acc.    acc.   top-3 acc.
 0%                 71.60%    93.76%     71.60%      93.76%     71.60%      93.76%      74.84%     95.76%        74.84%     95.76%      74.84%      95.76%
 Localized          71.40%    93.56%        -           -          -           -        74.20%     95.40%           -          -           -           -
 5%                 70.12%    93.20%     71.08%      93.92%     70.52%      93.52%      74.20%     95.40%        73.56%     95.52%      72.84%      95.24%
 10%                69.12%    92.20%     71.84%      93.68%     71.02%      92.88%      72.88%     94.68%        72.96%     94.68%      73.60%      95.00%
 15%                66.92%    91.96%     71.36%      94.04%     70.96%      92.72%      71.52%     93.20%        72.68%     94.12%      71.88%      94.20%
 20%                65.12%    91.44%     70.00%      93.24%     69.20%      93.20%      68.60%     93.40%        72.68%     94.12%      72.08%      93.76%

Table 2: Source attribution accuracy using regenerated watermarks by WASA-LLM (from 2nd-stage
pre-training of GPT2 on ArXiv dataset) under various attacks on generated sentences with embed-
ded watermarks (in addition to watermark removal/modification attacks) and on input sentences.
                                                                       GPT2                                          OPT
                   n categories    random guess
                                                         acc.       top-3 acc.     top-5 acc.      acc.          top-3 acc.     top-5 acc.
                        10             10.00%          74.84%        95.76%          98.56%      78.36%           99.04%         99.36%
                        25              4.00%          66.48%        90.69%          94.05%      69.76%           90.48%         95.76%
                        50              2.00%          56.44%        80.19%          87.54%      61.14%           82.63%         89.37%
                       100             1.00%           45.06%        68.61%          78.76%      48.86%           73.34%         81.54%

Table 3: Source attribution accuracy for different no. of categories/data providers on ArXiv dataset.

4.2     ROBUSTNESS
Our WASA framework is robust against malicious attacks aiming to disrupt the source attribution via
attacks on the generated watermarked sentences and on the input sentences.
Watermark Removal/Modification Attack. An adversary may remove/modify the watermarks in
our generated sentence to sabotage the source attribution accuracy. Due to the ability of our WASA-
LLM in learning an accurate texts-to-watermarks mapping, the watermark can be regenerated if it is
manipulated. Specifically, we clean the generated sentence by removing the corrupted watermark,
and use the cleaned sentence as input/prompt to WASA-LLM to regenerate the watermark (without
synthetic texts) which is then used for source attribution. The regenerated watermarks by WASA-
LLM (from second-stage pre-training of GPT2 on ArXiv dataset) lead to an overall accuracy (top-3
accuracy) of 71.60%(93.76%) which is comparable to the original 74.84%(95.76%) (Table 1). So,
our watermark regeneration is an effective defense mechanism. Besides removing/modifying the
watermark, an adversary may additionally modify the content of the generated sentence:
Additional Attacks. We also consider additional attacks on generated sentences with embedded wa-
termarks and on input sentences, including insertion, deletion, synonym substitution, and syntactic
transformation attacks. Table 2 reports the source attribution accuracy under the first 3 attacks, while
App. F.2 reports that under the last attack along with all the attack descriptions. For such attacks (in
addition to watermark removal/modification attacks) on generated sentences, watermark regenera-
tion is used. The results show that though the attacks deteriorate attribution accuracy, high source
attribution accuracy can still be preserved. This can again be explained by the reliable texts-to-
watermarks mapping of our WASA-LLM, which is robust against perturbations to the input/prompt.
4.3     S CALABILITY
Here, we will verify WASA’s ability to scale to a large number of data providers. We follow the
experimental setup in Sec. 4.1 and increase the number of data providers. Results in Tables 3 and 9
(App. F.3) show that as the number of data providers increases, the source attribution accuracy in-
evitably decreases yet still remains relatively high compared with random guessing. With more data
providers, we would recommend using k > 1 in top-k source attribution due to a higher resulting
accuracy and identifying the true source from among them.
4.4     OTHER K EY P ROPERTIES
Performance Preservation. We show that our WASA framework can preserve the ability of the
LLM in generating high-quality text in Table 10 (with more details in App. F.4) and ensure readabil-
ity of WASA-LLM-generated synthetic text in App. C.
Transferability. Our generated watermarked text has the same structure as the watermarked text
used to train our WASA-LLM: They both embed 10-character watermarks into texts with characters
from the same vocabulary. So, our generated watermarked text can be readily used as training data
for other LLMs that, like our WASA-LLM, can also generate synthetic text with watermarks. That
is, our generated watermarked text is transferable to other LLMs as their training data.


                                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adaptability. Our WASA framework only requires mild modifications to existing LLMs (Sec. 3.2)
and can hence be easily adapted to fit various LLMs. This has been verified by our results in Secs. 4.1
and 4.3 that given the same experimental setup, accurate source attributions can be achieved by
WASA-LLM that is obtained from our second-stage pre-training of various LLMs (i.e., GPT2, OPT).

5   A BLATION S TUDIES
We have also performed ablation studies to assess (a) the effectiveness of the designated embedding
space for watermark tokens and separation of the prediction/generation spaces (App. G.1), (b) the
impact of number of watermarks embedded in training data according to the percentage of top TF-
IDF scores in Sec. 3.1 (App. G.2), and to reveal insights about (c) the enforced watermark generation
in Sec. 4.1 has minimal impact on source attribution accuracy (App. G.3), (d) increasing the length
of generated texts leads to less forcefully generated watermarks and comparable source attribution
accuracy (App. G.4), (e) adopting TF-IDF to select sentences for embedding watermarks (Sec. 3.1)
indeed leads to a better performance than random selection (App. G.5), (f) using more data (for
every data provider) in our second-stage pre-training generally improves both the source attribution
accuracy and text generation ability (App. G.6), (g) high source attribution accuracy can be achieved
for watermarks with different lengths (App. G.7), (h) training for more epochs may further improve
the source attribution accuracy (App. G.8), and (i) using fewer Unicode characters slightly decreases
the top-k source attribution accuracy (App. G.9). More details are deferred to App. G.

6   R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we will review the most closely related works on source attribution and data prove-
nance to ours. App. B discusses additional related works on watermarking natural languages and
text steganography, as well as recent works on watermarking language models. Some recent works
attempt to obtain the data provenance of language models to verify whether a dataset has been used
to train a language model. Song & Shmatikov (2019) adopt membership inference attacks, i.e., by
training a shadow model to distinguish between training data vs. non-training data. However, their
method is only applicable to scenarios where the model output is relatively short (e.g., a single word)
and is hence not suitable for long generated texts which we consider in this work. Liu et al. (2023a)
have proposed to plant backdoor triggers into the training texts for the language model so that a data
contributor can verify whether its private text data has been used for training. However, this method
is not robust against removals of the backdoor triggers, and the backdoor triggers may deteriorate
the original text generation performance of the language model. Importantly, these works have only
focused on data provenance, and cannot be easily adapted to perform effective source attribution.
Abdelnabi & Fritz (2021) considers a different problem and proposes to embed a message into a
text via adversarial training. However, their method can only embed the message after the text is
generated by the language model and hence cannot be used for source attributionwhere the language
model generates the message/watermark. Some recent works in computer vision have tackled the
problem of source attribution (Marra et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019; 2021). However, to the best of our
knowledge, effective source attribution for the texts generated by language models remains an open
problem which requires significantly different approaches and is the focus of our work.

7   C ONCLUSION
This paper describes our proposed WASA framework which allows for effective source attribution
(and hence data provenance) for LLM-generated synthetic texts (Sec. 3). Through extensive empiri-
cal evaluations (Secs. 4 and 5), we have shown that our WASA framework satisfies the key properties
(Sec. 2) for watermarking frameworks to achieve effective source attribution and data provenance.
Since our WASA is the first watermarking framework to achieve effective source attribution for LLM-
generated texts, it faces some limitations which may call for future work. Firstly, we have only
focused on scenarios where the data providers have balanced data with sufficient dissimilarities
(Sec. 1). However, in some applications, the data from different data providers may be imbalanced
or similar. Secondly, though we have shown that our WASA is robust against various adversarial
attacks, it is unclear whether it is robust against more advanced/sophisticated attacks, which may be
achieved through adversarial training in future work. Due to lack of space, we defer the discussion
of some ethical considerations (e.g., privacy risks, data manipulation) for this work to App. A.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We have given the necessary details for reproducing the results in our work in this paper. Detailed
descriptions of the datasets used and the experimental settings have been included in Sec. 4 and
App. E, including the 5 specific random seed numbers for the experiment runs. Our code to repro-
duce the experiments has been included in the supplementary material.

R EFERENCES
Efficiently Generating Sentence-Level Textual Adversarial Examples with Seq2seq Stacked Auto-
  Encoder. Expert Systems with Applications, 213:119170, 2023.
Sahar Abdelnabi and Mario Fritz. Adversarial Watermarking Transformer: Towards Tracing Text
  Provenance with Data Hiding. In Proc. IEEE SP, pp. 121–140, 2021.
Nicholas Boucher, Ilia Shumailov, Ross Anderson, and Nicolas Papernot. Bad Characters: Imper-
  ceptible NLP Attacks. In Proc. IEEE SP, pp. 1987–2004, 2022.
Colin B. Clement, Matthew Bierbaum, Kevin P. O’Keeffe, and Alexander A. Alemi. On the Use of
  ArXiv as a Dataset. arXiv:1905.00075, 2019.
Long Dai, Jiarong Mao, Xuefeng Fan, and Xiaoyi Zhou. DeepHider: A Covert NLP Watermarking
  Framework Based on Multi-task Learning. arXiv:2208.04676, 2022.
Ji Gao, Jack Lanchantin, Mary Lou Soffa, and Yanjun Qi. Black-Box Generation of Adversarial
   Text Sequences to Evade Deep Learning Classifiers. In IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops
   (SPW), pp. 50–56, 2018.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. Making Pre-trained Language Models Better Few-shot
  Learners. In Proc. ACL-IJCNLP, pp. 3816–3830, 2021.
Chenxi Gu, Chengsong Huang, Xiaoqing Zheng, Kai-Wei Chang, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Watermarking
  Pre-trained Language Models with Backdooring. arXiv:2210.07543, 2023.
Felix Hamborg, Norman Meuschke, Corinna Breitinger, and Bela Gipp. news-please: A Generic
  News Crawler and Extractor. In Proc. 15th International Symposium of Information Science, pp.
  218–223, 2017.
Xuanli He, Qiongkai Xu, Lingjuan Lyu, Fangzhao Wu, and Chenguang Wang. Protecting Intellec-
  tual Property of Language Generation APIs with Lexical Watermark. In Proc. AAAI, pp. 10758–
  10766, 2022.
Nurul Shamimi Kamaruddin, Amirrudin Kamsin, Lip Yee Por, and Hameedur Rahman. A Review
  of Text Watermarking: Theory, Methods, and Applications. IEEE Access, 6:8011–8028, 2018.
Mikhail Khodak, Nikunj Saunshi, and Kiran Vodrahalli. A Large Self-Annotated Corpus for Sar-
 casm. In Proc. LREC, 2018.
John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. A
  Watermark for Large Language Models. In Proc. ICML, pp. 17061–17084, 2023.
Wojciech Kryściński, Nazneen Rajani, Divyansh Agarwal, Caiming Xiong, and Dragomir Radev.
 Booksum: A Collection of Datasets for Long-form Narrative Summarization. In Proc. EMNLP
 Findings, pp. 6536–6558, 2022.
Rohith Kuditipudi, John Thickstun, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Robust Distortion-free
  Watermarks for Language Models. arXiv:2307.15593, 2023.
Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. A Diversity-Promoting
  Objective Function for Neural Conversation Models. In Proc. NAACL, pp. 110–119, 2016.
Yixin Liu, Hongsheng Hu, Xuyun Zhang, and Lichao Sun. Watermarking Text Data on Large
  Language Models for Dataset Copyright Protection. arXiv:2305.13257, 2023a.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yiyi Liu, Ruqing Zhang, Yixing Fan, Jiafeng Guo, and Xueqi Cheng. Prompt Tuning with Contra-
  dictory Intentions for Sarcasm Recognition. In Proc. EACL, pp. 328–339, 2023b.
Patrice Lopez. Grobid. https://github.com/kermitt2/grobid, 2008–2023.
Francesco Marra, Diego Gragnaniello, Luisa Verdoliva, and Giovanni Poggi. Do GANs Leave
  Artificial Fingerprints? In Proc. MIPR, pp. 506–511, 2018.
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training Language Models to Follow Instructions with Human Feedback. In
  Proc. NeurIPS, 2022.
Christine I. Podilchuk and Edward J. Delp. Digital Watermarking: Algorithms and Applications.
  IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 18(4):33–46, 2001.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Lan-
  guage Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners, 2019. URL https://d4mucfpksywv.
  cloudfront.net/better-language-models/language-models.pdf.
Leonard Rosenthol. C2PA: The World’s First Industry Standard for Content Provenance (Conference
  Presentation). In Proc. SPIE 12226, Applications of Digital Image Processing XLV, pp. 122260P,
  2022.
Congzheng Song and Vitaly Shmatikov. Auditing Data Provenance in Text-Generation Models. In
  Proc. KDD, pp. 196–206, 2019.
Mercan Topkara, Umut Topkara, and Mikhail J. Atallah. Words Are Not Enough: Sentence Level
 Natural Language Watermarking. In Proc. MCPS, pp. 37–46, 2006a.
Umut Topkara, Mercan Topkara, and Mikhail J. Atallah. The Hiding Virtues of Ambiguity: Quan-
 tifiably Resilient Watermarking of Natural Language Text through Synonym Substitutions. In
 Proc. MM&Sec, pp. 164–174, 2006b.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation
  Language Models. arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Michael Völske, Martin Potthast, Shahbaz Syed, and Benno Stein. TL;DR: Mining Reddit to Learn
 Automatic Summarization. In Proc. EMNLP Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization, pp.
 59–63, 2017.
Zhong-Liang Yang, Xiao-Qing Guo, Zi-Ming Chen, Yong-Feng Huang, and Yu-Jin Zhang. RNN-
  Stega: Linguistic Steganography Based on Recurrent Neural Networks. IEEE Transactions on
  Information Forensics and Security, 14(5):1280–1295, 2019.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving with Large Language Models.
  arXiv:2305.10601, 2023.
Ning Yu, Larry Davis, and Mario Fritz. Attributing Fake Images to GANs: Learning and Analyzing
  GAN Fingerprints. In Proc. ICCV, pp. 7555–7565, 2019.
Ning Yu, Vladislav Skripniuk, Sahar Abdelnabi, and Mario Fritz. Artificial Fingerprinting for Gen-
  erative Models: Rooting Deepfake Attribution in Training Data. In Proc. ICCV, pp. 14428–14437,
  2021.
Jingqing Zhang, Yao Zhao, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter Liu. PEGASUS: Pre-training with Ex-
   tracted Gap-sentences for Abstractive Summarization. In Proc. ICML, pp. 11328–11339, 2020.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  OPT: Open Pre-trained Transformer Language Models. arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Xuandong Zhao, Lei Li, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Distillation-Resistant Watermarking for Model Pro-
  tection in NLP. In Proc. EMNLP Findings, pp. 5044–5055, 2022.
Zachary M. Ziegler, Yuntian Deng, and Alexander M. Rush. Neural Linguistic Steganography. In
  Proc. EMNLP, pp. 1210–1215, 2019.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS
Similar to other research topics on LLMs, watermarking the synthetic texts generated by LLMs for
source attribution (and hence data provenance) requires a thoughtful and ethical approach due to its
potential societal implications. That is, it is important to take necessary measures to avoid causing
harm to certain parties. Potential risks related to our watermarking framework include the following:
• Privacy Risks. Watermarking can potentially reveal sensitive information about data providers,
  thus leading to privacy breaches or the possibility of re-identification if not handled carefully.
  In our WASA framework, only the watermark can be seen in the synthetic data, which does not
  directly imply personal information about the data providers. Privacy can be preserved given that
  the mapping from watermarks to data providers is kept confidential.
• Chilling Effects. Watermarking may discourage some data providers from sharing their datasets,
  especially if they fear potential misuse or unintended consequences of having their data linked to
  specific research outcomes.
• Data Manipulation. While watermarks are meant to be unobtrusive and our WASA framework
  has been shown to be robust against various adversarial attacks, there can be unforeseen real-
  world instances where malicious actors attempt to manipulate the watermark, which may lead to
  negative consequences such as the dissemination of altered or misleading information.
To address these potential risks, it is essential to carefully consider the ethical implications of our
watermarking framework and implement measures to protect the privacy and interests of all involved
parties, particularly those who are more susceptible to harm. Researchers should conduct compre-
hensive risk assessments and engage in transparent communication with data providers to ensure the
responsible and ethical use of watermarked data. Additionally, incorporating diverse perspectives
and involving vulnerable communities in the decision-making process can help identify and mitigate
potential harm effectively.

B    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS
In addition to the previous works discussed in Sec. 6 that are most closely related to ours, we will
give a review of additional related works on watermarking natural languages and text steganography,
as well as recent works on watermarking language models.

Watermarking Natural Language/Text Steganography. In natural language processing, water-
marking and steganography are closely related in that they both desire stealthiness and robustness.
However, there are also important differences because watermarking emphasizes the importance
of ownership, whereas steganography focuses on the secret communication of messages. Language
watermarking is used to protect the integrity and authorship of digital texts (Kamaruddin et al., 2018;
Podilchuk & Delp, 2001). Early approaches of language watermarking are mostly rule-based and
make use of linguistic techniques such as synonym substitution (Topkara et al., 2006b) and sentence
structure alteration (Topkara et al., 2006a) to embed watermarks while attempting to preserve the
semantic meaning of the original texts. However, these approaches usually lead to deteriorated text
quality and are not scalable. Some recent works have aimed to develop advanced text steganography
methods using deep learning. The work of Yang et al. (2019) has utilized recurrent neural networks
to automatically generate steganographic texts, and the work of Ziegler et al. (2019) has proposed
to first convert the secret messages into bit strings and then map them to the cover text based on
arithmetic coding with the help of GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019).

Watermarking Language Models. Some recent works have proposed methods to add watermarks
to language models in order to protect the IP of the models (Dai et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2023; He et al.,
2022; Zhao et al., 2022). These methods allow the verification of model ownership and are hence
able to protect the economic interests of model owners. Specifically, the work of He et al. (2022) has
employed lexical replacement to watermark the language model output and used hypothesis testing
for post-hoc model ownership verification. The work of Gu et al. (2023) has adopted backdoor at-
tacks to embed black-box watermarks into pre-trained language models, which is achieved by using
rare words as well as a combination of common words as backdoor triggers and verifying the water-
marks by calculating the extraction success rate. Apart from model protection, the work of Kirchen-
bauer et al. (2023) has proposed to use watermarking to distinguish between human-generated and


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model-generated synthetic texts, which is achieved by softly constraining the word choices when the
model generates synthetic texts and using hypothesis testing to make the distinction. More recently,
the work of Kuditipudi et al. (2023) has improved the method from Kirchenbauer et al. (2023) by
developing a distortion-free method, which ensures that the watermarks do not change the sampling
distribution of the texts. Importantly, these methods cannot be used to perform source attribution for
the texts generated by language models, which we focus on in this work.

C     G ENERATED S YNTHETIC T EXTS WITH E MBEDDED WATERMARKS
We have discussed in Sec. 3.3 how our trained WASA-LLM can be used to generate synthetic texts
with embedded watermarks. Fig. 4 below shows an example of the watermarked texts generated by
our WASA-LLM, which shows that the generated watermarks that are embedded into the synthetic
texts are indeed imperceptible to human eyes. Therefore, the readability of the synthetic texts will
not be affected much.


Figure 4: An example of our WASA-LLM-generated synthetic texts with embedded watermarks that
are imperceptible to human eyes.



D     WATERMARK M ATCHING
Exact Matching. In this work, we adopt exact matching to determine the correctness of the gen-
erated watermarks. That is, given a piece of synthetic text with watermarks and the corresponding
ground-truth watermark, the generated watermark is correct only if they are strictly equal in string
matching. In addition, in case multiple watermarks are generated in the synthetic data, all generated
watermarks have to match the ground-truth watermark to affirm the correctness. The pseudocode
for the matching algorithm is given below:

Algorithm 1 Exact Matching
Require: Synthetic text syn, ground-truth watermark wtmg
 1: if ∃ wtm in syn then
 2:     wtms ← watermark decoder(syn)
 3:     if wtm == wtmg (by string matching) for all wtm in wtms then
 4:         return True
 5:     end if
 6: end if


Soft Matching. To further improve the source attribution accuracy in some applications, we may
relax the requirement of exact watermarking matching and instead attribute the generated texts to the
data provider whose watermark has the smallest Levenshtein distance to the generated watermark.
However, in all our experiments, our WASA is able to achieve accurate source attribution without
soft matching.

E     D ETAILED E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
E.1   DATASETS

To simulate different data providers with unique characteristics, we create the Clean-ArXiv-Corpus
(or ArXiv for short) dataset which consists of academic papers from ArXiv. The dataset contains


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


academic papers from various sub-disciplines, including computer science, physics, mathematics,
public health, and other related fields. We make use of the provided metadata from the work
of Clement et al. (2019) to download the corresponding PDF files and retrieve the categorization
information associated with each article. Subsequently, we employ GROBID (Lopez, 2008–2023)
to parse and extract the main body of the papers, excluding the abstract and reference sections.
Our Clean-ArXiv-Corpus dataset covers a comprehensive collection of 100 distinct categories, each
comprising a number of papers ranging from 2827 to 2984. We treat every category as a data
provider, so one data provider/category is the source of each piece of text. Our main experiments in
Sec. 4 are conducted using 10 categories (i.e., data providers) and we use 33% of papers from each
category due to computational constraints. However, in our ablation study (App. G.6), we have also
tested utilizing more data from every data provider (including 100% of the data), which has led to
further improved performances and consistent conclusions. For each of the 10 categories, we further
randomly split its data into training and evaluation datasets with a ratio of 9 : 1 according to the seed
number. In our ablation study, we will use more categories and also use all papers in each category.
More detailed information about the full Clean-ArXiv-Corpus dataset, including all 100 categories
and all papers in each category, is shown in Table 4; Table 4 shows an instance of the random split
into training and evaluation datasets based on seed number 2023.
In addition to the Clean-ArXiv-Corpus dataset, we also adopt the BookSum dataset (Kryściński
et al., 2022). This dataset contains documents from the literature domain including novels, plays,
and stories. The BookSum dataset contains 181 books and we treat every book as a data provider.
For every data provider (i.e., book), we adopt all the text data from the book in all our experiments.
More information on the BookSum dataset is shown in Table 5; Table 5 shows an instance of the
random split into training and evaluation datasets based on seed number 2023.

                                                         Training    Evaluation
                        Papers                            264K           29K
                        Unique tokens                     17.1M          3M
                        Unique tokens per Category        407K           87K
                        Total tokens                       1.8B         203M
                        Total tokens per Category         18.2M          2M

           Table 4: Information on the Clean-ArXiv-Corpus (or ArXiv for short) dataset.

                                                         Training    Evaluation
                        Books                              161           20
                        Unique tokens                     413K          106K
                        Unique tokens per Book             91K          20K
                        Total tokens                      33M           4.6M
                        Total tokens per Book             3.3M          467K

                           Table 5: Information on the BookSum dataset.


E.2   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING

In our experiments, we build our WASA-LLM based on the open-source pre-trained GPT2-Large
model (Radford et al., 2019) and OPT-1.3B model (Zhang et al., 2022). Based on the pre-trained
weights, we perform our second-stage pre-training (Sec. 3.2) of the pre-trained GPT2-Large model
or the OPT-1.3B model on the watermarked (Sec. 3.1) text data for one epoch to obtain WASA-
LLM. We find that training for one epoch already allows our WASA framework to achieve com-
pelling performances, as shown in our experiments in Sec. 4. We have also tested more training
epochs in App. G.8 and the results suggest that our performances can potentially be further im-
proved with more training epochs. We plot the convergence of the training of our WASA-LLM in
terms of the losses for the word and watermark tokens in Fig. 5, which shows that our second-stage
pre-training effectively reduces both losses. Importantly, the watermark token loss rapidly declines
after a small number of steps, which suggests that our WASA-LLM can quickly learn an accurate
texts-to-watermarks mapping.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Training losses for word tokens (Loss lm) and watermark tokens (Loss wtm) when ob-
taining WASA-LLM from second-stage pre-training of the GPT2 model on ArXiv dataset.


Here, we give more details on the hyperparameters we adopted. We fix 5 seed numbers at 2021,
2022, 2023, 2024, and 2025 for obtaining reproducible results, and the results shown in this work
are the average taken across that from the 5 seeds. We adopt the Adam optimizer with a learning rate
of 5 × 10−5 and no weight decay. We make use of the fp16 technique and a gradient accumulation
of 8 to speed up training. We also adopt a gradient checkpoint to reduce memory usage so that batch
size can be slightly increased. We use a block size of 512 and a batch size of 3 for most of the
experiments and a batch size of 16 in the experiments to evaluate scalability. To further preserve
the ability of the original pre-trained LLM models, during the second-stage pre-training, we freeze
the first 12 layers of GPT2-Large (among a total of 36 layers) and freeze the first 8 layers of OPT-
1.3B (among a total of 24 layers). When generating the synthetic texts (see Sec. 3.3), we use the
multinomial sampling of top-60 with temperature = 0.7. We also make use of a 1.2 repetition
penalty and a 2.0 length penalty to generate better synthetic data. The generation of watermarks
for our WASA-LLM adopts a pure beam search, as discussed in Sec. 3.3, with a beam size of 5.
For the baseline models (GPT2-Large and OPT-1.3B), watermark generation is performed in the
same way as text generation, so we use the same hyperparameters as that specified in the baseline
models. All second-stage pre-training is performed using NVIDIA RTX A5000 and A100. In our
implementation, we adopt the GROBID library to process the PDF files. For model training, we
adopt the Hugging Face Trainer pipeline which embeds necessary tricks to speed up the training
process. The open-source GPT2-Large and OPT-1.3B are also adopted from Hugging Face.2

F     M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
F.1   ACCURACY

More Details on Experimental Setup. In our experiments on the source attribution accuracy, for the
ArXiv dataset, we select 50 papers from each of the 10 categories (App. E.1) and for every selected
paper, we choose the first sentence that has been selected for watermarking (to obtain our WASA-
LLM from second-stage pre-training of various pre-trained LLMs, see Sec. 3.1 for more details on
how we select the sentences for watermarking) as well as contains at least 200 characters. Similarly,
for every book (i.e., data provider) in the BookSum dataset, we select the first 50 sentences that
have been selected for watermarking as well as have at least 200 characters. As a result, for both
datasets, we have selected 50 sentences to be used as the inputs/prompts to our WASA-LLM, which
corresponds to 50 trials of source attribution for each of the 10 data providers.
Source Attribution Accuracy for Each Data Provider. Table 6 shows the detailed results on
source attribution accuracy for the 10 different data providers, in addition to Table 1 in Sec. 4.1. The
results show that the accuracy remains balanced across the data providers.
Data Provenance. Table 7 displays the detailed results for the experiment on data provenance
presented in Sec. 4.1 of the main paper. The insights/conclusions drawn from these results have been
  2
    https://huggingface.co/GPT2-Large and https://huggingface.co/facebook/
OPT-1.3B.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       ArXiv dataset                                                   BookSum dataset
                           GPT2                 OPT                                           GPT2                    OPT
 Data Provider                                                 Data Provider
                      acc.   top-3 acc.    acc.   top-3 acc.                           acc.     top-3 acc.    acc.      top-3 acc.
 hep-th              65.60%    94.40%     67.60%    99.20%     Adam Bede              82.40%      95.60%     85.20%      96.00%
 hep-ph              85.20%    96.80%     87.60%    98.80%     David Copperfield      80.00%      88.40%     77.20%      91.60%
 quant-ph            74.80%    91.60%     76.80%    98.00%     Dracula                66.80%      86.00%     71.60%      91.60%
 astro-ph            86.40%    94.40%     86.00%    98.40%     Hamlet                 91.20%      96.80%     97.60%      99.20%
 cs.CV               82.00%    95.20%     85.20%    99.20%     Henry IV Part 1        90.40%      98.40%     97.20%      99.60%
 cs.LG               77.60%    98.80%     83.20%    99.60%     Ivanhoe                83.60%      94.40%     89.20%      93.60%
 cond-mat.mes-hall   64.80%    98.40%     74.00%    99.20%     Jane Eyre              74.00%      90.00%     80.00%      96.40%
 gr-qc               76.40%    96.40%     82.00%    99.20%     Little Women           85.60%      94.00%     94.00%      98.00%
 cond-mat.mtrl-sci   64.80%    95.20%     71.60%    99.20%     Middlemarch            72.80%      94.40%     76.00%      93.20%
 cond-mat.str-el     70.80%    96.40%     69.60%    99.60%     The Pickwick Papers    52.40%      80.00%     64.00%      79.20%
 Overall             74.84%    95.76%     78.36%    99.04%     Overall                77.92%      91.80%     83.20%      93.84%


Table 6: Source attribution accuracy achieved by our WASA-LLM (i.e., obtained from second-stage
pre-training of different models on various datasets) for different data providers.


discussed in Sec. 4.1: Due to its ability to perform accurate source attribution, our WASA framework
can also achieve reliable data provenance.



                               category            n watermark    data provenance (n match)
                               cond-mat.soft            50                  ✗ (0)
                               q-bio.PE                 50                  ✗ (0)
                               cs.SY                    50                  ✗ (0)
                               eess.IV                  50                  ✗ (0)
                               hep-ex                   50                  ✗ (0)
                               math.LO                  50                  ✗ (0)
                               math.NA                  50                  ✗ (0)
                               math.ST                  50                  ✗ (0)
                               nlin.SI                  50                  ✗ (0)
                               physics.class-ph         50                  ✗ (0)
                               hep-th                   50                 ✓ (32.8)
                               hep-ph                   50                 ✓ (42.6)
                               quant-ph                 50                 ✓ (37.4)
                               astro-ph                 50                 ✓ (43.2)
                               cs.CV                    50                 ✓ (41.0)
                               cs.LG                    50                 ✓ (38.8)
                               cond-mat.mes-hall        50                 ✓ (32.4)
                               gr-qc                    50                 ✓ (38.2)
                               cond-mat.mtrl-sci        50                 ✓ (32.4)
                               cond-mat.str-el          50                 ✓ (35.4)


Table 7: Reliable data provenance can be achieved due to the ability of WASA-LLM to perform
accurate source attribution. WASA-LLM is obtained from second-stage pre-training of the GPT2
model on the ArXiv dataset. Note that the numbers shown here are the average taken across 5 runs
with different random seeds.



Fine-grained Analysis of Source Attribution Errors. To gain more insights into the behavior
of our WASA framework, we perform a more fine-grained analysis of the errors incurred by our
WASA framework in source attribution on the ArXiv dataset (i.e., corresponding to the results in
Table 1). In Table 8, for every category (i.e., data provider), we separate the source attribution errors
into two types of errors: (a) misclassification in which the generated watermark matches the water-
mark of another incorrect category, and (b) incorrect watermark in which the generated watermark
does not match the watermark of any category. The results in Table 8 show that the vast majority of
our errors result from misclassification and our WASA-LLM rarely generates incorrect watermarks
not belonging to any category. This implies that our source attribution errors are mostly caused by
the generated synthetic texts (conditioned on a sentence from a data provider/category) exhibiting
the characteristics of multiple data providers. These results further substantiate the strong and re-
liable watermark generation ability of our WASA-LLM because it almost never generates incorrect
(unseen) watermarks.


                                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            category            n watermark   n match   misclassification   incorrect watermark
            hep-th                  50         32.8           17.2                  0
            hep-ph                  50         42.6           7.4                   0
            quant-ph                50         37.4           12.6                  0
            astro-ph                50         43.2           6.8                   0
            cs.CV                   50         41.0           9.0                   0
            cs.LG                   50         38.8           11.2                  0
            cond-mat.mes-hall       50         32.4           17.6                  0
            gr-qc                   50         38.2           11.8                  0
            cond-mat.mtrl-sci       50         32.4           17.6                  0
            cond-mat.str-el         50         35.4           14.6                  0
            Total                  500         374.2         125.8                  0

Table 8: Error analysis of watermarks incurred by our WASA-LLM that is obtained from second-
stage pre-training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset. Note that the numbers shown here are
the average taken across 5 runs with different random seeds.


F.2     ROBUSTNESS

F.2.1    A DDITIONAL ATTACKS ON G ENERATED S ENTENCES WITH E MBEDDED WATERMARKS
As discussed in Sec. 4.2, an adversary may additionally modify the content of the generated sentence
while removing/modifying the generated watermarks. Here, we will consider insertion, deletion,
synonym substitution, and syntactic transformation attacks. In insertion attacks on a generated wa-
termarked sentence, either one word is randomly inserted into the sentence (i.e., localized insertion
attacks), or various words are randomly interspersed throughout the sentence (i.e., dispersed inser-
tion attacks) (Kamaruddin et al., 2018). For dispersed insertion attacks, we vary the attack strengths
by changing the number of inserted words from 5% to 20% of the total number of words in the sen-
tence. In deletion attacks, some words in the text are randomly deleted. In synonym substitution
attacks (Kamaruddin et al., 2018), an adversary substitutes some words in the generated sentence
with their synonyms while preserving the semantic meaning of the sentence. We again test different
attack strengths by varying the percentage of randomly deleted and substituted words. In addition,
we also performed the syntactic transformation attack on the generated sentences whereby an ad-
versary transforms the sentences (without altering their semantic meanings) via techniques such as
modifying the prepositions, tenses, and other syntax components. Here, we adopt a strong variant
of such attacks, which paraphrases the input sentence using the PEGASUS model fine-tuned for
paraphrasing (Zhang et al., 2020). The accuracy (top-3 accuracy) after the syntactic transforma-
tion attacks is 66.28% (89.56%). The robustness of our WASA framework can be validated by the
marginal performance degradation in Table 2.

F.2.2    ATTACKS ON I NPUT S ENTENCES (P ROMPTS )
An adversary may also manipulate the input sentence (prompt) to our trained WASA-LLM to dis-
rupt watermark generation and hence source attribution. The insertion, deletion, and syntactic
transformation attacks are the same as those described in App. F.2.1, except that these attacks are
performed on the input sentences here. Similar to App. F.2.1, we vary the attack strengths for these
three types of attacks. The results in Table 2 show that these attacks also only lead to marginal
degradation in the source attribution accuracy. Moreover, under the strong syntactic transformation
attacks, the source attribution remains accurate (with an accuracy of 63.00% and a top-3 accuracy
of 89.00%), which provides further evidence for the robustness of our WASA framework against
attacks on the input sentences. Its robustness against these attacks can again be explained by its
reliable texts-to-watermarks mapping, which allows our WASA-LLM to consistently generate the
correct watermarks even if the prompt is perturbed.

F.3     S CALABILITY

In Sec. 4.3, we have verified WASA’s scalability to a large number of data providers using the ArXiv
dataset. Here, we will also show in Table 9 the source attribution accuracy for a larger number
of books (i.e., data providers) using the BookSum dataset. Note that WASA’s scalability using the


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


BookSum dataset is worse than that using the ArXiv dataset because each data provider in the former
offers much less data.

                                            GPT2                                      OPT
  n books    random guess
                                acc.     top-3 acc.     top-5 acc.    acc.        top-3 acc.   top-5 acc.
      10        10.00%        77.92%      91.80%         96.52%      83.20%        93.84%       97.80%
      25         4.00%        52.69%      68.80%         75.33%      64.04%        76.85%       83.71%
      50         2.00%        45.18%      62.23%         67.63%      54.17%        70.01%       76.79%
      100       1.00%         18.50%      40.15%         44.52%      24.01%        55.70%       63.31%

Table 9: Source attribution accuracy for different numbers of books (i.e., data providers) in the
BookSum dataset.


F.4    P ERFORMANCE P RESERVATION

Here, we will show that our WASA-LLM preserves the text generation ability of the original LLM by
comparing it with the original GPT2-Large model which we denote as originalGPT. We apply our
second-stage pre-training to originalGPT using the same (but un-watermarked) data from the ArXiv
dataset as that used for second-stage pre-training of the GPT2-Large model to obtain our WASA-
LLM. We assess the text generation performance using several commonly used evaluation metrics
(with a separate evaluation dataset, as explained in App. E.1): perplexity (i.e., lower is better), and
distinct-1 and distinct-2 scores (i.e., higher is better) (Li et al., 2016). The results in Table 10
show that the text generation ability of our WASA-LLM is comparable to that of originalGPT, which
indicates that our WASA framework preserves the ability of the LLM to generate high-quality texts
(Sec. 2).

                         models          perplexity     distinct-1   distinct-2
                         originalGPT      12.2818         0.8141      0.9796
                         WASA-LLM         12.6570         0.8194      0.9800

Table 10: Comparison of the text generation performances achieved by our WASA-LLM (obtained
from second-stage pre-training of the GPT2-Large model) vs. the baseline model on the ArXiv
dataset.


G     D ETAILED R ESULTS FROM A BLATION S TUDIES
Here, we will present detailed results from our ablation studies. In all our ablation studies, we use
second-stage pre-training of the GPT2-Large model on the ArXiv dataset to obtain WASA-LLM.
Note that we fix 5 seed numbers at 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, and 2025 for obtaining reproducible
results, and the results shown are the average taken across that from the 5 seeds.

G.1    E FFECTIVENESS OF OUR WASA-LLM T RAINING

We have mainly implemented two important algorithmic designs to help our WASA-LLM learn an
accurate texts-to-watermarks mapping (Sec. 3.2): (1) using a designated embedding space for water-
mark tokens and (2) separating the prediction/generation spaces for the word and watermark tokens.
Here, we compare our WASA-LLM with two baselines: tokenizerGPT implementing only the first
design of a designated embedding space for watermark tokens, and originalGPT (original GPT2-
Large) implementing neither design. We apply our second-stage pre-training to both baselines using
the same (watermarked) data from the ArXiv dataset which was used for second-stage pre-training
of the GPT2-Large model to obtain our WASA-LLM, and evaluate the source attribution accuracy
following that of Sec. 4.1. The results in Table 11 show that the first design alone does not improve
the source attribution accuracy whereas the combination of both designs brings about a significant
improvement. This is because merely creating the embedding space for watermark tokens does not
help in learning the mapping from the texts to watermarks, and it is of particular importance to


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


combine both designs for our WASA-LLM to perform well. Moreover, our WASA-LLM achieves a
significantly better source attribution accuracy at the expense of incurring more computational time.
Note that originalGPT takes longer training time than tokenizerGPT because there is no designated
embedding space for watermark tokens in originalGPT, hence resulting in more training instances
used.

                 model          n watermark    acc.    n training samples   training time
                 RandomGuess         -        10.00%           -                  -
                 originalGPT        412       45.69%        163507            6h30m3s
                 tokenizerGPT       439       44.01%        140599             5h3m6s
                 WASA-LLM           448       74.84%        159387           8h09m24s

Table 11: Comparison of source attribution accuracy achieved by WASA-LLM (obtained from
second-stage pre-training of the GPT2 model) vs. the baseline models on the ArXiv dataset where
‘acc.’ denotes the source attribution accuracy. RandomGuess incurs an accuracy of 10% since there
are 10 categories.


G.2   I MPACT OF N UMBER OF WATERMARKS IN T RAINING DATA

Here, we will evaluate the impact of the number of watermarks in the training data on the source
attribution accuracy achieved by WASA-LLM. Following that of Sec. 3.1, we vary the percentage of
sentences selected for watermarking (i.e., top X% of the TF-IDF scores) and evaluate its impact on
our WASA-LLM obtained from second-stage pre-training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset.
Fig. 6 (left) shows that as the number of watermarks increases, the source attribution accuracy firstly
increases and then declines. This is because an overly small number of watermarks results in in-
sufficient data for learning an accurate texts-to-watermarks mapping; meanwhile, if watermarks are
added to an excessively large number of sentences, then some of the watermarked sentences may
not be representative of the texts from their data providers, which also increases the difficulty of
learning the mapping from the texts of the data providers to their unique watermarks (see Sec. 3.1).
In addition, Fig. 6 (right) shows that increasing the number of added watermarks in general leads to
worse text generation performances (i.e., larger perplexity) of the WASA-LLM. The detailed results
are provided in Table 12. Moreover, Fig. 7 shows a clearer visualization of the results in smaller
percentages.


Figure 6: Source attribution accuracy and perplexity achieved by WASA-LLM (i.e., obtained from
second-stage pre-training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset) vs. percentage of watermarked
sentences in the training data.


G.3   I MPACT OF E NFORCED WATERMARK G ENERATION

As discussed in Sec. 4.1, to evaluate the source attribution accuracy in our experiments, we have
adopted a simple technique to enforce watermark generation in order to simplify the evaluations.
That is, if a watermark is not generated after the generation of the sentence is completed, we add
the token [W T M ] to the end of the sentence to enforce the watermark generation. Here, we will
evaluate the impact of this enforced watermark generation. The results in Table 13 show that the


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 pct. sentences       pct. blocks       acc.         top-3 acc.   perplexity
                 20%                  88.25%          74.84%          95.76%      12.6570
                 40%                  96.88%          74.16%          95.45%      12.9180
                 60%                  98.86%          74.32%          95.04%      13.3096
                 80%                  99.38%          73.48%          95.40%      14.1952
                 100%                 100.00%         72.24%          95.00%      15.8465

Table 12: Comparison of source attribution accuracy achieved by WASA-LLM (i.e., obtained from
second-stage pre-training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset) for different percentages of
watermarked sentences in the training data. The percentage of blocks that are watermarked is given
as well.


Figure 7: Source attribution accuracy and perplexity achieved by WASA-LLM (i.e., obtained from
second-stage pre-training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset) vs. percentage of watermarked
sentences in the training data on a smaller scale of 0.05% − 1% for a clearer visualization.


forcefully generated watermarks and naturally generated watermarks have comparable source attri-
bution accuracy. This shows that the technique of enforced watermark generation we have adopted
has minimal impact on the evaluations of the source attribution accuracy (Sec. 4.1).

      category            n watermark nf   n match nf      acc. nf    n watermark f   n match f   acc. f
      hep-th                   45.8           30.4         66.38%          4.2           2.4      57.14%
      hep-ph                   44.2           37.8         85.52%          5.8           4.8      82.76%
      quant-ph                 46.0           35.4         77.00%           4             2       50.00%
      astro-ph                 44.2           38.6         87.33%          5.8           4.6      79.31%
      cs.CV                    44.2           36.4         82.35%          5.8           4.6      79.31%
      cs.LG                    44.4           35.0         78.83%          5.6           3.8      67.86%
      cond-mat.mes-hall        44.8           28.8         64.29%          5.2           3.6      69.23%
      gr-qc                    43.2           33.8         78.24%          6.8           4.4      64.71%
      cond-mat.mtrl-sci        46.6           30.6         65.67%          3.4           1.8      52.94%
      cond-mat.str-el          44.6           31.6         70.85%          5.4           3.8      70.37%
      Total                    448            338.4        75.54%          52           35.8      68.85%

Table 13: Source attribution accuracy achieved by WASA-LLM (i.e., obtained from second-stage
pre-training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset) for naturally generated watermarks (denoted
by ‘watermark nf’) vs. forcefully generated watermarks (denoted by ‘watermark f’).


G.4   I MPACT OF L ENGTHS OF C ONDITIONED S ENTENCE AND S YNTHETIC S ENTENCE

Recall that in our main experiments, we have used a sentence with 200 characters as the input/prompt
(i.e., the conditioned sentence) to our WASA-LLM, and let the WASA-LLM generate synthetic texts
with 100 tokens (Sec. 4.1). In this section, we vary the character lengths of both the conditioned
sentence and the generated synthetic texts, and evaluate their impact on the source attribution ac-
curacy achieved by WASA-LLM (i.e., obtained from second-stage pre-training of the GPT2 model
on the ArXiv dataset). The results in Table 14 show that longer conditioned sentences (i.e., in-


                                                      21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


puts/prompts) lead to better performances. Moreover, when the length of the conditioned sentences
is fixed (at 200), increasing the length of the generated synthetic texts consistently reduces the num-
ber of forcefully generated watermarks (App. G.3) while preserving the source attribution accuracy
achieved by WASA-LLM.

      len. cond. sentence    tokens syn. sentence       acc.          top-3 acc.   pct. watermark f
              100                     100              63.92%          89.96%           15.2%
              100                     200              64.36%          89.48%            5.2%
              200                     100              74.84%          95.76%            8.6%
              200                     200              75.20%          95.64%            4.2%
              200                     300              74.24%          95.40%            2.2%
              200                     400              74.60%          95.24%            1.0%

Table 14: Impact of the lengths of the conditioned sentences (inputs/prompts) and the generated syn-
thetic sentences on the source attribution accuracy achieved by WASA-LLM (obtained from second-
stage pre-training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset) where ‘len. cond. sentence’ stands for
the character length of the conditioned sentences, ‘tokens syn. sentence’ refers to the number of
tokens in the generated synthetic sentences, and ‘pct. watermark f’ denotes the percentage of force-
fully generated watermarks.


G.5   S TRATEGY FOR S ELECTING S ENTENCES TO WATERMARK

As we have discussed in Sec. 3.1, for every data provider, we embed watermarks into the sentences
with top TF-IDF scores and then use these watermarked sentences for the second-stage pre-training
(Sec. 3.2) of the GPT2 model to obtain our WASA-LLM. This is because the sentences with high
TF-IDF scores are more representative of the text data from a data provider, which makes it easier
to learn the mapping from the texts of different data providers to their corresponding unique wa-
termarks. Here, we will evaluate whether this strategy is effective by comparing it with the natural
baseline of randomly selecting sentences to embed watermarks. The results in Table 15 show that
when selecting 20% of the sentences for watermarking, the strategy of random embedding signifi-
cantly decreases the source attribution accuracy, which validates the effectiveness of our strategy of
selecting sentences with high TF-IDF scores to watermark.

                                                       dataset size         acc.    top-3 acc.   perplexity
  embedding strategy        acc.     top-3 acc.
                                                       10%: 100MB         68.80%     94.10%      14.6135
  TF-IDF (ours)           74.84%      95.76%           33%: 300MB         74.84%     95.76%      12.6570
  Randomly Embed          71.40%      94.48%           66%: 600MB         76.28%     95.88%      11.6749
                                                       100%: 1GB          78.48%     95.80%      11.3171
Table 15: Source attribution accuracy achieved
by WASA-LLM (obtained from second-stage pre-         Table 16: Comparison of source attribution accu-
training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset)     racy and perplexity achieved by WASA-LLM (ob-
using different strategies to select the sentences   tained from second-stage pre-training of the
for watermarking.                                    GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset) across differ-
                                                     ent dataset sizes.


G.6   I MPACT OF A MOUNT OF DATA FOR S ECOND -S TAGE P RE - TRAINING TO O BTAIN
      WASA-LLM

Here, we will evaluate the impact of using varying amounts of data from the ArXiv dataset for
our second-stage pre-training (Sec. 3.2) of the GPT2 model to obtain WASA-LLM. As discussed in
App. E.1, in our main experiments for the ArXiv dataset, we have used 33% of text data from every
category (i.e., data provider) to reduce computations. Here, we will vary this percentage to evaluate
its impact on both the source attribution accuracy and the text generation performance achieved by
our WASA-LLM. The results in Table 16 demonstrate that as more data is used, both the source
attribution accuracy and the text generation ability (i.e., perplexity) achieved by our WASA-LLM are
generally improved.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.7    I MPACT OF L ENGTH OF WATERMARK

In our main experiments, we have adopted a watermark design that consists of 10 characters/tokens
(Sec. 3.1). However, our WASA framework allows for the use of watermarks with different lengths.
Here, we will test the impact of the length of the watermarks on the source attribution accuracy
achieved by WASA-LLM (obtained from second-stage pre-training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv
dataset). The results in Table 17 show that for watermarks with 5, 10, and 15 characters, their source
attribution accuracies are comparable while the 5-character watermark achieves slightly better per-
formances. This is likely because when the watermark is shorter, the resulting watermark prediction
problem becomes relatively easier (i.e., the number of parameters in the last linear layer is smaller),
which may lead to better watermark prediction and generation. However, note that a long water-
mark is favored when there is a need to scale to a large number of data providers. Therefore, our
WASA framework offers the flexibility to choose watermarks with different lengths, and the preferred
watermark length can be application-dependent.

      len. watermarks     acc.     top-3 acc.                  n epochs        acc.   top-3 acc.
      5 characters      76.12%      95.48%                        1       74.84%       95.76%
      10 characters     74.84%      95.76%                        2       76.96%       96.00%
      15 characters     74.12%      95.28%                        3       75.88%       95.88%

Table 17: Source attribution accuracy achieved      Table 18: Source attribution accuracy achieved
by WASA-LLM (obtained from second-stage pre-        by WASA-LLM (obtained from second-stage pre-
training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset)    training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset)
using watermarks with different lengths.            after training with more epochs.


G.8    I MPACT OF N UMBER OF T RAINING E POCHS

As we have discussed in App. E.2, we have trained our WASA-LLM for one epoch during the second-
stage pre-training (Sec. 3.2). Here, we will evaluate the performance of WASA-LLM after training
with more epochs. The results in Table 18 show that training with multiple epochs in general further
improves the performance. This demonstrates the potential of our WASA framework to achieve
even better source attribution accuracy (than those presented in our current experiments) with more
computations.

G.9    I MPACT OF N UMBER OF WATERMARK C HARACTERS

In our main experiments, we have used 6 invisible Unicode characters to form each character in the
10-character watermark. Our WASA framework also allows for the use of watermarks such that each
character in the watermark can be chosen among a different number of available characters. Ta-
ble 19 shows the source attribution accuracy achieved by WASA-LLM (obtained from second-stage
pre-training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset) when each character in the watermark can be
chosen among only 2 available characters: U+200B: Zero Width Space and U+200C: Zero Width
NonJoiner. The results are comparable while the one with 2 available characters shows slightly
worse top-3 accuracy. This is likely because when fewer available characters are used, the water-
marks for different categories are more similar to each other, which may make top-3 classification
more difficult.

                           n available characters       acc.      top-3 acc.
                                      2                75.48%      89.92%
                                      6                74.84%      95.76%

Table 19: Impact of the number of available characters (used to make up each character in the 10-
character watermark) on the source attribution accuracy achieved by WASA-LLM (obtained from
second-stage pre-training of the GPT2 model on the ArXiv dataset).



                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.10      E FFECTIVENESS OF E VALUATION

In our experiment design, we assign the ground truth source of each generated text to be identical to
that of the prompt sentence. Here, we would like to verify that our method of using the source of the
prompt sentence as the ground truth source for the generated sentence is indeed a reliable approach,
in addition to its benefit of simplifying the experimental evaluation.
A natural and reliable method to find the ground truth source of a generated text is to consult the
opinion of human experts. Therefore, we would like to show that our method to determine the
ground truth source is an accurate approximation to human evaluations. To avoid the substan-
tial costs and resources associated with human evaluators, we have employed GPT-4, noted for its
human-level performance across various benchmarks (OpenAI, 2023), as a surrogate ‘human-like
labeler’. Then, we examine whether the ground truth source determined by our method (i.e., using
the source of the prompt sentence) aligns well with those determined by GPT-4. Specifically, we use
GPT-4 to categorize generated texts into one of the ten ArXiv categories (i.e., data providers) using
a carefully constructed prompt, as shown in Table 20. After evaluating 500 generated texts, we have
found that 89.6% of GPT-4’s decisions align with our source determination method (i.e., using the
source of the prompt sentence). This validates that our method to determine the ground truth source
of a generated text is a reasonable and reliable approach.
We would like to add that employing GPT-4 as a ‘human-like labeler’ is only feasible in our con-
trolled setting here because it requires including our prior knowledge about all sources and detailed
descriptions of the sources; see the detailed prompt in Table 20. Moreover, it also incurs excessive
costs in terms of monetary expenses and computations when the number of data providers is large.
Therefore, we would like to clarify that this GPT-4-based method is not a realistic alternative method
for source attribution and is instead only employed here to verify the reliability of our method of
source determination.
Additionally, note that the reason why we have used watermarked training data as the prompt sen-
tences in our evaluation was because it leads to simple and reliable evaluations. Here, we justify
this using the GPT-4-based experiment as well. We use GPT-4 to examine the reliability of the
ground truth source determination when sentences from two held-out sets are used as the prompt
sentences: when the prompt sentences are selected from unwatermarked training data and when the
prompt sentences are from the validation data. The results show that when the prompt sentences are
selected from unwatermarked training data, 81.6% of GPT-4’s decisions align with the source of the
prompt sentences; when the prompt sentences are from the validation data, the alignment becomes
75.0%. The results suggest that when the sentences from both held-out sets are used as the prompt
sentences, our method to determine the ground truth source is still reasonably reliable. However, our
ground truth source determination is the most reliable when sentences from watermarked training
data are used as the prompt, as we have done in our main experiments. Therefore, the results justify
the rationale behind our choice of using watermarked training data as prompts because it enhances
the reliability of our source determination and hence the fidelity of our evaluation results.


G.11      E FFECTIVENESS OF WASA FOR S UPERVISED F INETUNING (SFT) TASK

The WASA framework can be effective for SFT data as well. Overall, while finetuning for the
supervised task, we can also learn the mapping from the texts of the data providers to their unique
watermarks using an algorithm akin to the one described in Sec. 3.2. Then, during sample prediction,
we can provide not only the predicted label but also the corresponding watermark.
Specifically, for the SFT task, we apply prompt finetuning (Gao et al., 2021) where we intro-
duce a prompt (manual template) after each training data. We then introduce the watermark
following the training data by embedding it after the label. Each supervised data point si is
a sequence of tokens: si = [u1 , u2 , . . . , u|si | ] where |si | is the token count for si . For in-
stance, si = “What he can’t do is read a book” in Fig. 8. We extend si by appending a tem-
plate, which results in stemplatei        = [u1 , u2 , . . . , u|si | , u|si |+1 , . . . , u|si |+p ] with the template exam-
ple being “Are you sarcastic? Yes/No”. A data point embedded with a watermark is denoted as
           ′
si template = [u1 , u2 , . . . , u|si |+p , w1 , . . . , wm ] where w’s represent watermark tokens. As shown in
Fig. 8, an invisible watermark may follow after the label “Yes”.


                                                            24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Definition of Task in Prompts for GPT-4 Labeling

     Given below are 10 categories for texts from ArXiv papers with their descriptions. Please
     read the descriptions and classify the provided texts to one of the paper categories.
     The 10 categories are: hep-th, hep-ph, quant-ph, astro-ph, cs.CV, cs.LG, cond-mat.mes-
     hall, gr-qc, cond-mat.mtrl-sci, cond-mat.str-el.
     hep-th stands for High Energy Physics - Theory. This category includes research pa-
     pers which are centered on theoretical concepts and mathematical models in high energy
     physics.
     hep-ph stands for High Energy Physics - Phenomenology. This category includes research
     papers centered on the application of theoretical physics to high energy physics experi-
     ments.
     quant-ph stands for Quantum Physics. This category includes research papers centered on
     the theoretical and experimental aspects of the fundamental theory of quantum mechanics.
     astro-ph stands for Astrophysics. This category includes research papers centered on the
     study of the physics of the universe, including the properties and behavior of celestial
     bodies.
     cs.CV stands for Computer Science - Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. This
     category includes research papers focused on how computers can be made to gain high-
     level understanding from digital images or videos.
     cs.LG stands for Computer Science - Machine Learning. This category includes research
     papers focused on the development and implementation of algorithms that allow comput-
     ers to learn from and make decisions or predictions based on data.
     cond-mat.mes-hall stands for Condensed Matter - Mesoscale and Nanoscale Physics. This
     category includes research papers that focus on the properties and phenomena of physical
     systems at mesoscopic (intermediate) and nanoscopic scales.
     gr-qc stands for General Relativity and Quantum Cosmology. This category includes re-
     search papers centered on theoretical and observational aspects of the theory of general
     relativity and its implications for understanding cosmology at the quantum scale.
     cond-mat.mtrl-sci stands for Condensed Matter - Materials Science. This category in-
     cludes research papers centered on the understanding, description, and development of
     novel materials from a physics perspective.
     cond-mat.str-el stands for Condensed Matter - Strongly Correlated Electrons. This cate-
     gory includes research papers focused on the study of solids and liquids in which interac-
     tions among electrons play a dominant role in determining the properties of the material.
     Note that you should only include the class in your reply and provide no explanations.
     Please classify the following sentence into one of the 10 categories, however, if you think
     that the sentence could be classified into multiple categories, you may give up to 3 most
     likely categories:

                       Table 20: Definition of task in prompts for GPT-4 labeling.



                        Figure 8: Example of training samples in the SFT dataset.


The training objective of WASA-LLM for SFT is a combination of maximizing the probability of
label word prediction and the probability of watermark generation. Since we only need to predict
the label word, the predictive distribution can be simplified to

 P (u|si |+p |u1 , u2 , . . . , u|si | , u|si |+1 , . . . , u|si |+p−1 ) = hl [|si | + p − 1] · We⊤ [label word indices]

where We⊤ [label word indices] means to only use the label words’ embedding. So,
                                        ′
                         Lsft (stemplate
                                i        ) = log Pu (u|si |+p |u1 , u2 , . . . , u|si |+p−1 ) ,

                                ′     Pm
               Lwtm (stemplate
                      i        )=           j=1 log Pw (wj |u1 , u2 , . . . , u|si |+p , w1 , . . . , wj−1 ) .


                                                              25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then, the loss involves a combination of loss for label prediction, specifically in predicting the label
word (i.e., Yes/No in the case of sarcasm), and loss for watermark generation. In particular, the loss
                           ′                        ′                        ′
is LossWASA-LLM (stemplate
                   i         ) = Losssft (stemplate
                                           i          ) + Losswtm (stemplate
                                                                    i          ) in which
                                                                                    m
                    ′                                                       ′       X
    Losssft (stemplate
              i        ) = CE(P (u|si |+p ), u|si |+p ), Losswtm (stemplate
                                                                   i        )=            CE(Pw (wj ), wj ) .
                                                                                    j=1

To demonstrate the effectiveness of WASA-LLM for SFT data, we conduct experiments using the
Self-Annotated Reddit Corpus (SARC) (Khodak et al., 2018) which is an SFT dataset. This dataset,
which is designed for sarcasm detection, includes 1.3 million sarcastic comments sourced from
Reddit; Table 22 shows the details of this dataset. The dataset contains a column named ‘subred-
dit’ which indicates the sub-forums dedicated to specific topics. Different subreddits are used to
represent various data providers. Similar to the setting in Sec. 4, we select 10 data providers in the
experiment. We calculate the TF-IDF scores of all training points from each data provider and select
those with the top 50% of the TF-IDF scores (i.e., most representative sentences) for watermarking.
We also adopt GPT2-Large as the pre-trained model. For the sarcasm task’s template, we adopt the
Question Prompt (Liu et al., 2023b). Then, in terms of evaluating the source attribution accuracy, we
randomly select each data point as the input/prompt to the trained WASA-LLM and use the subreddit
of that data point as the source. The other evaluation settings are the same as that in Sec. 4.1.
Table 21 illustrates that a top-1 source attribution accuracy of 50.80% and a top-3 accuracy of
78.80% can be achieved. The performance is inferior compared to that observed in generation tasks,
primarily due to the increased challenge in learning mappings from texts to watermarks because
texts in the SFT dataset contain fewer tokens on average. Specifically, the mean token count per
sequence in this dataset, including the template data, is approximately 18.4 which contrasts with
the average of 512 tokens per sequence in unsupervised tasks. Despite this, the achieved accuracy
significantly surpasses the baseline of 10.00%. Furthermore, the model exhibits a decent sarcasm
prediction accuracy of 86.60% which even surpasses the performance of the original GPT-2. One
of the reasons may be that certain subreddits are more likely to contain sarcastic comments and
our watermarking framework coincidentally captures this pattern. The results demonstrate that our
framework is still effective for SFT data and can maintain the performance preservation property.

       model                    prediction acc.   source attribution acc.       top-3 acc.    training time
       RandomGuess                 50.00%                10.00%                  30.00%            -
       unwatermarked GPT-2         84.80%                   -                       -          3h37m38s
       WASA-LLM                    86.60%                50.80%                  78.80%        4h32m17s

Table 21: Comparison of performances of the original GPT-2 model trained with unwatermarked
data and our WASA-LLM in terms of sarcasm prediction accuracy and source attribution accuracy.


                                                           Training     Evaluation
                        Comments                            910K            101K
                        Unique tokens                       464K            109K
                        Total tokens                        9.5M             1M

           Table 22: Information on the Self-Annotated Reddit Corpus (SARC) dataset.


G.12    M ORE D IVERSE DATASETS

To verify the generalizability of our WASA framework on datasets that are less curated and noisy,
or potentially less formal, we have adopted several additional datasets from other domains (i.e.,
news article datasets and social media datasets). The results show that our framework is still able to
achieve high source attribution accuracy on these datasets, and that the accuracy is generally lower
than those in our main experiments due to lower dataset quality.
Firstly, we adopt the CC-News dataset (Hamborg et al., 2017) dataset as the representative dataset
containing news articles. It contains approximately 700K English language news articles sourced


                                                    26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from various global news sites. The dataset is collected by crawling the news websites for main text
content. More detailed information on this dataset is shown in Table 23. Importantly, no additional
preprocessing is conducted on the text content, resulting in a dataset that is less curated, quite noisy,
and may include diverse elements such as different languages, emojis, URLs, Unicode, etc. In our
experiments, we categorize data providers based on the ‘domain’ column which denotes the distinct
news media. The source attribution accuracy on the CC-News dataset is given in Table 24.

                                                           Training   Evaluation
                        News                                637K         70.8K
                        Unique tokens                       3.3M         880K
                        Total tokens                        253M          28M

                           Table 23: Information on the CC-News dataset.


             n categories       random guess             acc.    top-3 acc.      top-5 acc.
                   10              10.00%           60.20%         79.40%          85.00%

                   Table 24: Source attribution accuracy on the CC-News dataset.

From Table 24, it is evident that our framework can still achieve decent source attribution accuracy
even with the less curated and noisy data. Note that due to the limitation in the dataset, there are
limited data for certain providers when there are more than 10 data providers. It can further introduce
the problem of dataset imbalance. Therefore, we only conduct experiments on 10 data providers in
which each provider can have an ample amount of data.

                                                           Training   Evaluation
                        Posts                               3.5M         385K
                        Unique tokens                       7.4M         1.7M
                        Total tokens                        942M         105M

                    Table 25: Information on the Reddit Webis-TLDR-17 dataset.

Secondly, we utilize the Reddit dataset (whose details are in Table 25) as the representative social
media dataset where the texts are less formal than papers, books, or news. The Reddit Webis-TLDR-
17 dataset (Völske et al., 2017), which contains about 4 million posts (each with an average of 270
words), was created for summarization tasks. In our study, we exclusively use the ‘content’ col-
umn (i.e., the complete post before summarizing) for our unsupervised second-stage pre-training
task. The Reddit dataset includes a ‘subreddit’ column specifying the sub-forums on different top-
ics. These various subreddits are used to represent different data contributors in our analysis. It
is important to clarify that this social media dataset poses significant challenges compared to the
papers, books, or news data due to the diverse backgrounds of the text contributors and the informal
language prevalent in Reddit forums. These forums not only have a higher prevalence of spelling
errors and typos but also feature Internet slang and buzzwords, emojis, abbreviations, etc, hence
making the dataset noisy. Finally, in contrast to the other three datasets where most sequences con-
tain 512 tokens, the Reddit dataset has only an average of 270 words per sequence, thus indicating
shorter training texts. Note that learning the mapping from a shorter text to a watermark is more
challenging. Despite these challenges, the source attribution accuracy (especially top-5 accuracy)
remains relatively decent, as demonstrated in Table 26.

G.13    C HARACTER -L EVEL ATTACKS

Apart from the word-level attacks discussed in App. F.2 that additionally modify the content of
the generated sentence while removing/modifying the generated watermarks, for the regenerated
watermarks, we would also like to explore some character-level attacks on the generated sentences
similar to the setting in the work of Gao et al. (2018). These attacks aim to disrupt the original texts at


                                                    27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    n categories     random guess      acc.         top-3 acc.   top-5 acc.
                         10             10.00%        51.40%         77.80%       89.00%
                         25              4.00%        46.32%         65.92%       79.68%
                         50              2.00%        37.76%         56.40%       65.20%
                        100             1.00%         39.00%         54.02%       61.04%

Table 26: Source attribution accuracy for different numbers of categories/data providers on the
Reddit Webis-TLDR-17 dataset.


                        insertion attack       deletion attack                             swap attack
  attack strength                                                     attack strength
                       acc.     top-3 acc.    acc.     top-3 acc.                        acc.    top-3 acc
  0%                 71.60%        93.76%    71.60%        93.76%           0%          71.60%    93.76%
  5%                 70.80%        87.80%    71.00%        88.40%           2%          60.80%    87.20%
  10%                63.20%        82.00%    60.80%        81.00%           4%          56.00%    86.20%

Table 27: Source attribution accuracy using regenerated watermarks by WASA-LLM (from 2nd-stage
pre-training of GPT2 on ArXiv dataset) under character-level attacks on generated sentences with
embedded watermarks (in addition to watermark removal/modification attacks).



a character level, thus making them stronger than word-level attacks; however, it is also potentially
easier to identify such attacks (LI2, 2023). Specifically, we considered character-level insertion,
deletion, and character-swapping attacks. We also adopt our regeneration defense after these attacks
are applied. Table 27 shows the source attribution accuracy for the regenerated watermarks.
As shown in Table 27, under these strong character-level attacks, the source attribution accuracy of
our watermarks is lowered yet remains decent. In addition, we would like to clarify that since these
character-level attacks can heavily influence the original readability of the texts, their feasibility in
realistic scenarios may be limited.


G.14    R ELATIVE P OSITIONS OF G ENERATED WATERMARKS


Figure 9: Distribution of the relative positions of the generated watermarks in the generated sen-
tence.


To further investigate the nature of our generated watermarks, we have analyzed the distribution of
the relative positions of the generated watermarks in the generated sentences. As shown in Fig. 9, the
generated watermarks are uniformly distributed within a sentence. This is because when we embed
watermarks into the selected sentences for LLM training, the position of the embedded watermark is
randomly selected. Therefore, after the LLM is trained, the position of the generated watermark in
the generated sentence is also uniformly distributed. This uniform distribution of watermarks makes
it harder for an adversary to remove the watermark, compared to the scenario where the watermarks
are at a fixed position.


                                                      28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Figure 10: Generated text from ArXiv dataset (astro-ph category).


             Figure 11: Generated text from BookSum dataset (Adam Bede category).


G.15    G ENERATION Q UALITY A NALYSIS

To further assess the naturalness and coherence of the generated text in addition to App. F.4, we have
employed an evaluation method using a GPT-4 zero-shot prompt (i.e., introduced in the work of Yao
et al. (2023)) to provide a 1-10 scalar score assessing the text’s naturalness and coherence. The
evaluation results reveal that the original texts from the training data (i.e., ArXiv papers) achieve
an average score of 7.370 in coherency and 7.744 in naturalness, while the text generated by our
WASA-LLM attains comparable scores of 7.135 in coherency and 6.926 in naturalness. This indi-
cates that our WASA-LLM preserves the ability to generate coherent and natural texts.

G.16    C ASE STUDY: S YNTHETIC DATA AND ITS S OURCE

To facilitate a better demonstration of the performance of our WASA framework, we perform a case
study on the synthetic data generated by our WASA-LLM. The examples shown in Figs. 10 and 11 are
the generated texts from our WASA-LLM trained with the ArXiv dataset and the Booksum dataset,
respectively. They further verify the invisibility of the generated watermarks and demonstrate that
our framework preserves the quality of the generated texts.

G.17    C ASE STUDY: S YNTHETIC DATA WITH T WO S OURCE

Considering the special cases where the generated data is a combination of data from two providers,
our current WASA framework naturally handles them: We can use the generated top-k watermarks to
identify the k most likely data providers in order to account for cases where there are multiple data
providers.
To demonstrate our framework’s capability in this context, we have crafted several case
studies simulating examples of text that are combinations of two data providers. We se-
lect two pieces of text generated by different data providers and manually concatenate
them. Subsequently, we use the concatenated text as the prompt for WASA-LLM to gen-
erate the top-3 watermarks.      As an example in Fig. 12, we have crafted the texts as
the concatenation of the generated texts from two data providers gr-qc (with watermark
‘U+200DU+2064U+200BU+200BU+200CU+200BU+200BU+200DU+2063U+200C’) and quant-
ph (with watermark ‘U+2062U+2063U+200CU+2063U+2063U+2063U+200CU+200CU+200B
U+200D’). In such cases, our framework is able to produce the watermarks corresponding to both
data providers among the top-3 generated watermarks. Note that in the above example and the next,
we manually visualize the watermarks for illustrative purposes, while in real cases, the watermarks
remain invisible.
As another example, we have crafted the texts (i.e., shown in Fig. 13) as the concatena-
tion of the generated texts from another two data providers astro-ph (with watermark
‘U+2063U+200DU+200CU+200CU+200BU+200BU+2062U+200CU+2063U+200B’) and cs.CV
(with watermark ‘U+200BU+2064U+200DU+200BU+200CU+200DU+2064U+2062U+2063
U+2064’). In this case, our framework is also able to generate the watermarks for both data
providers among the top-3 watermarks. These results demonstrate the potential of our top-k source
attribution to handle scenarios in which the generated data is a combination of multiple data
providers.


                                                 29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: Combined generated text from ArXiv dataset (gr-qc and quant-ph categories) with top-3
watermarking covering both watermarks.


Figure 13: Combined generated text from ArXiv dataset (astro-ph and cs.CV categories) with top-3
watermarking covering both watermarks.


                                              30
