Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D OES W RITING WITH L ANGUAGE M ODELS R EDUCE
C ONTENT D IVERSITY ?
 Vishakh Padmakumar                                      He He
 New York University                                     New York University
 vishakh@nyu.edu                                         hehe@cs.nyu.edu



                                              A BSTRACT

         Large language models (LLMs) have led to a surge in collaborative writing with
         model assistance. As different users incorporate suggestions from the same model,
         there is a risk of decreased diversity in the produced content, potentially limiting
         diverse perspectives in public discourse. In this work, we measure the impact
         of co-writing on diversity via a controlled experiment, where users write argu-
         mentative essays in three setups—using a base LLM (GPT3), a feedback-tuned
         LLM (InstructGPT), and writing without model help. We develop a set of diversity
         metrics and find that writing with InstructGPT (but not the GPT3) results in a
         statistically significant reduction in diversity. Specifically, it increases the similarity
         between the writings of different authors and reduces the overall lexical and content
         diversity. We additionally find that this effect is mainly attributable to InstructGPT
         contributing less diverse text to co-written essays. In contrast, the user-contributed
         text remains unaffected by model collaboration. This suggests that the recent
         improvement in generation quality from adapting models to human feedback might
         come at the cost of more homogeneous and less diverse content.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) are rapidly changing how people create content (Lee et al., 2022a;
Mirowski et al., 2023). While LLM-based writing assistants have the potential to improve writing
quality and increase author productivity, they also introduce an algorithmic monoculture (Kleinberg
and Raghavan, 2021). As millions of users rely on the same underlying model to produce text, there
is a potential risk of shifting the content towards the mode—good but not colorful writing. In this
work, we aim to assess whether writing with LLMs unintentionally reduces content diversity.
Existing evidence has already hinted that LLMs may influence users’ opinions. Jakesch et al. (2023)
and Bhat et al. (2023) find that users’ opinions expressed in their writing can be biased by controlling
LLMs to promote a specific argument (e.g., social media is good/bad for society). Additionally, it
has been shown that current LLMs do not equally represent views from various demographic groups
(Santurkar et al., 2023; Durmus et al., 2023). These results suggest that writing with LLMs may
limit the perspectives expressed in the writing. We hypothesize that incorporating model suggestions
dilutes the writer’s unique voice, leading to different writers producing similar content, and this
homogenization in turn reduces the overall diversity of content produced by many writers.
To test our hypotheses, we design a controlled experiment (Figure 1) where users are asked to write
an argumentative essay given a topic from the New York Times student opinion series following
Lee et al. (2022a), e.g., “What are the most important things students learn at school?” We assign
participants to three groups: a control group where participants write essays without model help, an
LLM treatment group where participants write essays with a base language model (GPT3), and a
feedback-tuned LLM treatment group where participants write essays with a language model finetuned
with human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022) (InstructGPT). We hired 38 writers from Upwork. For
each group, we collected 100 essays on 10 topics. We then develop a set of metrics and measure the
effect of LLMs on content diversity at both the individual level and the collective level:

       • Homogenization: Do users write more similarly to each other when writing with LLMs?


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Solo
                                                                       Homogenization
                                                     ...               Users with InstructGPT write more
                                                                        similar essays than other groups
                Topic
               What are the most      GPT3
                   important
                things students                      ...
                learn at school?                                        Diversity
                                                                       Essays co-written with InstructGPT
                                   InstructGPT                           has the least content diversity

                                                     ...                 ...           ...          ...


Figure 1: We measure the content diversity of essays written by three groups of users: a control group
writing without model help (Solo), a treatment group writing with a base language model (GPT3),
and second treatment group writing with a feedback-tuned language model (InstructGPT). Essays
co-written with InstructGPT are more similar to each other and exhibit the least lexical and content
diversity, whereas those co-written with GPT3 are not significantly different to the Solo essays.


            We find that essays written by the group using InstructGPT exhibit a higher degree of
            homogenization compared to the control group and the GPT3 group (Section 4). In particular,
            by matching model-contributed text to the summarized key points of each essay, we find that
            the key points contributed by InstructGPT result in increased homogenization (Section 6).
          • Diversity: Does writing with LLMs reduce the diversity of content produced by a group of
            users?
            We find that the set of essays written with InstructGPT show both lower lexical diversity and
            reduced diversity in the key points expressed as compared to the other two groups (Section 5).
            This is seen in the increased repetition of phrases (higher-order n-grams) introduced by the
            model (Section 5.2) and a reduction in the number of unique key points in the essays.

Interestingly, while writing with the human feedback-tuned LLM (InstructGPT) incurs increased
homogenization and reduced diversity, we did not observe a statistically significant effect from writing
with the base LLM (GPT3) despite a similar model contribution (Section 3). Further analysis shows
that InstructGPT tends to provide less diverse suggestions and introduce less diverse text compared
to GPT3. This finding echoes prior results showing reduced diversity after reinforcement learning
from human feedback (Bai et al., 2022; Song et al., 2023).
As LLMs become more tightly integrated into text editing applications, our findings highlight a new
axis of evaluation in interactive settings. Reduced content diversity is not only detrimental to personal
expression and creativity, but also risks creating a feedback loop as future models trained on the
homogenized content further propagate this pattern (Taori and Hashimoto, 2023). To facilitate future
research on understanding the impact of LLMs in co-writing, we release essays from all three groups
along with all model suggestions recorded by the CoAuthor platform (Lee et al., 2022a).1


2       DATA C OLLECTION
Our approach to studying the impact of LLMs on content diversity is to conduct controlled exper-
iments. Specifically, we control the set of writers and the topics of the essays. We then compare
essays written with and without model help.

2.1      TASK S ETUP
We consider the task of argumentative essay writing using topics from the New York Times Student
Opinion series following Lee et al. (2022a). Specifically, users are given a topic such as “What are
the most important things students learn at school?” and are asked to write an essay expressing their
opinions in around 300 words. We choose this task because the topics are sufficiently open-ended to
allow for diverse responses while remaining accessible to users with all backgrounds. The instructions
and the complete list of 10 prompts used in the experiment are provided in Appendix A.3.

    1
        Code and data are available at https://github.com/vishakhpk/hai-diversity.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We adopt the CoAuthor platform developed by Lee et al. (2022a). When the user hits the TAB key, we
obtain 5 text continuations from a backend model and present them in a dropdown menu. Figure 5 in
Appendix A shows a screenshot of the interface as the user requests model suggestions. The user then
has the option to either accept and edit one of the suggestions or reject all suggestions and continue
with their writing process. We ask the users to request suggestions a minimum of 5 times per essay
but do not require them to accept any of these. The entire writing process, including all keystrokes,
suggestions, and user actions, is recorded by the platform. This allows us to differentiate the parts of
the essay introduced by the users and models at the character level for subsequent analysis.

2.2    E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We recruit participants from Upwork who are native English speakers and have prior experience
in writing or copyediting on the platform. We provide further details on participant recruitment
and remuneration in Appendix A.1. We then collect essays from three settings: a control group,
where participants write essays without any model help; an LLM treatment group, where participants
write with the help of a base language model; and a feedback-tuned LLM treatment group, where
participants write with a language model finetuned on human feedback. We distinguish the two
types of language models because prior work has shown that finetuning language models on human
feedback tends to decrease the entropy of the output distribution Bai et al. (2022) and thus may
decrease text diversity in general. We henceforth refer to the three settings as Solo, GPT3, and
InstructGPT respectively.
We obtain model continuations from the OpenAI API using davinci as the base language model
and text-davinci-003 as the feedback-tuned language model. To avoid reduced diversity due
to decoding, we use a decoding strategy biased towards higher entropy. Specifically, we sample
continuations from both models with a temperature of 0.9 and a frequency penalty of 0.5 (detailed
parameters listed in Appendix A.2), following the “high randomness” setting from Lee et al. (2022a).
Each participant is asked to complete a session consisting of three essay writing tasks—one in each
of the three settings and each on a different topic. In each session, the order of the three settings
and the assignment of topics are randomized. Each essay takes 15 minutes on average. In total, we
obtained 10 essays on each of the 10 topics for each setting, resulting in 300 essays in total.

3     H OW MUCH DO USERS ENGAGE WITH THE MODEL ?

Before diving into the analysis of content diversity, we first examine whether the user and the language
models form an effective collaboration by examining the usage statistics and model-contributed text.

          Model     # Queries     Acceptance Rate (%)       Model-Written Percentage        Word Count
      InstructGPT      9.15                70.49                        32.45                  368.39
            GPT3       9.62                71.32                        35.57                  380.87

Table 1: Averaged per-essay usage statistics of GPT3 and InstructGPT. Both models are helpful to
users, evidenced by the high acceptance rates of suggestions and the sizeable model written fraction
of essays. Furthermore, we find no statistically significant difference in usage of the two models.

Usage statistics. We find that users actively query the model and use model suggestions during
writing. As shown in Table 1, users query the model around 9 times on average for each essay and
accept about 70% of them (note that they are asked to query at least 5 times). Since users may further
edit the suggestions after accepting them, we want to know whether the accepted suggestions are
retained in the final essay.2 The interface used for data collection records keystroke-level information
about whether each character was introduced by the model or the user. Thus, we report the average
percentage of characters introduced by the model in each essay. We observe that the model contributes
roughly 35% of the characters in each essay, suggesting that they are reasonably helpful to the writing
task. Finally, we are curious whether the users find InstructGPT to be more helpful than GPT3 given
its additional feedback tuning. However, the two language models appear to be equally helpful to
    2
      Participants are not obligated to accept any suggestions from the model. We ask that they query the model
for suggestions at least 5 times when writing an essay, accepting these only when appropriate (Appendix A.3).


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



While I believe the concerns regarding children’s screen time are valid, I believe it is somewhat biased to not
take this problem, which is a genuine issue right now, as an everyone problem, [skipped] I know that
I, along with many other teenagers, would like nothing more than to go back to school, play sports outside,
meet new people, and such. [skipped] They are also places for new ideas, watching college lectures, and
political discourse [skipped]
• The problem of screen time should be considered an everyone problem, not just a student one
• Social media can be used for educational purposes
• Limiting screen time may not be effective in the long run
• Parents should trust their teenager more and not worry too much about their screen time

Table 2: Excerpt from an essay written by a user with InstructGPT and the generated key points. Bold
text was introduced by the model. We align each key point to a sentence in the essay with which it
has the highest Rouge-L overlap, as illustrated by the highlight. Since the majority of the text in the
aligned sentence is written by the model, we attribute the first key point to the model.

users. We do not observe a significant difference between their usage statistics: an independent
samples t-test on the number of queries and acceptance rates shows no significance at the 5% level.
Model contribution to key ideas. The usage statistics tell us that LLMs contribute to a fair
amount of the text written. However, are they contributing key arguments or merely supporting
the elaboration of a point? To quantify model contribution to the main ideas, we need a way to
represent the important content in an essay. Motivated by recent encouraging results of using LLMs
for zero-shot summarization (Goyal et al., 2022), we summarize each essay into a list of key points
by prompting gpt-3.5-turbo.3 An example is shown in Table 2.4
Given a list of key points for each essay, we then estimate the fraction of key points written by the
model and the user. Specifically, we align each key point to a sentence in the essay with which it
has the highest overlap, as measured by Rouge-L (Lin, 2004). If more than half of the sentence’s
characters are model-generated based on the recorded keystroke data, the key point is attributed to
the model; otherwise, it is attributed to the user. We show the fraction of key points written by the
model for the two groups of co-written essays in Figure 7 in Appendix C. We observe that the median
fraction for both GPT3 and InstructGPT is around 0.4, indicating that models make a significant
contribution to the key content of the essay. However, there is also a large variation among users,
with some essays having none or all of the key points attributed to the model, suggesting diverse
levels of reliance on the model.
Given the significant model contribution in co-written essays, we hypothesize that this intervention
would result in increased content similarity among users. We test this hypothesis in Section 4.

4     D OES WRITING WITH LLM S RESULT IN MORE SIMILAR ESSAYS ?
In the previous section, we have seen that models contribute a substantial portion of the essays’
content. Does this lead to more similar essays, or do the essays retain the individual styles of the
users? In this section, we measure the homogenization effect of co-writing with LLMs.

4.1   M ETRIC
We first define the homogenization of a single essay as its average pairwise similarity to all other
essays written on the same topic. Let Dt denote the set of essays on topic t.PThe homogenization
score of an essay d (written in response to topic t) is hom(d | t) = |Dt1|−1 d′ ∈Dt \d sim(d, d′ )
where | · | denotes the size of the set. Correspondingly, we define corpus homogenization as the
average homogenization score of all essays. We use two metrics to compute the similarity between
two documents: Rouge-L, an overlap-based metric; and BertScore (Zhang et al., 2020), an embedding-
based metric.5 Both homogenization metrics range from 0 to 1 with a higher score indicating more
    3
      We use gpt-3.5-turbo due to its high performance on summarization on the HELM benchmark (Liang
et al., 2022).
    4
      See Table 6 in Appendix A.4 for the full example. On average, each essay is summarized into 6.86 key
points with a standard deviation of 1.53. There is no significant difference between the average number of key
points generated for essays from any pair of groups based on independent samples t-tests at the 5% level.
    5
      We use the microsoft/deberta-xlarge-mnli model, the highest ranked model in the BertScore repository
according to Pearson correlation with human ratings of similarity.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                  0.220
                                                                               Solo         GPT3          InstructGPT
                                  0.200


          Homogenization Scores
                                  0.180
                                  0.160
                                  0.140
                                  0.120
                                  0.100
                                  0.080
                                          Total (*)   Citizens   Dating   Screen   Extreme Animal Audiobooks College Mindfulness School Stereotypes
                                                                           Time     Sports Welfare           Athletes

Figure 2: Boxplots of homogenization scores for all three groups (Solo, InstructGPT, GPT3) when
comparing essays at the key point level using Rouge-L as the similarity metric. The left-most column
(Total) shows essay homogenization scores for all topics and the other columns show the scores for
essays on each topic. Essays written with InstructGPT exhibit higher corpus homogenization by a
statistically significant margin (Section 4.2) and the highest median topic homogenization on 7 out of
10 topics. We observe the same trend when using BertScore in Figure 9(b) in Appendix C.

similar content. We measure homogenization at both the essay level and the key point level. For key
point homogenization, we represent each essay as a concatenation of its key points (Section 3) before
calculating its homogenization score.

4.2   R ESULTS

Writing with InstructGPT produces more similar content. The corpus homogenization scores
when comparing essays from the three groups at the key point level using Rouge-L are 0.1536 for Solo,
0.1578 for GPT3 and 0.1660 for InstructGPT. InstructGPT exhibit higher corpus homogenization
than both other groups to a statistically significant degree as verified with p < 0.05 on an independent
samples t-test. This result holds across both similarity metrics as well as when the essays are
compared at the essay level (Table 10 in Appendix C). Figure 2 shows the homogenization scores
across topics at the key point level using Rouge-L.6 We observe that the InstructGPT group has a
higher median homogenization than other groups on 7 out of 10 topics. While the effect of model
intervention varies across topics, the trend of increased homogenization persists (Appendix B.3).

Writing with GPT3 does not increase homogenization. Although GPT3 and InstructGPT con-
tribute a similar amount of text and key points to the co-written essays (Section 3), unlike InstructGPT,
GPT3 does not appear to increase the similarity between essays written by different users. In particu-
lar, there is no statistically significant difference between the corpus homogenization score of GPT3
and that of Solo at the 5% significance level using an independent samples t-test. This discrepancy
between InstructGPT and GPT3 suggests that the impact of LLMs on content homogenization is not
uniform. While InstructGPT often outperforms GPT3 on benchmarks across a wide range of metrics
(Liang et al., 2022), our results highlight that this performance boost may come at the cost of creating
more homogeneous content in interactive settings.

5     D OES WRITING WITH LLM S REDUCE THE OVERALL DIVERSITY ?
In the previous section, we have seen that writing with the feedback-tuned model leads to different
users writing similar essays on the same topic. A direct consequence of this homogenization effect
is that it may reduce the overall diversity of the collection of writings from many authors. In this
section, we test whether writing with LLMs reduce the diversity of the produced content.

5.1   M ETRIC
To measure the diversity of a collection of essays, we represent the corpus as a bag of information
units (e.g., n-grams), and compute the number of unique information units divided by the total
number of information units, such as the type-token ratio. Intuitively, if the essays all repeat each
other (least diverse), the entire collection can be represented as a single essay (small ratio).
   6
     Figure 8 and Figure 9 in Appendix C contain similar plots of the homogenization scores at the essay level
and key point level using both Rouge-L and BertScore.


                                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We consider two types of information units: n-grams and key points. The fraction of unique n-grams
is a straightforward measure of lexical diversity (Li et al., 2023; Meister et al., 2023). For key
point diversity, we first represent each essay as a set of key points (as described in Section 3) and
aggregate the key points from all essays. To compute the number of unique key points, we perform
agglomerative clustering and consider all key points in one cluster to be equivalent. We use the
implementation of agglomerative clustering from Scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) using the
complete linkage criterion.7 We convert Rouge-L to a distance metric for the clustering algorithm by
subtracting the similarity score from 1 (which ranges from 0 to 1).

5.2      R ESULTS

n-gram size                    Solo       GPT3          InstructGPT                             Thresholds                   Solo        GPT3         InstructGPT
      1                        0.119      0.116                0.115                                        0.5           0.982          0.971                 0.950
      2                        0.602      0.585                0.579                                        0.6           0.941          0.927                 0.877
      3                        0.898      0.886                0.869                                        0.7           0.792          0.779                 0.738
      4                        0.973      0.967                0.953                                        0.8           0.543          0.514                 0.494
      5                        0.991      0.988                0.977

                       (a) Fraction of unique n-grams                                                               (b) Fraction of unique key points.

Table 3: Content diversity calculated in two ways: (a) N -gram diversity in each setting. Bold
values indicate the lowest diversity score as measured by the fraction of unique n-grams. Essays
written with InstructGPT are the least diverse across n-gram sizes. (b) Diversity measured by
agglomerative clustering of the key points of essays with RougeL using various distance thresholds
for clustering. Bold values are different from other columns by a statistically significant margin
(p < 0.05). InstructGPT consistently exhibits lower content diversity across all selected thresholds.

                    0.04                                               Solo                                                                                Solo
                                                                       InstructGPT                                                                         InstructGPT
                                                                                                       0.0003
                    0.03                                               GPT3                                                                                GPT3
      Probability


                                                                                         Probability


                    0.02                                                                               0.0002

                    0.01                                                                               0.0001

                           0       10         20          30         40         50                              0       10          20         30         40           50
                                 1-grams in decreasing order of frequency                                             5-grams in decreasing order of frequency

                                (a) Unigram Distribution                                                             (b) 5-gram Distribution

Figure 3: Distributions of the top-50 (a) unigrams and (b) 5-grams from each group. Despite similar
unigram distributions, essays written with InstructGPT exhibit higher repetition of common 5-ngrams.

Writing with InstructGPT reduces lexical diversity. In Table 3a, we show the diversity measured
by n-grams (where n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) for essays written in all three groups. We see that the InstructGPT
group consistently exhibits lower diversity across all values of n, whereas GPT3 does not significantly
decrease the diversity score. The reduced lexical diversity showcases a disadvantage of co-writing
with LLMs, particularly in creative writing genres like stories and poems, as it may wash away unique
expressions on the long tail of human writings.
Writing with InstructGPT reduces key point diversity. In Table 3b, we report the diversity
scores measured by the fraction of unique key points. The clustering process involves a threshold
that determines the maximum distance above which two clusters will not be merged.8 We vary this
threshold and find that the InstructGPT group consistently exhibits lower diversity across all selected
values.9 In addition, the diversity of the InstructGPT group is lower than both the Solo and GPT3
groups by a statistically significant margin (p < 0.05) by a pairwise permutation test detailed in
    7
      Complete linkage measures the distance between two clusters by the maximum distance between any pair
of items from them.
    8
      A higher distance threshold indicates that key points having lower similarity can be clustered together. At
higher thresholds, the diversity becomes lower for all groups because more key points are considered equivalent.
    9
      The same trend holds when using BertScore as a distance measure (Table 12b in Appendix C).


                                                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix B.1. More concerning than reduced lexical diversity, this decline in key point diversity
raises concerns with long-term social impact, emphasizing the need to safeguard perspectives from
underrepresented groups as collaborative writing gains prominence.
Essays written with InstructGPT repeat higher-order n-grams more frequently. To further
analyze how diversity is changed, we plot the distribution of unigrams and 5-grams in each group of
essays in Figure 3 (truncated to the most frequent 50 n-grams from each group).10 In the InstructGPT
group, a notable concentration of probability mass in the head of the distribution for 5-grams suggests
a higher degree of repetition and lower text diversity in the co-writing process. We verify the
significance of the difference in 5-gram frequencies between InstructGPT and Solo via a chi-square
test (p < 0.05).11 To see what kind of phrases the model repeats, we list the ten most frequent
5-grams in Solo and InstructGPT in Table 4. We find that common 5-grams from InstructGPT often
contain topical words overlapping with the essay prompt, whereas those from Solo are more often
generic phrases. As users may seek suggestions for key ideas in the essays (Section 3), the similarity
of the suggested content manifests in these common topical 5-grams which occur repetitively.

                        Solo                                               InstructGPT
    5-Gram                                    Count        5-Gram                                    Count
    keeping up with the news                     7         keep up with the news                       14
    in my opinion the most                       7         on animal welfare when humans               12
    keep up with the news                        6         to focus on animal welfare                  11
    opinion the most important things            6         selfish to pursue risky sports              11
    but on the other hand                        5         students should learn in school             11
    the most important thing that                5         wrong to focus on animal                    10
    wrong to focus on animal                     5         sports like extreme mountain climbing       10
    focus on animal welfare when                 5         keeping up with the news                     9
    unfair when it is considered                 5         the end of the day                           9
    in my opinion listening to                   4         things students should learn in             9

Table 4: Most frequent 5-grams in Solo and InstructGPT corpora along with the corresponding repeti-
tion counts. Highlighted 5-grams are those that contain topic-specific information from the prompts.
We observe higher repetition overall and more occurrence of topical 5-grams with InstructGPT.

We additionally show in Appendix C that the reduction of diversity measured by linguistic units such
as n-grams and key points also correlates with less diversity in an information-theoretic sense.

6        W HY DOES WRITING WITH I NSTRUCT GPT REDUCE DIVERSITY ?
We consistently observe that writing with InstructGPT results in a reduction of content diversity,
whereas this is not the case with GPT3 despite users seemingly engaging equally with both models
(Section 3). This raises the question of how writing with InstructGPT makes a difference. There are
two potential contributors. First, InstructGPT may produce less diverse text, influencing the essay
by directly contributing text. Second, users may write differently in the presence of assistance, e.g.,
adopting the model’s opinion (Jakesch et al., 2023). In this section, we aim to answer this question
by disentangling the effect from the model and the user in collaborative settings.
InstructGPT generates less diverse text than GPT3. We first confirm that generations from
InstructGPT are less diverse than GPT3, which has also been observed in prior work. The technical
report for GPT4 finds that the feedback-tuned model is less calibrated (OpenAI, 2023) and Bai et al.
(2022) find that finetuning leads to decreased entropy of the output distribution. In our setting, we
measure the diversity of model generation by the pairwise similarity of the five generated continuations
upon each user query, similar to self-BLEU (Zhu et al., 2018). Thus, higher similarity scores indicate
lower diversity. We observe that InstructGPT indeed generates less diverse text than GPT3 on average
(0.20 vs 0.11 on Rouge-L), with significance at the 5% level using an independent samples t-test.12
Since users incorporate text from both models at similar rates (Table 1), it is plausible that the less
    10
      Each line in Figure 3 corresponds to the 50 most frequently repeated n-grams in a specific group, which
vary across groups. Figure 10 in Appendix C shows similar plots for 1 to 5-grams.
   11
      We observe a significant difference in n-gram usage for 4- and 5-grams as detailed in Appendix B.2.
   12
      We also obtain the same conclusion using BertScore as the similarity metric (see Figure 12 in Appendix C).


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           0.250
                                                                    GPT3                            0.0008                     GPT3 Contribution w/ Humans
                           0.225                                    InstructGPT                                                InstructGPT Contribution w/ Humans

   Homogenization Scores
                           0.200                                                                                               Human Contribution w/ GPT3
                                                                                                    0.0006                     Human Contribution w/ InstructGPT
                           0.175


                                                                                      Probability
                                                                                                                               Solo
                           0.150                                                                    0.0004
                           0.125
                           0.100                                                                    0.0002
                           0.075
                           0.050                                                                             0      10         20         30         40         50
                                   Human Contribution   Model Contribution                                       5-grams in decreasing order of frequency
                                                  (a)                                                                               (b)

Figure 4: (a) Homogenization scores calculated separately on key points attributed to users and the
model using Rouge-L. InstructGPT contributed key points show a higher degree of homogeniza-
tion whereas user-contributed key points have similar homogenization scores when writing with
InstructGPT and GPT3. (b) Distributions of 5-grams introduced by the user (dashed lines) and the
model (solid lines). The distribution of 5-grams from Solo essays is also provided as a reference.
Distributions of user-written text in all settings are similar regardless of model assistance, whereas
InstructGPT contributed text has notably larger probability mass on common 5-grams. This indicates
that the reduced lexical diversity in the InstructGPT group is mainly due to model introduced text.

diverse suggestions from InstructGPT lead to a decrease in the diversity of the final co-written essay.
Next, we examine the diversity of model-written and user-written text in the essays directly.
InstructGPT increases repetition of higher-order n-grams while user-written text is unaffected.
The essays consist of both model-written and user-written text. Which contributes more to the
decrease in diversity? To study this, we attribute each token in the essay to either the user or the
model.13 We then examine the distribution of 5-grams from user-written and model-written text
Figure 4(b).14 We see that the 5-gram distributions of user-written text remain the same regardless of
whether the user writes with a model (Solo vs. GPT3/InstructGPT) and which model they write with
(GPT3 vs. InstructGPT). Hence the phrase-usage pattern of users is not affected by the presence of
model assistance. Instead, the increased repetition of 5-grams observed in Section 5.2 is more model-
related as evidenced by the high probability mass on common 5-grams introduced by InstructGPT.15
InstructGPT increases similarity between key points while user-written text is unaffected.
Finally, we disentangle the effect from the model and the user for the increase in homogenization
observed in Figure 2. We attribute each key point to either the user or the model (same as in Section 3)
and calculate the essay homogenization scores on user-contributed and model-contributed key points
respectively. In Figure 4(a), we compare the user-contributed and model-contributed homogenization
across the InstructGPT and GPT3 groups. We observe that, while the average homogenization score
of user-contributed key points does not change between the two groups, the InstructGPT contributed
key points have higher average homogenization than GPT3 (p < 0.05). This suggests that user
behavior with respect to content creation is largely unchanged when writing with different models,16
and the increased homogenization is mainly due to InstructGPT contributions.
Takeaway. Our results suggest that the users’ lexical choice and argument generation is not affected
when writing with model assistance. The reduction in diversity in collaborative writing is attributed
more to text contributed directly by the InstructGPT model. This paints a relatively optimistic picture
as the risk of forming a feedback loop through the mutual influence between the user and the model
is potentially limited. However, it is important to note that our study focuses on single interactions
between users and models, and the dynamics might change through repeated interactions over time.
  13
      We use the recorded character-level keystroke information (Section 2.1) to determine the authorship of
each token. Most tokens are attributed entirely to either the user or the model. In cases of mixed contribution,
authorship is assigned based on the majority of characters.
   14
      We ensure that each entire n-gram here was written by the user or model in a single continuous span of text
to ensure we do not count incoherent n-grams.
   15
      Figure 11 in Appendix C shows similar distributions varying n from 1 to 5. We see the increased repetition
of n-grams introduced by InstructGPT in 3 and 4-grams as well.
   16
      We can also compare the homogenization of user-contributed key points with and without model assistance.
However, we note that user-contributed key points in co-written essays are a subset of the original key points and
hence exhibit more variation across essays. Therefore, they are not directly comparable to those in Solo.


                                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   R ELATED W ORK
Human-AI collaborative writing. Collaborative writing predates LLMs where users are assisted
by suggestions retrieved from a knowledge base (Swanson and Gordon, 2008; 2012; Chen et al.,
2014; Roemmele and Gordon, 2015) or generated by task-specific RNNs (Ghazvininejad et al., 2017;
Roemmele and Gordon, 2018; Clark et al., 2018). The early systems can produce relevant suggestions,
but they often need to be revised before being incorporated into the draft. In contrast, LLMs offer
suggestions that are often directly incorporated into user writing, either through continuations or in
response to instructions, resulting in a surge of studies demonstrating their effectiveness (Gero and
Chilton, 2019; Akoury et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2022; Swanson et al., 2021; Chakrabarty et al., 2022;
Ippolito et al., 2022; Mirowski et al., 2023) However, despite the improved productivity, we show
that LLM-contributed text can also affect the writing in subtle and unintended ways.
Effect of human-AI co-writing. Recent research focuses on analyzing user-model interactions
and their influence on users and the writing process. Buschek et al. (2021) investigate how the
number of suggestions affects users in email writing, highlighting the tradeoff between suggestion
utility and writing efficiency. Lee et al. (2022a) collect data on user interactions with GPT3 as a
collaborator, noting increased vocabulary diversity and productivity. Our work extends this research
by formalizing metrics to quantify the homogenization effects resulting from user interactions with
LLMs by comparing collaborative essays with essays written without model help.
Evaluation of interactive text generation. Traditional evaluation metrics primarily assess text
similarity to reference text (Papineni et al., 2002; Lin, 2004; Sellam et al., 2020). In interactive
contexts where references are absent, alternative metrics gauge model assistance effectiveness
indirectly. These include user-rated model helpfulness (Roemmele and Gordon, 2018; Clark et al.,
2018; Padmakumar and He, 2022), retention of model suggestions in the final text (Akoury et al.,
2020), and completion time (Buschek et al., 2021). Lee et al. (2022b) additionally considers user
ownership and enjoyment which emphasizes maintaining user writing style. Our work extends
existing metrics that evaluate lexical diversity and text style based on token and POS n-grams
statistics (Roemmele et al., 2017; See et al., 2019; Tevet and Berant, 2021; Meister et al., 2023). We
adapt these metrics for co-writing scenarios and introduce content-specific diversity measures.
Social impacts of LLMs. Bommasani et al. (2021); Bender et al. (2021); Solaiman et al. (2023)
extensively discuss the societal risks of the adoption of LLMs in user-facing applications. Most
relevant to our work is the concern over the potential emergence of an algorithmic monoculture
(Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021), which assesses outcome homogenization in decision-making Creel
and Hellman (2022); Bommasani et al. (2022). Additionally, Hancock et al. (2020) discuss the
potential language homogenization during AI-mediated communication, while Arnold et al. (2020)
demonstrate that predictive keyboards lead to shorter image captions with fewer rare words. Jakesch
et al. (2023); Bhat et al. (2023) show that writing with a biased language model can change user
opinions. Liao and Xiao (2023) advocate for novel evaluation methods to uncover socio-technical
issues arising from increased general-purpose LLM use. Our work investigates one axis of such
evaluation, namely content diversity, in co-writing settings.

8   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we study how writing with LLMs impacts the diversity of content produced. Through a
controlled study, we find that users writing with InstructGPT produce more similar content than those
writing with GPT3 or without model help. This homogenization also results in a reduction of the
overall diversity of content produced by many users. Furthermore, our analysis indicates that this
effect is attributable to the less diverse text contributed by InstructGPT, while the user-contributed
text remains largely consistent with and without model help. These findings highlight a new axis
on which to evaluate the impact of LLMs prior to their deployment. While adapting a model with
human feedback leads to an improvement in instruction following, this may be accompanied by a
reduction in content diversity. Combined with other recent findings that LLMs influence user opinions
during the writing process (Jakesch et al., 2023), this calls for a careful user-centered evaluation to
ensure that these models do not suppress the voice of users in scenarios where personal expression is
desired. Finally, our work also adds to the growing body of open problems on reinforcement learning
with human feedback (Casper et al., 2023). Learning from the diverse feedback of many users and
personalizing model generations to individuals are challenging future directions.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Mina Lee, Nick Lourie, Naomi Saphra, Richard Pang, and Nitish Joshi
for their input at various stages of the project. We would also like to thank Abby Rabinowitz and
Alexander Landfair from the NYU Expository Writing Program for valuable discussions during the
planning stages. We would finally like to acknowledge all the writers recruited for this project without
whom this work would not have been possible. This work is supported by Open Philanthropy, AWS
AI, and the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1922658.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
All data collection experiments were done between March and July 2023. For the sake of repro-
ducibility, the essays with character-level logs as recorded by the interface along with all model
suggestions presented to users will be released after the review period. This allows readers to replay
entire writing sessions using the code released by Lee et al. (2022a). We also make public all the
scripts to process the raw logs to perform the analyses run in this paper.

E THICS S TATEMENT
We detail all the procedures for user recruitment and remuneration in Appendix A.1. The plan for our
user study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of our university. We obtained consent
from all participants to share the essays publicly post the completion of the study. We detail further
limitations of our study in Appendix D.

R EFERENCES
Nader Akoury, Shufan Wang, Josh Whiting, Stephen Hood, Nanyun Peng, and Mohit Iyyer. 2020.
  Storium: A dataset and evaluation platform for machine-in-the-loop story generation. In Proceed-
  ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
  pages 6470–6484.

Kenneth C Arnold, Krysta Chauncey, and Krzysztof Z Gajos. 2020. Predictive text encourages
  predictable writing. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User
  Interfaces, pages 128–138.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. 2022. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862.

Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On
  the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021
  ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pages 610–623.

Advait Bhat, Saaket Agashe, Parth Oberoi, Niharika Mohile, Ravi Jangir, and Anirudha Joshi. 2023.
  Interacting with next-phrase suggestions: How suggestion systems aid and influence the cognitive
  processes of writing. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User
  Interfaces, pages 436–452.

Rishi Bommasani, Kathleen A Creel, Ananya Kumar, Dan Jurafsky, and Percy S Liang. 2022. Picking
  on the same person: Does algorithmic monoculture lead to outcome homogenization? Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:3663–3678.

Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen Creel,
  Jared Quincy Davis, Dorottya Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Ste-
  fano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren
  Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Peter


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas Icard, Saahil
  Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, Omar
  Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal
  Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu
  Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell, Zanele Munyikwa,
  Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Ben Newman, Allen Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles,
  Hamed Nilforoshan, Julian Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou, Joon Sung
  Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Rob Reich, Hongyu
  Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher Ré, Dorsa Sadigh, Sh-
  iori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishnan Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori,
  Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai
  Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi
  Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. 2021. On the
  opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258.

Daniel Buschek, Martin Zürn, and Malin Eiband. 2021. The impact of multiple parallel phrase
  suggestions on email input and composition behaviour of native and non-native english writers. In
  Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–13.

Stephen Casper, Xander Davies, Claudia Shi, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, Jérémy Scheurer, Javier Rando,
   Rachel Freedman, Tomasz Korbak, David Lindner, Pedro Freire, et al. 2023. Open problems
   and fundamental limitations of reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2307.15217.

Tuhin Chakrabarty, Vishakh Padmakumar, and He He. 2022. Help me write a poem: Instruction
  tuning as a vehicle for collaborative poetry writing. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 6848–6863, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
  Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Quanze Chen, Chenyang Lei, Wei Xu, Ellie Pavlick, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2014. Poetry of the
  crowd: A human computation algorithm to convert prose into rhyming verse. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing, volume 2, pages 10–11.

Elizabeth Clark, Anne Spencer Ross, Chenhao Tan, Yangfeng Ji, and Noah A Smith. 2018. Creative
   writing with a machine in the loop: Case studies on slogans and stories. In 23rd International
   Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pages 329–340.

Kathleen Creel and Deborah Hellman. 2022. The algorithmic leviathan: Arbitrariness, fairness, and
  opportunity in algorithmic decision-making systems. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 52(1):26–
  43.

E. Durmus, K. Nyugen, T. I. Liao, N. Schiefer, A. Askell, A. Bakhtin, C. Chen, Z. Hatfield-Dodds,
   D. Hernandez, N. Joseph, L. Lovitt, S. McCandlish, O. Sikder, A. Tamkin, J. Thamkul, J. Kaplan,
   J. Clark, and D. Ganguli. 2023. Towards measuring the representation of subjective global opinions
   in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.16388.

Sebastian Gehrmann, Elizabeth Clark, and Thibault Sellam. 2023. Repairing the cracked foundation:
  A survey of obstacles in evaluation practices for generated text. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 77:103–166.

Katy Ilonka Gero and Lydia B Chilton. 2019. Metaphoria: An algorithmic companion for metaphor
  creation. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems,
  pages 1–12.

Marjan Ghazvininejad, Xing Shi, Jay Priyadarshi, and Kevin Knight. 2017. Hafez: an interactive
 poetry generation system. In Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations, pages 43–48.

Tanya Goyal, Junyi Jessy Li, and Greg Durrett. 2022. News summarization and evaluation in the era
  of gpt-3. arXiv e-prints, pages arXiv–2209.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jeffrey T Hancock, Mor Naaman, and Karen Levy. 2020. Ai-mediated communication: Definition,
   research agenda, and ethical considerations. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication,
   25(1):89–100.

Daphne Ippolito, Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, and Sehmon Burnam. 2022. Creative writing
  with an ai-powered writing assistant: Perspectives from professional writers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.05030.

Maurice Jakesch, Advait Bhat, Daniel Buschek, Lior Zalmanson, and Mor Naaman. 2023. Co-writing
 with opinionated language models affects users’ views. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference
  on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–15.

J. Kleinberg and M. Raghavan. 2021. Algorithmic monoculture and social welfare. In National
   Academy of Sciences.

Mina Lee, Percy Liang, and Qian Yang. 2022a. Coauthor: Designing a human-ai collaborative writing
  dataset for exploring language model capabilities. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on
  Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–19.

Mina Lee, Megha Srivastava, Amelia Hardy, John Thickstun, Esin Durmus, Ashwin Paranjape, Ines
  Gerard-Ursin, Xiang Lisa Li, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong, et al. 2022b. Evaluating human-language
  model interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09746.

X. L. Li, A. Holtzman, D. Fried, P. Liang, J. Eisner, T. Hashimoto, L. Zettlemoyer, and M. Lewis.
  2023. Contrastive decoding: Open-ended text generation as optimization. In Association for
  Computational Linguistics (ACL).

Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga,
  Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. 2022. Holistic evaluation of
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110.

Q Vera Liao and Ziang Xiao. 2023. Rethinking model evaluation as narrowing the socio-technical
  gap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03100.

Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summa-
  rization Branches Out, pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics.

C. Meister, T. Pimentel, G. Wiher, and R. Cotterell. 2023. Locally typical sampling. Transactions of
   the Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL), 11.

Piotr Mirowski, Kory W Mathewson, Jaylen Pittman, and Richard Evans. 2023. Co-writing screen-
   plays and theatre scripts with language models: Evaluation by industry professionals. In Proceed-
   ings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–34.

OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.

L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal,
   K. Slama, A. Ray, J. Schulman, J. Hilton, F. Kelton, L. Miller, M. Simens, A. Askell, P. Welinder,
   P. Christiano, J. Leike, and R. Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with
   human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155.

Vishakh Padmakumar and He He. 2022. Machine-in-the-loop rewriting for creative image captioning.
  In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 573–586.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A method for
  automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL).

F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning
   Research, 12:2825–2830.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Melissa Roemmele and Andrew S Gordon. 2015. Creative help: A story writing assistant. In
 Interactive Storytelling: 8th International Conference on Interactive Digital Storytelling, ICIDS
 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark, November 30-December 4, 2015, Proceedings 8, pages 81–92.
 Springer.

Melissa Roemmele and Andrew S Gordon. 2018. Automated assistance for creative writing with
 an rnn language model. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on intelligent user
 interfaces companion, pages 1–2.

Melissa Roemmele, Andrew S Gordon, and Reid Swanson. 2017. Evaluating story generation
 systems using automated linguistic analyses. In SIGKDD 2017 Workshop on Machine Learning
 for Creativity, pages 13–17.

Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto.
  2023. Whose opinions do language models reflect? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17548.

Abigail See, Aneesh Pappu, Rohun Saxena, Akhila Yerukola, and Christopher D. Manning. 2019.
  Do massively pretrained language models make better storytellers? In Proceedings of the 23rd
  Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 843–861, Hong Kong,
  China. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Thibault Sellam, Dipanjan Das, and Ankur P Parikh. 2020. Bleurt: Learning robust metrics for text
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04696.

Irene Solaiman, Zeerak Talat, William Agnew, Lama Ahmad, Dylan Baker, Su Lin Blodgett, Hal
   Daumé III, Jesse Dodge, Ellie Evans, Sara Hooker, et al. 2023. Evaluating the social impact of
   generative ai systems in systems and society. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05949.

Z. Song, T. Cai, J. D. Lee, and W. J. Su. 2023. Reward collapse in aligning large language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17608.

Simeng Sun, Ori Shapira, Ido Dagan, and Ani Nenkova. 2019. How to compare summarizers
  without target length? pitfalls, solutions and re-examination of the neural summarization literature.
  In Proceedings of the Workshop on Methods for Optimizing and Evaluating Neural Language
  Generation, pages 21–29, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ben Swanson, Kory Mathewson, Ben Pietrzak, Sherol Chen, and Monica Dinalescu. 2021. Story
  centaur: Large language model few shot learning as a creative writing tool. In Proceedings of
  the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  System Demonstrations, pages 244–256.

Reid Swanson and Andrew S Gordon. 2008. Say anything: A massively collaborative open domain
  story writing companion. In Interactive Storytelling: First Joint International Conference on
  Interactive Digital Storytelling, ICIDS 2008 Erfurt, Germany, November 26-29, 2008 Proceedings
  1, pages 32–40. Springer.

Reid Swanson and Andrew S Gordon. 2012. Say anything: Using textual case-based reasoning to
  enable open-domain interactive storytelling. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems
  (TiiS), 2(3):1–35.

R. Taori and T. B. Hashimoto. 2023. Data feedback loops: Model-driven amplification of dataset
   biases. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).

Guy Tevet and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Evaluating the evaluation of diversity in natural language
  generation. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 326–346, Online. Association for Computational
  Linguistics.

Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, and Daphne Ippolito. 2022. Wordcraft: Story writing with
  large language models. In 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI ’22,
  page 841–852, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. Bertscore:
  Evaluating text generation with bert.

Y. Zhu, S. Lu, L. Zheng, J. Guo, W. Zhang, J. Wang, and Y. Yu. 2018. Texygen: A benchmarking
   platform for text generation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.01886.

Jacob Ziv and Abraham Lempel. 1977. A universal algorithm for sequential data compression. IEEE
   Transactions on information theory, 23(3):337–343.

Jacob Ziv and Abraham Lempel. 1978. Compression of individual sequences via variable-rate coding.
   IEEE transactions on Information Theory, 24(5):530–536.


A     TASK D ETAILS

A.1    U SER R ECRUITMENT ON U PWORK

We recruit a total of 38 participants from Upwork, all of whom are native English speakers and have
prior experience in writing or copyediting on the platform. Their prior experience varied from 5
to over 200 previously completed tasks on the platform. Our participants are exclusively from the
United States and encompassing diverse racial backgrounds with an approximately equal distribution
between genders. Each participant is asked to complete a session consisting of three essay writing
tasks—one in each of the three settings and each on a different topic. In each session, the order of the
three settings and the assignment of topics are randomized. We don’t enforce that users include a
certain amount of machine-generated text as we want to study how collaborative writing in its most
natural form differs from solo writing without model help. The average machine-written fraction
is 0.32 for InstructGPT and 0.35 for GPT (Table 9) indicating that users obtain useful help from
the models without over-relying on the same. The vast majority of essays have machine-written
fractions ranging from 0.2 to 0.5 with a few outliers being as low as 0.1 and as high as 0.8 (Figure 13
in Appendix C). Users are allowed to edit their essays post-completion. Their objective is to convey
their opinions effectively. We acknowledge that this might affect word usage patterns which again
motivates the contribution of our proposed key point-based evaluation as these key points are less
likely to be changed during post-editing. Each essay takes 15 minutes on average and hence a session
usually takes the participants under one hour. Compensation was provided through hourly contracts,
prorated to $20 per hour. After each participant completed one session, their essays were reviewed
manually by the authors of this work for the relevance to the essay prompt as well as coherence of
writing. This process does not involve policing the actual content of the essays and we encourage our
participants to express their opinions in detail. This was used to filter out a few participants whose
sessions were reassigned. The remaining participants were then invited to complete two additional
sessions, each with different topics. As a result, each of the 38 participants completed between 1 and
3 sessions. In total, we obtain 10 essays on each of the 10 topics for each setting, resulting in 100
essays per setting.

A.2    D ECODING PARAMETERS ON O PENAI API

To avoid reduced diversity due to decoding, we use a decoding strategy biased towards higher diversity.
Specifically, we sample continuations from both models following the “high randomness” setting
from Lee et al. (2022a). The decoding parameters we use are:

       • Engine: davinci for the base language model and text-davinci-003 for the feedback-
         tuned language model
       • Response length (word piece): 30
       • Temperature: 0.9
       • Top P: 1
       • Frequency penalty: 0.5
       • Presence penalty: 0.5


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Prompt Code     Prompt (Source URL)

school          What Are the Most Important Things Students Should Learn in School? In your opinion, what
                are the most important things students should learn in school? What is the most important thing
                you have learned in school? How has this knowledge affected your life? How do you think it
                will help your success in the future? (Link)

stereotype      What Stereotypical Characters Make You Cringe? What stereotypical characters in books,
                movies or television shows make you cringe and why? Would you ever not watch or read
                something because of its offensive portrayal of someone? (Link)

audiobook       Is Listening to a Book Just as Good as Reading It? Do you listen to audiobooks? What are the
                benefits, in your opinion, of listening instead of reading? Are there advantages to reading that
                cannot be gained by listening? Which method do you prefer? Why? (Link)

athletes        Should College Athletes Be Paid? Do you think college athletes should be paid? Or is a college
                scholarship and other non-monetary perks like the opportunity to play in front of cheering fans
                enough? What possible difficulties or downsides might there be in providing monetary
                compensation to players? (Link)

extremesports   Is It Selfish to Pursue Risky Sports Like Extreme Mountain Climbing? Some sports, like
                extreme mountain climbing, are dangerous. Since there are varying degrees of risk in most, if
                not all, sports (such as the possibility of concussions, broken bones and even death), how does
                one decide where the line might be drawn between what is reasonable and what is not? Are
                some sports simply too dangerous to be called a sport? (Link)

animal          Is It Wrong to Focus on Animal Welfare When Humans Are Suffering? Would you be surprised
                to hear that a study found that research subjects were more upset by stories of a dog beaten by a
                baseball bat than of an adult similarly beaten? Or that other researchers found that if forced to
                choose, 40 percent of people would save their pet dog over a foreign tourist. Why do you think
                many people are more empathetic toward the suffering of animals than that of people? In your
                opinion, is it wrong to focus on animal welfare when humans are suffering? Why do you think
                so? (Link)

news            Are We Being Bad Citizens If We Don’t Keep Up With the News? In your opinion, are we being
                bad citizens if we don’t keep up with the news? Do you think all people have some
                responsibility to know what is going on in the world? Does engaging with current events
                actually do anything at all? Why do you think the way you do? (Link)

mindfulness     Should Schools Teach Mindfulness? Have you ever tried mindfulness or meditation, practices
                that focus on the present moment and being aware of your thoughts, feelings and bodily
                sensations? If so, what was it like for you? If not, does it sound like something you’d like to try?
                Do you think that such practices have a place in schools? Why or why not? (Link)

screen          How Worried Should We Be About Screen Time During the Pandemic? The coronavirus
                pandemic ended the screen time debate: Screens won. We all now find ourselves on our screens
                for school, for work and for connecting with family and friends during this time of social
                distancing and increased isolation. But should we be worried about this excessive screen use
                right now? Or should we finally get over it and embrace the benefits of our digital devices?
                (Link)

dating          How Do You Think Technology Affects Dating? Have you had any experience with dating?
                Have you ever used dating apps? If so, what has it been like for you? If not, why not? How do
                you think technology — like apps, Netflix, social media and texting — affects dating and
                relationships? In your opinion, does it improve or worsen romantic interactions? (Link)

                         Table 5: List of prompts used in the experiments.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Figure 5: Text editor interface showing suggestions when requested by the user.


A.3   U SER I NSTRUCTIONS

Essay Requirements To complete an essay assignment successfully, you would need to write a
short 3-passage essay given the prompt presented to you. The essay should reflect your opinion of the
assigned topic and you’re writing an argumentative piece for why you feel that way. The expected
length of the essays is around 300 words (3-4 short paragraphs of 3-4 sentences each). Each piece
should take you between 10 and 15 minutes (as calculated from prior experiments). When writing
with AI help, you are required to obtain model suggestions at least 5 times (we encourage you to
do this more if you find it helpful, more the better). Some example responses are provided below
(though these were written by non-experts so I’m sure you can identify flaws and improve on the
style)

Instructions in Detail

      • When you are completing a task, make sure you have a Session ID. If you don’t have this
        already, please send us a message on Upwork.
      • View the spreadsheet of assignments and navigate to your assigned session. Each session
        will correspond to three rows in the spreadsheet, each with an accompanying URL.
      • Each of these links corresponds to the three assignment essays you would have to complete
        in order to finish the task.
      • If you click one of these, you will see the text editor pop up which looks like this which
        shows the prompt for the assigned essay.
      • Out of the three assignments, please note that one is the essay that you will have to write
        without the assistance of the AI. Please complete the three assignments in the order provided.
      • When you write with the AI, you will have the option to hit the TAB key on your keyboard
        and obtain suggestions from the model in the form of a dropdown like this. You are free to
        continue the writing process as you normally would, however, we encourage you to make
        use of model help when you are looking for ideas when you are stuck or just want to take a
        look at some possible continuations :)
      • When you write with the AI, you need to request at least 5 suggestions from the model.
        You do NOT need to accept all of the suggestions, you are free to accept one then edit it,
        ask for suggestions again at the same time, or even just reject all of the model suggestions.
        We encourage you to use the model as much as possible :) The objective of the study is to
        understand the effect of the model, so more interaction is better.
      • Once you complete the essay, make sure you hit ‘Save’ at the bottom of the screen to obtain
        a verification code on completion. We ask that you complete the writing in one sitting. We
        aim to record the entire writing process so please refrain from copy-pasting any text into the
        editor.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 Essay
While I believe the concerns regarding children’s screen time are valid, I believe it is somewhat
biased to not take this problem, which is a genuine issue right now, as an everyone problem, and not a
student one. With that in mind, I do believe that for the majority of our generation it would not be as
hard to disconnect with devices after the pandemic.

I know that I, along with many other teenagers, would like nothing more than to go back to school,
play sports outside, meet new people and such. I doubt I could say the same for our older generations,
because while parents ban teenagers from using their phones, they often spend many more hours on
their devices. Cranky grandparents grumble about how ’back in their day they lived without a mobile
phone’ usually forget the point of their stories. Back in their day indeed.

We live in a different era, and to think that the same rules should apply to teenagers, especially during
a pandemic, isn’t logical.Pinterest, Youtube, Twitter aren’t just places where teens while away their
time. They are also places for new ideas, watching college lectures, and political discourse. Limiting
screen time, while in the short run is helpful, is doubtful to do anything in the long run. Banning
technology is not stopping kids from using it. It’s just stopping them from telling their parents about
it.

I would like to end by saying, parents, please trust your teenager just a little bit more, and don’t be
too worried about their screen time!
                                               Keypoints

       • The concerns regarding children’s screen time are valid
       • The problem of screen time should be considered an everyone problem, not just a student
         one
       • For most young people, it would not be hard to disconnect from devices after the pandemic
       • Older generations often spend more time on their devices than teens, despite their
         complaints
       • Social media can be used for educational and constructive purposes
       • Limiting screen time may not be effective in the long run
       • Parents should trust their teenager more and not worry too much about their screen time


                         Table 6: Example of summarization into keypoints


A.4    S UMMARIZATION INTO K EY P OINTS

Motivated by recent encouraging results of using LLMs for zero-shot summarization (Goyal et al.,
2022), we summarize each essay into a list of key points by prompting gpt-3.5-turbo. Table 6 con-
tains a full example of an essay with the generated key points. We use a simple prompt, “Summarize
this essay into a set of simple and distinct bullet points. Make sure that the bullet points cover all the
information from the essay.”


B     S IGNIFICANCE T ESTING

B.1   P ERMUTATION T EST FOR S IGNIFICANCE OF D IVERSITY R ESULTS

To test for the significance of the results on diversity (Section 5.2), since we do not have multiple
instances of essay corpora from each setting (Solo, GPT3 and InstructGPT), we employ three
permutation tests between each pair of settings. A walkthrough example of the permutation test setup
is as follows. We wish to evaluate the significance of the difference between the diversity scores of
Solo and InstructGPT, as measured by the clustering of key points (Table 3) or by traditional lossless


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


compression algorithms (Table 13). We first calculate the statistic (difference between the diversity
scores) on the collected corpora of essays. We then take the union of Solo and InstructGPT essays,
randomly partition this into two equal sets, and recalculate the statistic on these two permuted sets of
essays. This process is then repeated for 1000 different permutations. We then obtain the p-value of
this two-tailed permutation test as the proportion of times the absolute value of the statistic calculated
on the permuted data is greater than the statistic calculated on the observed data from the user study.
This is then repeated for all pairs out of Solo, GPT3, and InstructGPT. Bold values in the results
tables (Table 3, Table 13) indicate those instances where the p-value on the permutation test for a
setup (InstructGPT) was significant at the 5% level over both other setups (GPT3 and Solo).

B.2   C HI -S QUARE T EST FOR S IGNIFICANCE FOR n- GRAM D ISTRIBUTIONS

To confirm the significance of the difference between the categorical distributions of n-grams in the
different setups, we employ a chi-square test on the count of occurrences. We evaluate if writing
with InstructGPT results in a change of 5-gram usage in Figure 3 and Figure 4(b). To perform this
test, we first identify and take the union of the 50 most frequently occurring 5-grams in each setup.
We then obtain the counts of occurrences of each of these 5-grams in both corpora and perform a
chi-square test for significance on these frequencies. A p-value < 0.05 results in a rejection of the
null hypothesis and the observation of a significant difference in the categorical distributions. We
perform these for all pairs out of Solo, GPT3, and InstructGPT and find that the repetition of n-grams
when writing with InstructGPT is more similar by a significant margin compared to both other setups
(Figure 3).

B.3   S IGNIFICANCE T ESTING FOR R ESULTS ON H OMOGENIZATION

As noted in Section 2.2 and Appendix A.1, we recruit a fixed set of users who wrote essays in
each of the three setups in a randomized order. We ensure that they write essays on different topics
in each setup to prevent a repetition of their opinions. To test for the significance of the change
in homogenization across all topics between the three setups, we conducted independent samples
t-tests in Figure 2. To further test the significance of this result, we observe that within each topic,
each writer only submits an essay to one of the three setups. This matches the between-group
experimental setup, albeit with less power as we only collected 10 essays per setup per topic. We
compute the significance of the difference in homogenization scores per topic via an independent
samples t-test. We report the p-values comparing each pair of setups within each topic at both the key
point (Table 7) and essay level (Table 8). Comparisons with significance at the 5% level are marked
with an asterisk. We observe that the InstructGPT setup exhibits higher homogenization over Solo
writers with significance at the 5% level on 8 out of 10 topics at the raw essay level and 6 out of 10 at
the key point level using both Rouge-L and BertScore. The same trend holds on GPT3 on 7 topics at
the raw essay level and 5 at the key point level. We believe that this confirms the overall trend that
writing with InstructGPT results in higher homogenization in the essays created.

C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Reporting more basic statistics about the collected essays We aim to improve the comprehen-
siveness of our analysis by reporting additional metrics on the collected essays in Table 9.

       • We compute basic statistics such as perplexity (via GPT2), average sentence length, and essay
         length on the essays collected. Predictably, writing with model-help reduces the perplexity
         of the essays which now incorporate suggestions sampled from an LM distribution. The
         total length of essays, in terms of word count, is roughly similar, with writers writing slightly
         shorter sentences when writing with InstructGPT (albeit with a slightly high standard error).
       • Additionally, by calculating the average height of the dependency parse trees of the sentences
         in the essays, we observe that writing with InstructGPT results in sentences with fewer
         nested structures, indicative of slightly lower complexity.
       • Writing with model help also results in fewer unique POS-Ngrams again providing some
         evidence that collaborative writing could result in more homogenized usage of language.
         The effect here is even between GPT3 and InstructGPT, a slight departure from the results


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    Significance Testing - Key point level

                                 Rouge-L                                                           BertScore

                Topic    Solo vs In-   InstructGPT      GPT3 vs                   Topic      Solo vs In-   InstructGPT   GPT3 vs
                         structGPT     vs GPT3          Solo                                 structGPT     vs GPT3       Solo

            Stereotype         0.02*         0.34             0.01*          Stereotype             0.13         0.18         0.81
                School         0.03*        0.05*              0.86              School             0.78         0.15         0.17
          Mindfulness          0.00*        0.00*             0.03*        Mindfulness             0.00*         0.11         0.64
              Athletes          0.24         0.14              0.53            Athletes             0.09        0.05*         0.67
           Audiobook            0.73        0.03*              0.25         Audiobook              0.00*         0.06        0.01*
       Animal Welfare           0.67         0.13             0.01*     Animal Welfare              0.31        0.02*        0.00*
       Extreme Sports          0.03*        0.02*              0.93     Extreme Sports              0.43         0.11         0.38
          Screen Time          0.00*         0.09             0.00*        Screen Time             0.00*        0.00*        0.06*
                Dating         0.17*        0.00*             0.04*              Dating            0.01*        0.01*         0.41
              Citizens          0.51         0.08              0.16            Citizens             0.16         0.11         0.87


Table 7: Evaluating the significance of the difference of homogenization between the three setups
across each topic (Corresponding to the box plots in Figure 9). We conduct an independent samples
t-test to compare the document homogenization values between the setups pairwise. Pairs with
a significant difference at the 5% level are highlighted with an asterisk. The overall trend is that
InstructGPT has significantly higher homogenization across a majority of topics.


                                                    Significance Testing - Raw essay level

                                 Rouge-L                                                           BertScore

                Topic    Solo vs In-   InstructGPT      GPT3 vs                   Topic      Solo vs In-   InstructGPT   GPT3 vs
                         structGPT     vs GPT3          Solo                                 structGPT     vs GPT3       Solo

            Stereotype         0.02*        0.01*             0.00*          Stereotype            0.02*        0.01*        0.03*
                School          0.17         0.12              0.71              School             0.14         0.22         0.62
          Mindfulness          0.00*        0.01*              0.42        Mindfulness             0.02*         0.22         0.81
              Athletes         0.00*        0.00*              0.52            Athletes            0.00*        0.00*         0.90
           Audiobook           0.01*         0.15              0.69         Audiobook              0.00*        0.00*         0.76
       Animal Welfare           0.49         0.11              0.15     Animal Welfare              0.13        0.00*        0.00*
       Extreme Sports           0.35        0.00*             0.00*     Extreme Sports             0.04*        0.00*         0.09
          Screen Time          0.00*        0.00*             0.00*        Screen Time             0.00*        0.00*         0.70
                Dating         0.00*         0.61             0.00*              Dating             0.88        0.01*        0.02*
              Citizens         0.00*         0.14              0.11            Citizens            0.00*        0.04*         0.11


Table 8: Evaluating the significance of the difference of homogenization between the three setups
across each topic (Corresponding to the box plots in Figure 8). We conduct an independent samples
t-test to compare the document homogenization values between the setups pairwise. Pairs with
a significant difference at the 5% level are highlighted with an asterisk. The overall trend is that
InstructGPT has significantly higher homogenization across a majority of topics.


                                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            Solo             GPT3         InstructGPT
              Perplexity of Essays (via GPT2)                 25.067             22.10            20.26
                   Sentence Length (in words)            23.51 (0.25)      23.66 (0.24)     22.51 (0.24)
                         Height of Syntax Tree            5.93 (0.06)       5.98 (0.06)      5.71 (0.05)
                      Essay Length (in words)        376.44 (8.03)        380.87 (9.30)    368.39 (8.43)
                          Relevance to Prompt                      4.30           4.15             4.10
     Human Ratings            Grammaticality                       4.00           4.10             4.00
                           Depth of Discussion                     3.95           3.85             3.80
                                                1                 73                56               58
                                                2                487               437              426
Unique POS Ngrams                               3               1297              1261             1235
                                                4               2044              1975             1988
                                                5               2423              2338             2414

Table 9: Reporting basic statistics about the collected essays. Writing with the help of a model reduces
the perplexity (measured via GPT2) of the essays in InstructGPT and GPT3. We also observe that
users write essays of similar length across all setups with slightly shorter sentences in InstructGPT.
We also examine the height of the dependency parse trees of the sentences in each setup to find that
writing with InstructGPT also results in sentences with less complexity on average. Along with these
average numbers, we report the standard errors in brackets. We also find that writing with model help
results in fewer unique POS-n-grams. Finally, we rate the quality of one essay per topic per setup
(selected randomly) along three different dimensions (grammaticality, relevance to the prompt, and
depth of discussion) to find that there is no significance in essay quality across setups.


         on diversity which is more focused on content. We finally plot the distributions of the 50
         most frequent POS-Ngrams (Figure 6) and find that on 4 and 5-grams, writing with model
         help leads to higher repetition of frequent POS-Ngrams.
       • To ensure that the quality of the essays is not a confounder in the result, we present human
         ratings for a random sample of 10 essays (one per topic) from each setup that we conducted as
         part of our quality control checks. Here we judged the essays on 3 different axes—relevance
         to the topic, grammaticality, and the depth of discussion on their opinions. This was per
         the advice from faculty at the Expository Writing program at our university. This analysis
         showed no clear differences between the setups, explained in part due to the observation that
         the machine-written fraction in the collaborative essays was on average around 32%-35%
         (Table 9).


Writing with InstructGPT results in more similar content at the key point and raw essay level
In addition to the results presented in Section 4.2, we also report the corpus homogenization scores
at the key point and essay level in Table 10. Across both Rouge-L and BertScore, the corpus of
essays written with InstructGPT exhibits higher corpus homogenization than both other groups by
a statistically significant margin (p-value < 0.05) on both levels. We also plot the homogenization
scores of all the essays calculated at the raw essay and key point levels in Figure 8 and Figure 9. We
choose to report the homogenization at the key point level mainly because string similarity metrics
such as Rouge-L and BertScore are less reliable on longer text documents (Sun et al., 2019; Gehrmann
et al., 2023).

Essays written with InstructGPT repeat higher- order n-grams more frequently Building on
from the results in Section 5.2, we plot the n-gram distributions of the raw essays varying n from 1
to 5 in Figure 10. Here we truncate the distribution to the most common 50 n-grams from each setup.
While the distributions for 1, 2 and 3-grams are almost identical across the setups, on 4 and 5-grams
we see a concentration of probability mass at the head of the distribution for the essays written with
InstructGPT. The reduction in lexical diversity (Table 3a) is manifested in this increased repetition of
higher-order n-grams.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               0.125                                                         Solo                              0.04                                                  Solo
                                                                             InstructGPT                                                                             InstructGPT
               0.100                                                         GPT3                              0.03                                                  GPT3
 Probability


                                                                                                 Probability
               0.075
               0.050                                                                                           0.02

               0.025                                                                                           0.01
               0.000
                          0     10         20                    30         40         50                              0         10            20       30         40         50
                              1-grams in decreasing order of frequency                                                         2-grams in decreasing order of frequency

                              (a) Unigram Distribution                                                                         (b) Bigram Distribution

                                                                             Solo                                                                                    Solo
                  0.015                                                      InstructGPT                       0.005                                                 InstructGPT
                                                                             GPT3                                                                                    GPT3
    Probability


                                                                                                 Probability


                                                                                                               0.004
                  0.010
                                                                                                               0.003
                  0.005                                                                                        0.002
                          0      10         20                    30        40         50                                  0        10         20       30          40         50
                              3-grams in decreasing order of frequency                                                         4-grams in decreasing order of frequency

                              (c) Trigram Distribution                                                                         (d) 4-gram Distribution

                                                                                                                                Solo
                                                               0.0020                                                           InstructGPT
                                                                                                                                GPT3
                                                 Probability


                                                               0.0015

                                                               0.0010

                                                                        0        10         20                        30       40         50
                                                                             5-grams in decreasing order of frequency

                                                                             (e) 5-gram Distribution

Figure 6: Distribution of the top-50 POS-n-grams in the essays from the various setups varying n
from 1 to 5. While the lower order n-gram usage patterns are similar across groups, essays written
with InstructGPT exhibit higher repetition of common 4- and 5-POS-ngrams.


                                                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             1.0


                          Fraction of Key Points by Models
                                                             0.8

                                                             0.6

                                                             0.4

                                                             0.2

                                                             0.0
                                                                           GPT3          InstructGPT

Figure 7: Boxplot of the fraction of key points contributed by the model in each essay. Both models
contribute a considerable amount of key points. However, the high variance suggests varied reliance
on the model by different users.


                                                                                  Solo         GPT3     Instruct-
                                                                                                          GPT
                      Key point Rouge-L                                        0.1536          0.1578    0.1660
                      Level     BertScore                                      0.6305          0.6284    0.6437
                      Essay                                         Rouge-L    0.1498          0.1523    0.1621
                      Level                                        BertScore   0.6044          0.6130    0.6318

Table 10: Corpus homogenization scores comparing essays from the three setups at the key point
and essay level using both Rouge-L and BertScore to calculate homogenization. Essays written with
InstructGPT exhibit higher homogenization than Solo and GPT3 across both levels and similarity
metrics by a statistically significant margin (p-value < 0.05).



Essays written with InstructGPT are more compressible. We also show that the reduction
of diversity measured by linguistic units such as n-grams and key points also correlates with less
diversity in an information-theoretic sense. Specifically, we measure the compression ratio of essays
written in the three settings using various lossless compression algorithms: LZMA, ZLIB, and GZIP,
each being a variation of the Lempel-Ziv algorithm (Ziv and Lempel, 1977; 1978). These algorithms
compress data by identifying repeated patterns and using dictionary mappings for encoding. To
compute the compression ratio, we concatenate all essays from a setting into a single text file. We then
run the compression algorithm on it and calculate the ratio of the compressed file size to the original
file size. From Table 13, we see that the InstructGPT essays are consistently more compressible
across all three compression algorithms, which is statistically significant with p < 0.05 according to
permutation tests (Appendix B.1).


InstructGPT presents less diverse suggestions to users than GPT3 To test the hypothesis that
adapting a model with human feedback reduces the diversity of the presented suggestions, we
calculate the average similarity of all pairs of the five suggestions presented by InstructGPT and
GPT3 upon each user query. In addition to the similarity plotted with Rouge-L in Figure 12 we also
plot the average similarity scores of suggestions computed using BertScore in Figure 12(b).


Higher correlation between AI written fraction of the document and homogenization, on
InstructGPT than GPT3 To study the relationship between increased model intervention and
homogenization, we plot the fraction of the essay written by the model as a function of the document
homogenization with BertScore and Rouge-L in Figure 13. We observe a weak correlation when
users write with InstructGPT, particularly in the case of BertScore.


                                                                                   22
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        0.220
                                                                     Solo         GPT3          InstructGPT
                        0.200
Homogenization Scores


                        0.180
                        0.160
                        0.140
                        0.120
                        0.100
                        0.080
                                Total (*)   Citizens   Dating   Screen   Extreme Animal Audiobooks College Mindfulness School Stereotypes
                                                                 Time     Sports Welfare           Athletes
                                                        (a) Homogenization calculated with Rouge-L
                        0.725
                                                                     Solo         GPT3          InstructGPT
                        0.700
Homogenization Scores


                        0.675
                        0.650
                        0.625
                        0.600
                        0.575
                        0.550
                                Total (*)   Citizens   Dating   Screen   Extreme Animal Audiobooks College Mindfulness School Stereotypes
                                                                 Time     Sports Welfare           Athletes
                                                       (b) Homogenization calculated with BertScore

  Figure 8: Boxplots of homogenization scores for all three groups (Solo, InstructGPT, GPT3) when
  comparing the raw essays and calculated using (a) Rouge-L and (b) BertScore as measures of
  similarity. The left-most column (Total) shows essay homogenization scores for all topics and the
  other columns show essay homogenization scores by topic. Essays written with InstructGPT exhibit
  higher corpus homogenization by a statistically significant margin (Section 4.2).


                                                                                   23
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        0.220
                                                                     Solo         GPT3          InstructGPT
                        0.200
Homogenization Scores


                        0.180
                        0.160
                        0.140
                        0.120
                        0.100
                        0.080
                                Total (*)   Citizens   Dating   Screen   Extreme Animal Audiobooks College Mindfulness School Stereotypes
                                                                 Time     Sports Welfare           Athletes
                                                        (a) Homogenization calculated with Rouge-L
                        0.725
                                                                     Solo         GPT3          InstructGPT
                        0.700
Homogenization Scores


                        0.675
                        0.650
                        0.625
                        0.600
                        0.575
                        0.550
                                Total (*)   Citizens   Dating   Screen   Extreme Animal Audiobooks College Mindfulness School Stereotypes
                                                                 Time     Sports Welfare           Athletes
                                                       (b) Homogenization calculated with BertScore

  Figure 9: Boxplots of homogenization scores for all three groups (Solo, InstructGPT, GPT3) when
  comparing essays at the key point level and calculated using (a) Rouge-L and (b) BertScore as
  measures of similarity. The left-most column (Total) shows essay homogenization scores for all
  topics and the other columns show essay homogenization scores by topic. Essays written with
  InstructGPT exhibit higher corpus homogenization by a statistically significant margin (Section 4.2).


                                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               0.04                                                            Solo                              0.004                                              Solo
                                                                               InstructGPT                                                                          InstructGPT
               0.03                                                            GPT3                              0.003                                              GPT3
 Probability


                                                                                                   Probability
               0.02
                                                                                                                 0.002
               0.01
                                                                                                                 0.001
                        0         10         20                     30        40        50                                0        10         20       30         40          50
                                1-grams in decreasing order of frequency                                                      2-grams in decreasing order of frequency

                                (a) Unigram Distribution                                                                      (b) Bigram Distribution

                                                                               Solo                                                                                 Solo
               0.0025                                                                                            0.0006
                                                                               InstructGPT                                                                          InstructGPT
               0.0020                                                          GPT3                                                                                 GPT3
 Probability


                                                                                                   Probability


               0.0015                                                                                            0.0004
               0.0010
               0.0005                                                                                            0.0002

                            0      10         20                     30       40         50                               0        10         20        30         40         50
                                 3-grams in decreasing order of frequency                                                      4-grams in decreasing order of frequency

                                (c) Trigram Distribution                                                                      (d) 4-gram Distribution

                                                                                                                               Solo
                                                                                                                               InstructGPT
                                                                 0.0003
                                                                                                                               GPT3
                                                   Probability


                                                                 0.0002

                                                                 0.0001

                                                                          0        10         20                     30       40         50
                                                                               5-grams in decreasing order of frequency

                                                                               (e) 5-gram Distribution

Figure 10: Distribution of the top-50 n-grams in the essays from the various setups varying n from
1 to 5. While the lower order n-gram usage patterns are similar across groups, essays written with
InstructGPT exhibit higher repetition of common 4-ngrams and 5-grams.


                                                                                              25
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     0.04                                        GPT3 Contribution w/ Humans                                                                                                 GPT3 Contribution w/ Humans
                                                                 InstructGPT Contribution w/ Humans                                      0.004                                               InstructGPT Contribution w/ Humans
                                                                 Human Contribution w/ GPT3                                                                                                  Human Contribution w/ GPT3
                     0.03                                        Human Contribution w/ InstructGPT                                                                                           Human Contribution w/ InstructGPT
                                                                                                                                         0.003
       Probability


                                                                                                                           Probability
                                                                 Solo                                                                                                                        Solo
                     0.02
                                                                                                                                         0.002
                     0.01
                                                                                                                                         0.001
                                             0       10          20                   30          40          50                                                     0           10          20         30         40         50
                                                  1-grams in decreasing order of frequency                                                                                   2-grams in decreasing order of frequency
                                                    (a) Unigram Distribution                                                                                                     (b) Bigram Distribution

              0.0012                                             GPT3 Contribution w/ Humans                                          0.0010                                                 GPT3 Contribution w/ Humans
                                                                 InstructGPT Contribution w/ Humans                                                                                          InstructGPT Contribution w/ Humans
              0.0010                                             Human Contribution w/ GPT3                                           0.0008                                                 Human Contribution w/ GPT3
                                                                 Human Contribution w/ InstructGPT                                                                                           Human Contribution w/ InstructGPT
Probability


                                                                                                                        Probability
              0.0008                                             Solo                                                                 0.0006                                                 Solo
              0.0006
                                                                                                                                      0.0004
              0.0004
                                                                                                                                      0.0002
              0.0002
                                             0       10          20                   30          40          50                                                     0           10          20         30         40         50
                                                  3-grams in decreasing order of frequency                                                                                   4-grams in decreasing order of frequency
                                                    (c) Trigram Distribution                                                                                                     (d) 4-gram Distribution

                                                                                    0.0008                         GPT3 Contribution w/ Humans
                                                                                                                   InstructGPT Contribution w/ Humans
                                                                                                                   Human Contribution w/ GPT3
                                                                                    0.0006                         Human Contribution w/ InstructGPT
                                                                      Probability


                                                                                                                   Solo
                                                                                    0.0004

                                                                                    0.0002

                                                                                              0          10        20                     30                                40        50
                                                                                                    5-grams in decreasing order of frequency
                                                                                                         (e) 5-gram Distribution

 Figure 11: n-gram distribution of tokens introduced by the user and the model during the two co-
 writing setup with InstructGPT and GPT3 respectively. The distribution of human-written n-grams
 from Solo essays is also provided as a reference. The distribution of user-written text in all settings is
 similar to each other regardless of model assistance, whereas InstructGPT contributed text notably
 has larger probability mass on common 3, 4, and 5-grams. This indicates that the reduced lexical
 diversity in the InstructGPT group is mainly due to model introduced text.


                                           0.50
                                                             GPT3                          InstructGPT                                                                                      GPT3             InstructGPT
                                                                                                                                                                     0.80
                 Avg Pairwise Similarity


                                                                                                                                           Avg Pairwise Similarity


                                           0.40
                                           0.30                                                                                                                      0.70
                                           0.20                                                                                                                      0.60
                                           0.10
                                                                                                                                                                     0.50
                                           0.00
                                                          GPT3                               InstructGPT                                                                              GPT3                    InstructGPT
                                                            (a) Rouge-L                                                                                                                    (b) BertScore

 Figure 12: Boxplot of average pairwise similarity of suggestions provided by InstructGPT and GPT3
 when calculated using (a) RougeL and (b) BertScore as a measure of similarity. InstructGPT presents
 more similar suggestions on average to the user by a statistically significant margin.



                                                                                                                        26
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                       0.68


                                                 AI Written Fraction
                                                                       0.66

                                                                       0.64

                                                                       0.62

                                                                       0.60                                                                        InstructGPT
                                                                                                                                                   GPT3
                                                                              0.0   0.2                 0.4                 0.6              0.8             1.0
                                                                                          Document Homogenization/Sim Score with BertScore


                                                                                                              (a)
                                                                       0.20                                                                        InstructGPT
                                                                                                                                                   GPT3
                                                 AI Written Fraction   0.18

                                                                       0.16

                                                                       0.14

                                                                       0.12

                                                                       0.10
                                                                              0.0   0.2                 0.4                 0.6              0.8             1.0
                                                                                          Document Homogenization/Sim Score with RougeL


                                                                                                              (b)

                                                                                                   Figure 13


                        0.300
                                                                                              GPT3                      InstructGPT
                        0.250
Homogenization Scores


                        0.200

                        0.150

                        0.100

                        0.050

                        0.000
                                Total   Screen                  School Audiobooks College                     Dating Stereotypes Extreme                 Animal    Citizens Mindfulness
                                         Time                                     Athletes                                        Sports                 Welfare
                                                                        (a) Homogenization calculated with Rouge-L
                        0.800
                                                                                              GPT3                      InstructGPT
                        0.700
Homogenization Scores


                        0.600

                        0.500

                        0.400

                        0.300
                                Total   Screen                  School Audiobooks College                     Dating Stereotypes Extreme                 Animal    Citizens Mindfulness
                                         Time                                     Athletes                                        Sports                 Welfare
                                                                       (b) Homogenization calculated with BertScore

  Figure 14: Boxplots of homogenization scores comparing essays generated solely via InstructGPT
  and GPT3 models at the raw essay level and calculated using (a) Rouge-L and (b) BertScore as
  measures of similarity. The left-most column (Total) shows essay homogenization scores for all topics
  and the other columns show essay homogenization scores by topic. Essays written with InstructGPT
  exhibit higher corpus homogenization by a statistically significant margin.


                                                                                                              27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           n-gram size      Solo    GPT3       InstructGPT
                                 1         0.119     0.116         0.115
                                 2         0.602     0.585         0.579
                                 3         0.898     0.886         0.869
                                 4         0.973     0.967         0.953
                                 5         0.991     0.988         0.977

Table 11: N -gram diversity in each setting. Bold values indicate the lowest diversity score as
measured by the fraction of unique n-grams. Essays written with InstructGPT are the least diverse
across n-gram sizes.

Thresholds      Solo    GPT3      InstructGPT       Thresholds       Solo      GPT3       InstructGPT
    0.5        0.982     0.971        0.950              0.1        0.998      0.997         0.992
    0.6        0.941     0.927        0.877              0.2        0.981      0.976         0.941
    0.7        0.792     0.779        0.738              0.3        0.805      0.787         0.730
    0.8        0.543     0.514        0.494              0.4        0.321      0.338         0.292
                    (a) RougeL                                            (b) BertScore

Table 12: Diversity measured by agglomerative clustering of the key points of essays with (a) RougeL
and (b) BertScore as the metric. We report the scores using different distance thresholds for clustering.
Bold values are different to other columns by a statistically significant margin (p < 0.05) using a
permutation test. InstructGPT consistently exhibits lower content diversity across both similarity
metrics and all selected thresholds.


D    L IMITATIONS
Interaction interface. Our interface provides suggestions to users in the form of continuations of
the current text in the draft. Further investigation is needed to evaluate if the reduction in content
diversity with feedback-tuned models can be mitigated with prompt engineering or richer forms of
interaction (e.g., through a dialogue).

User selection. The outcome of the experiments can be affected by the specific group of participants.
We try to ensure a diverse user group and detail our recruitment procedures in Appendix A.1. However,
it is unclear whether these results will generalize to other groups such as students learning to write or
second language speakers, who have different goals and incentives for using writing assistants.

LLM access. Our experiments are conducted using two limited-access models from OpenAI. While
we believe they are representative of properties of current LLMs, it is possible that the other models
may exhibit different behavior, especially given that the RLHF pipeline is highly customized.


                            Algorithm     Solo       GPT3 InstructGPT
                              LZMA        0.305      0.302        0.293
                               ZLIB       0.353      0.351        0.342
                               GZIP       0.352      0.341        0.350

Table 13: Compression ratios of the essays using various lossless compression algorithms. Bold
values are different from each of the other columns with statistical significance (p < 0.05) using
permutation tests. InstructGPT exhibits lower diversity, i.e. lower compression ratios, than GPT3 and
InstructGPT across all three compression algorithms.


                                                   28
