Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I MAGE - DRIVEN V IDEO E DITING WITH L ATENT D IFFU -
SION M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review

                                  [Whole Input Video] a man is riding a motorbike


               Text-driven video editing                               Image-driven video editing
              A Iron Man is riding a motorbike                          A S* Man is riding a motorbike


Figure 1: Illustration of the differences between text-driven video editing and the proposed image-
driven video editing. The former modifies the video by changing the text prompt, as opposed to the
proposal, which uses an image to provide detailed control over the editing process.

                                                 A BSTRACT

         Recent works in Text-to-Image (T2I) models have shown potential in address-
         ing text-driven video editing using latent diffusion models (LDM). However, text
         prompts as a representation of visual signals remain a crude abstraction, leaving
         the challenge of achieving fine-grained and controllable video editing unresolved.
         In this study, we introduce the Latent prompt based Image-driven Video Editing
         (LIVE) framework to unlock the capabilities of pretrained LDM for precise edit-
         ing control. At the heart of LIVE lies a novel Latent Prompt Mechanism, which
         utilizes latent code from a reference image as a prompt to enrich visual details.
         We begin by revisiting the attention mechanisms in LDM and enhancing them
         to facilitate comprehensive interactions between video frames and latent prompts
         in both spatial and temporal dimensions. We also devise a training process to
         fine-tune components such as latent prompts, textual embeddings, and LDM pa-
         rameters, effectively representing the provided video and image within the dif-
         fusion space. Subsequently, these optimized elements are combined to generate
         the edited video output, enabling seamless object substitution in each frame with
         user-specified targets while maintaining visual consistency across frames. Our ex-
         periments on real-world videos demonstrate the efficacy of the LIVE framework
         and its promising applications in image-driven video editing tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, significant progress has been made in video generation. Initially, the primary focus
of video generation research (Ho et al., 2022c; Singer et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022a; Harvey et al.,
2022) is to generate a video from noise. However, with the emergence of AI Generated Content
(AIGC) and rapid development of generative models like diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) and
GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2020), research emphasis has shifted towards video editing (Molad et al.,
2023; Ceylan et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023). Despite progress made in video editing,
current video editing tasks are limited to text-based modifications, which fall short of providing
the level of customization that users desire. To address this issue, we introduce an image-driven
video editing task that allows users to change specific parts of a video based on user-input images.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We propose a solution to this task, which provides a more personalized and precise video editing
experience that aligns with the user’s intended modifications.
Currently, most methods utilize attention control (Hertz et al., 2022; Chefer et al., 2023) between
text and images to manipulate and substitute objects or styles within video sequences, concurrently
employing null-text inversion (Mokady et al., 2022) to uphold a consistent background. However,
these existing methods have not yet explored the possibility of directly incorporating input images
into the editing process. Our image-driven video editing task poses a unique challenge, involving
the replacement of an object within an input image with a corresponding video component while
preserving cross-frame consistency and adhering to the sequence’s motion. This task differs from
traditional video editing as it requires the utilization of both image and text inputs.
Taking inspiration from Tune-A-Video (TAV) (Wu et al., 2022), we design our image-driven video
editing framework, based on the text-to-video (T2V) model, to address the image-driven edit task.
Nevertheless, a newly built T2V model does not take into account the information contained within
input images of uses. Thus, we divide our framework into two parts. The first part is fine-tuned
on the original video, which focuses on learning the motion and background. The second part is
trained to incorporate the input image into our model, achieving text and image alignment. After
training these two parts together, during the inference process, we adopt attention control to maintain
background consistency and generate final edit results.
In particular, our base model is implemented with inflated 2D stable diffusion, which has the ability
to generate videos from text. For the first part, we modify the T2V framework with a learnable
latent prompt to absorb motion information of input video. For the second part, we leverage textual
inversion (Gal et al., 2022) which is a cost-effective method for aligning text and image to establish
a mapping between text and image. We design a pipeline to train two parts together, improving both
parts’ training effects. At inference time, we replace the latent prompt and text with relevant training
outcomes and utilize custom attention control to get edited video.
In summary, our contributions are in three folds: 1) We introduce a novel image-driven video edit-
ing task aimed at generating customized videos based on the input image; 2) We propose a LIVE
framework to deal with the customized video editing task. We delicately devise both the training and
inference pipeline to overcome the challenges of this task; 3) Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method in this task, yielding promising results in aspects such as image object
swap, video consistency, motion maintenance, etc.

2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   I MAGE GENERATION AND EDITING

While many deep generative models, such as GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2020), have showcased their
capacity to generate realistic images (Brock et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2019), Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models(DDPMs) (Ho et al., 2020) have recently gained popularity due to their high-
quality output on large-scale datasets (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). DALLE-2 (Ramesh et al., 2022)
further enhances the text-image alignments utilizing the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) feature space,
while Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) employs cascaded diffusion models (Ho et al., 2022b) for high-
fidelity image generation. To boost training efficiency, Latent Diffusion Models (LDM) (Rombach
et al., 2022) have been introduced to manage the generation process in the latent space.
Besides the great success made in image generation, text-to-image(T2I) diffusion models have also
disrupted the dominance of previous state-of-the-art models in text-driven image editing (Richardson
et al., 2021; Tov et al., 2021). Building upon a pre-trained T2I diffusion model, recent works (Coua-
iron et al., 2022; Kawar et al., 2022; Tumanyan et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022) have achieved remark-
able performance in text-driven image editing. Prompt-to-Prompt (P2P) (Hertz et al., 2022), based
on the crucial observation that the spatial layout and geometric information of generated images
are preserved in the text-image cross-attention map, accomplishes fine-grained control of the spatial
layout in the edited image by directly manipulating the cross-attention maps during the generation
process. InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2022) and Paint-by-Example (Yang et al., 2022) enable
characterized image editing with user-provided instructions. Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022),
DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2022), and XTI (Voynov et al., 2023) learn special tokens for personalized


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


concepts and generate corresponding images. Null-text Inversion (Mokady et al., 2022) focuses on
null-text optimization, facilitating real image editing.

2.2   V IDEO GENERATION AND EDITING

Compared to image generation, video generation presents a bigger challenge due to its higher-
dimensional complexity and the scarcity of high-quality datasets. Video Diffusion Models (Ho et al.,
2022c) have devised a novel architecture using a 3D U-Net with factorized spacetime attention (Ho
et al., 2019) to generate temporally-coherent results. Imagen Video (Ho et al., 2022a) utilizes a cas-
caded Video Diffusion Model to achieve high-resolution video generation. However, these methods
require paired text-video datasets and cost much to train. Recently, TAV (Wu et al., 2022) has inno-
vatively transformed a T2I model into a T2V model and fine-tuned it to reconstruct the input video,
enabling one-shot tuning video generation. Our model initialization is inspired by TAV.
T2I diffusion models have excelled in image editing, but their application in video editing remains
underexplored. Text2Live (Bar-Tal et al., 2022) combines layered neural representations (Lu et al.,
2020) with text guidance to demonstrate compelling video editing results. Dreamix (Molad et al.,
2023) employs a pre-trained Imagen Video (Ho et al., 2022a) backbone to perform image-to-video
and video-to-video editing, with additional ability to change motion. Gen-1 (Esser et al., 2023) trains
models jointly on images and videos for tasks such as stylization and customization. However, these
methods above require costly training. As a result, a collection of fine-tuning methods has been pro-
posed. Video-P2P (Liu et al., 2023), built upon the image editing method P2P (Hertz et al., 2022),
modifies the attention map corresponding to the text prompt and uses local blending to maintain
consistency for the remaining parts of the attention heatmap. It also proposes decoupled-guidance
attention control to enhance the preservation of the unedited area. Edit-A-Video (Shin et al., 2023)
also uses attention replace mechanism in P2P and null-text inversion (Mokady et al., 2022) to edit
videos and maintain coherence. Pix2Video (Ceylan et al., 2023) introduces self-attention feature
injection, which can maintain edited videos’ appearance coherence. It further develops latent guid-
ance, using the l2 loss between the predicted current frame from the previous frame and the ground
truth frame as guidance, significantly improving temporal consistency.
Although these methods have made decent progress in text-driven video editing, they are limited
to video editing through modifications of the text prompt and cannot be applied to our proposed
image-driven video editing task. As such, we build our framework on some modifications to the
TAV framework and attention control methods, making it suitable for our task.

3     M ETHOD
In this section, we first briefly introduce DDPMs (Ho et al., 2020) in Sec.3.1. Then we intro-
duce LIVE, a framework designed to overcome the image-driven video editing task. In Sec.3.2, we
present our LIVE framework, which introduces a latent prompt designed specifically for completing
the image-driven video editing task. Then we further explain how the framework generates edited
videos in Sec.3.3 and attention control to achieve the best results in Sec.3.4.

3.1   P RELIMINARY

DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) is a recently popular generative model consisting of a forward noising
process and a backward denoising process. The goal is to add noise to images step by step to
Gaussian noise z ∼ N (0, 1), and then to denoise images to obtain the restored images. It can be
represented as:                                     p
                            q(xt |xt−1 ) := N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I),
                                             √       √                                        (1)
                                    xt := ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵt ,
                              Qt
where at := 1 − βt and ᾱt := s=1 as . The way to choose ᾱt is called noise schedule. We choose
cosine noise schedule as Nichol & Dhariwal (2021) mentioned. When x0 is known, q(xt−1 |xt , x0 )
                                                                      βt
is denotable from Eq.1 as q(xt−1 |xt , x0 ) := N (xt−1 ; √1αt (xt − √1−     ϵ ), 1−
                                                                         ᾱ t
                                                                                    ᾱt−1
                                                                                  1−ᾱt βt ).
                                                                         t

When it comes to the denoising process, it is natural to use q(xt−1 |xt ) to tackle the backward pro-
cess. Unfortunately, q(xt−1 |xt ) is insoluble, so a deep neural network is used to learn the denoising


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Training

      “A young man is surfing on a board”


                                                                                                                                  ···
                                             T2I model
            Latent prompt
                                                            Reconstructed Video


                                                                                                          Cross-frame attention
                                              inflation


                                                                                                                                  Cross attention



                                                                                                                                                    Temporal attn
                                            T2V model



                                                               Reconstructed
                                                                Image Clips
                                                                               (a)
                                                                                     (c)
      Inference                                                                (b)                                      Linear
                                                                                                                      Projection
                                                                                           Zlp


                                                                                                 concat



                                                                                                                       Linear
                                                                                                                     Projection
                                            T2V model



       Latent prompt                                                                                                   Linear
                                                                                                                     Projection


Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed LIVE framework. (a) Overview of training: We first inflate
T2I models to T2V models, and train them with two objectives. The first one is to finetune on
a text-video pair, getting trained T2V models. The second one is to align input images into text
embedding, enabling characterized video editing abilities. (b) Overview of Inference: a modified
text prompt is used to generate edited videos. (c) An extensive explanation of our LIVE: Our method
takes input videos as the finetune objects. After the diffusion forward process gets noisy latents, we
concat a latent prompt in frame dimension as unet input. We update attention blocks with diffusion
reconstruction loss. As for the cross-frame attention blocks, features of latent prompt zlp , first frame
z1, and previous frame zi−1 are projected to key K and value V . Features of the current frame zi
are projected to query Q. Outputs are sent to cross-frame attention blocks to update zi .
distribution. It can be defined as follows:
                                                pθ (xt−1 |xt ) := N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), Σθ (xt , t)),                                                              (2)
                                                     βt
where µθ (xt , t) can be represented by √1αt (xt − √1−     ϵ ). For the Σθ(xt , t)) part, Nichol &
                                                        ᾱt t
Dhariwal (2021) finds that it has upper and lower bounds and set it to a constant to simplify the
training objective as:                      √        √
                              Lt = ∥ϵ − ϵθ ( ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ, t)∥2 .                         (3)

However, it is known to all that DDPM’s reverse process is stochastic and unstable, leading to
different reconstructed results from inputs. Such behavior can be catastrophic for editing tasks
since editing requires only partial changes within a specific region while maintaining the original
appearance of the rest of the image. Fortunately, the introduction of DDIM (Song et al., 2020) has
resolved this issue. During inference, DDIM sets Σθ(xt , t) to 0, which transforms the inference
process from stochastic to deterministic. This leads to a denoising process that can be completed
with fewer steps while ensuring that the denoised result is consistent with the input image, with
only a modest reduction in quality. This denoising approach, also known as DDIM inversion, is
integrated into our method.

3.2   LIVE F RAMEWORK OVERVIEW

The LIVE framework is depicted in Fig. 2(a) and (b). As shown in Fig. 2(a), the LIVE framework
commences with a T2I model, which subsequently expands into a T2V model. In terms of technical
implementation, we adopt the configuration of TAV (Wu et al., 2022), as it is one of the few publicly
available T2V models. However, this model alone is insufficient for accomplishing image-driven
video editing tasks due to its inability to generate coherent videos and establish a stable mapping
with input images. Consequently, the first training objective focuses on acquiring the video re-
construction capability. During this phase, the inputs consist of the video to be fine-tuned and its


                                                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


corresponding text prompt. After the video is encoded into latent representations by the Variational
Autoencoder (VAE) and noise is added, we concatenate a learnable tensor (1 × 64 × 64 × 4), referred
to as the latent prompt, along the frame dimension. The shape of the latent prompt is identical to
those of the video latents, except for the frame dimension. This concatenated tensor is then used
as the input for the U-Net to obtain the reconstructed video. For the second training objective, it
is necessary to incorporate the input image information into the T2V model. We make efforts to
associate the input image with a specific space in the text embeddings. In such a way, the two objec-
tives’ training costs are at the same level. It facilitates alternating training and enables both training
objects to simultaneously converge to their optimal. The final training objective is:
                                         Lt = Lunet
                                               t    + λLtext
                                                        t    ,                                                  (4)
where Lunet
         t     denotes diffusion loss for optimizing U-Net and Ltext t    denotes diffusion loss for op-
timizing text embedding. Their specific forms are the same as those presented in 3. λ is the loss
coefficient to balance two parts training effect, which is set to 1 in practice.
After the model has been trained, image-driven video editing can be accomplished through a
straightforward process, as depicted in Fig. 2(b). First, we need to substitute the object name in
the text prompt of the original video with the rare string S∗ and use it as input for inference. Then,
during inference, we utilize attention control mechanism to obtain the final edited video.
The core of the LIVE framework lies in the latent prompt. The success of the image-driven video
editing task hinges on accurate object replacement and the seamless motion flow of the replaced
object. Consequently, the motion information learned by the model must be adequate to support the
object’s movements. The introduction of the latent prompt aims to resolve this issue by adding a
learnable variable to compensate for the insufficient motion information in the inflated T2V model.

3.3   L ATENT PROMPT BASED V IDEO E DITING

A natural approach would be to employ the                                   A man is surfing on a board
TAV model with textual inversion to tackle
                                                        Input video


this task. However, as demonstrated in Fig-
ure 3, when employing only cross-frame at-
tention, the movements of the replaced char-
acter exhibit discontinuities, resulting in arti-
                                                     W.O latent


facts within the character’s motion. This lim-
                                                      prompt


itation arises because the TAV model operates
as a T2V model, which has undergone only
one-shot fine-tuning. The motion information                          1st         3rd          5th        7th
learned by the model is insufficient to support
the seamless motion alignment of image in-          Figure 3: Observations on inflated T2V model’s
formation generated through textual inversion.      editing abilities. The top row is the finetuned
Hence, we start to rethink the attention mecha-     video, and the second row explicitly uses an in-
nisms in TAV and propose the latent prompt to       flated T2V model to get edited video. It can be
enhance models’ motion perception.                  seen that hands movement is terrible and some-
                                                    times hands can disappear.
Latent prompt. To address the intricacies of
video frame manipulation, we introduce the concept of the latent prompt that operates on two crucial
dimensions: spatial and temporal. This spatial-temporal interaction is pivotal for achieving coherent
and seamless video edits.
Given the video latent z ∈ Rf ×h×w×c , the latent prompt zlp is defined as a latent in the same latent
space as z but only has one frame, where zlp ∈ R1×h×w×c . We initialize the latent prompt with
the first frame of the input video. The spatial interaction begins with the latent prompt performing
cross-attention across all frames of the video. This operation enables zlp to grasp intricate spatial
details and relationships between different parts of the video frames. By fusing spatial information
from various frames, the Latent Prompt equips the model with a richer understanding of the visual
content, allowing for more precise manipulation of the video frames. As for the temporal dimension,
the Latent Prompt plays a vital role in learning and encoding the motion dynamics within the video
sequence. With the aid of cross-attention mechanisms and temporal attention, the latent prompt has
acquired a comprehensive understanding of the video’s temporal dynamics.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Training. Starting with the first training objective, the latent prompt is a tensor in the latent space
that can be optimized, similar to the text prompt mechanism used in the text encoder. As in Fig.2(c),
the latent prompt is concatenated with input video latents along the frame dimension and fed into the
U-Net for training. Owing to the addition of the latent prompt, we modify the attention mechanism
by incorporating the latent prompt zlp , the first frame z1 , and the previous frame zi−1 as attention
inputs, shown in Fig.2(c) downside. The formulation of our attention mechanism is as follows:
                    Q = W Q zi , K = W K [zlp , z1 , zi−1 ], V = W V [zlp , z1 , zi−1 ],             (5)
where [·] denotes concatenation operation. This ensures that the latent prompt maintains cross-frame
attention with each frame in the sequence. Consequently, the latent prompt is enriched with video
motion information, enhancing the naturalness and smoothness of the motion in videos generated
by the T2V model, which is inflated from the T2I model.
Considering the second training objective, we begin with textual inversion (Gal et al., 2022) by
providing rare strings, such as ” < aka∗ > ”, with the initial token’s embedding values for initial-
ization, which aids in creating alignment between the rare strings and images. We use the original
image searched from Internet as the input, without any segmentation. Due to the introduction of the
latent prompt, it becomes necessary to incorporate a latent prompt into the input. As depicted in
Fig. 2(a), our input is a combination of input image latents and their copies, with one representing
the latent prompt and the other representing the standard input for textual inversion. Furthermore,
we discover that the temporal attention in the U-Net architecture has an adverse impact on learning
this component. Consequently, we opt to bypass the use of temporal attention during the training of
the second objective to achieve optimal training results.
To achieve a balance between performance and training time, our approach involves updating the
latent prompt concurrently with the U-Net architecture. However, during the second training ob-
jective, we freeze the latent prompt and replace it with latents of the input image to satisfy the
requirements of the second part of the training, which largely preserves the textual inversion train-
ing results. Initially, we employ a cross-attention mechanism that takes both text and video as input
and outputs the latent prompt for training. However, we discover that this significantly more com-
plex approach does not produce satisfactory results, potentially due to the limited training steps. As
our goal is to fine-tune the model, we opt for a learnable variable instead of the previous complex
mechanism, which leads to better results and improves training efficiency.
Inference. After completing the training, we can directly obtain the edited video from the rare string
used during training. However, we need to analyze the processing of the latent prompt. During the
training of the first objective, we train the latent prompt using a trainable vector, while in the second
part, we replace the latent prompt position with the image latents. When inferring diffusion model,
it usually adopts the classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) method. As for the conditional
part, we set the input as the trained latent prompt and noise to enhance the motion information
required for the input images. When it comes to the unconditional part, we set the input as image
latents and noise so that the generated videos can include not only the image information bound
by the text prompt through the second part of the LIVE framework but also supplement it with
cross-frame attention, which can create videos that are content-rich and temporally continuous.

3.4   ATTENTION C ONTROL

After training a T2V model with the LIVE framework, we can perform object swapping. Attention
control has gained widespread attention as a training-free editing method. It guides the model to
generate edited images while preserving specific information from the original image by swapping
the maps of self-attention and cross-attention layers. We extend this concept to the video level to
accomplish object replacement while maintaining consistency between the original video and the
edited version in areas without objects. Following the setting of P2P (Hertz et al., 2022), after
getting origin prompt attention mask Mt and edited prompt attention mask Mt∗ at timestep t, we
adopt Word Swap edit function Edit(Mt , Mt∗ , t), which is expressed as follow:
                                                      ∗
                                                     Mt    if t < τ
                             Edit (Mt , Mt∗ , t) :=                   ,                         (6)
                                                     Mt    otherwise
where τ denotes the starting of attention injection. Due to the observation that early steps of dif-
fusion models contribute to the overall distribution of results, we inject edited attention mask Mt∗


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



    [Input Video] a man is driving a motorbike in the forest


           [Input Video] a car is driving on the road


Figure [Input Video] a horse is running on the beach
        4: Videos  editing results from various input videos, images, and prompts. Our LIVE frame-
work can accurately replace the designated object in the input image with the corresponding object
in the video while maintaining the visual continuity of the edited video.
to guide the composition generation. The original Word Swap can only be applied to text prompts
of the same length and replace them with complete attention. We modify it to specify which part
of the text prompt needs replacement so that we can have a flexible plan for Word Swap. We typ-
ically select verbs that represent motion and nouns that represent background in the sentence for
replacement. We did not choose to replace the object because we need the edited video to contain
accurate objects from the input images. We do not want the object information in the origin at-
tention map to interfere with our editing. We replace the background to ensure that the generated
object matches the new background. However, we have discovered that only replacing the back-
ground is not sufficient, because the background’s attention map is not as accurate as the objects’.
VideoP2P (Liu et al., 2023) and other text-driven video editing methods (Shin et al., 2023) utilize
null-text inversion (Mokady et al., 2022) to tackle this problem, but these approaches increase the
model training cost. Therefore, we choose to use local blend, another method in P2P (Hertz et al.,
2022), to compulsively replace the background and then apply Gaussian blur to adjust the transition
between objects and the background, which also yields promising results.

4       E XPERIMENTS
Implementation. We implement our approach based on stable diffusion v1-41 . Regarding opti-
mization of U-Net, similar to TAV (Wu et al., 2022), we fine-tune only the attention modules inside
the U-Net architecture on 8-frame 512 × 512 videos with a learning rate of 3e-5 for 500-600 steps.
For the textual inversion component, we use only one single input image with the placeholder token
set to ” < @#$ > ” and train it using a learning rate of 5e-03 for 500-600 steps. As for the latent
prompt, we initialize it with the first frame of the original video during the first part of training and
fix them to latents of the input image during the second part of training. During inference, we start
from the saved DDIM inversion values (Song et al., 2020) and set the classifier-free guidance (Ho &
Salimans, 2022) to 12.5. We use DDIM sampler to infer results for 50 steps. For attention control,
we set the cross-attention replacing ratio to 0.6 and the self-attention replacing ratio to 0.3. Experi-
ments are conducted on an RTX 3090ti GPU, with 15 minutes for training 500 steps and 10 minutes
for getting DDIM inversion values and inferring.
Baselines. As our proposed task has not been explored before, we choose the concurrent
text-driven video editing method as a baseline for comparison. The baseline methods include:
(1)TAV+DDIM (Wu et al., 2022): This method generates videos from text prompts by fine-tuning
pre-trained T2I diffusion models using an efficient one-shot tuning approach. (2)Video-P2P (Liu
et al., 2023): Building upon TAV, this method enables control over video content through text
editing using attention control and null-text inversion. (3)Vid2Vid-zero (Wang et al., 2023): This
    1
        Stable Diffusion: https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4


                                                               7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              [Input Video] a man is riding a motorbike                       [LIVE*] a S* woman is riding a motorbike


      [Vid2Vid-zero] a Asuka-Langley-Soryu is riding a motorbike       [Video-P2P] a Asuka-Langley-Soryu is riding a motorbike


            [TAV+DDIM*] a S* woman is riding a motorbike                   [Video-P2P*] a S* woman is riding a motorbike


Figure 5: Comparison to baseline methods. ∗ means that this method is implemented with textual
inversion. Only LIVE achieves both accurate object replacement and video consistency.

approach achieves zero-shot video reconstruction through dense spatio-temporal attention modules,
and realizes video editing with attention control and null-text inversion. Experiments are conducted
with their official codes and configurations
Dataset. We use the conventional videos used in Video-P2P (Liu et al., 2023) and Vid2Vid-
zero (Wang et al., 2023) as the evaluation dataset. We use their default text prompts to edit videos
for fair comparison.

4.1      M AIN R ESULTS

Qualitative results. We provide a set of examples of our method implementation in Fig. 4. For
each example, we show the 2nd, 4th, 6th, and 8th frames of the input and edited videos, as well as
the corresponding text prompt and input images. As demonstrated in the figure, LIVE is capable
of handling videos with prominent foreground objects and multiple foreground objects. We can
accurately replace objects with the input image, and the motion of the objects appears natural and the
same as the original video. Furthermore, our method can handle a wide range of object replacements.
For example, as demonstrated in the second row, we can replace a motorcycle being ridden by a
person with a horse, or as shown in the fourth row, we can replace a car with a train. These examples
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Please note that the color issues in the background
of the fifth and sixth rows are caused by limitations in the TAV approach used for reconstructing the
original video, and are not related to the LIVE framework itself.
Comparisons. From our comparison with baselines, all of them are designed to address text-driven
video editing. Except for Vid2Vid-zero, we implement textual inversion in other baselines, enabling
them to generate input objects. Vid2Vid-zero is a training-free method, while textual inversion needs
to optimize text embedding, making it not suitable for adding textual inversion. However, it can be
observed from Fig.5 that their performance in image-driven video editing is not very satisfactory.
Vid2Vid-zero can generate general results but poor motion. Video-P2P without textual inversion can
generate much better results, with impressive preservation of background. But the motion and pose
of the object are blurry. TAV+DDIM performs the best among the three baselines by effectively
replacing the object in the input image into the video. However, the edited video may struggle to
maintain the original content of the video in the background. As shown in Fig. 5 above, our approach
successfully achieves both object replacement and background preservation. The generated video
using our approach exhibits smoother and more continuous motion, resulting in better overall video
coherence.
Quantitive results. 1) CLIP score: We follow the setting of (Ho et al., 2022a) to calculate CLIP
score (Park et al., 2021), evaluating text-video alignment.We calculate CLIP scores at the frame level
and take average results as the final score. As shown in Fig. 6(a), our LIVE outperforms any baseline
method, demonstrating that our method possesses better text-video alignment. 2) User study: We
further evaluate LIVE against baselines with a user study. The questionnaire includes 5 videos, each


                                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                (a) CLIP Score                                              (b) Replacement accuracy                                         (c) Background preservation



Figure 6: Quantitative results. The user study shows that our LIVE framework gets better perfor-
mance in object replacement accuracy, background preservation, and clip score than other baselines.
                    W.O. latent prompt


                                                                                      W.O. temporal attn
                                                       W.O. latent prompt


                                                                                                                        W.O. temporal attn
                    With latent prompt


                                                       With latent prompt


                                                                                     With temporal attn


                                                                                                                       With temporal attn
      Input image                        Input image


       Figure 7: Ablations on latent prompts.                                                              Figure 8: Ablations on temporal attention.
of which is edited using four methods, including LIVE. For each video, there are two questions: 1)
Which method best preserves the input image after editing? 2) Which method has the best-preserved
background after editing? These two questions correspond to the two challenges of our proposed
image-driven video editing task: accurate object replacement and video coherence. In Fig.6(b) and
(c), the majority of the participants agree that our method can more accurately replace objects than
any other baseline methods. As for background preservation, we beat most methods except for
Video-P2P (Liu et al., 2023).Video-P2P (Liu et al., 2023) utilizes null-text inversion (Mokady et al.,
2022) and delicately devises an attention control mechanism to achieve slightly better preservation
results. In summary, the user study confirms that our method performs much better than other
methods in object replacement.

4.2   A BLATION S TUDIES

Latent prompt. Our primary focus is on the latent prompt. Thus, we initially examine its influence
on the overall framework. As shown in Fig. 7, the top row shows the case without latent prompt, and
it can be seen that the texture and shape of the object cannot be well preserved, and strange motion
can occur. In the next row, after adding the latent prompt, precise object replacement is achieved,
and the motion is also continuous, without the strange case in the top row.
Training of temporal attention. In the second part of the training, the goal is to bind text and
the input image, which theoretically should be trained on a 2D model without the time dimension.
However, since we inflate the model to 3D, temporal attention is involved during training. Intu-
itively speaking, temporal attention should not be trained in the second part, as it would affect not
only temporal attention but also the quality of the binding between text and images. As shown in
Fig. 8, when temporal attention is trained together with the second part, the image learning is not
satisfactory and artifacts may appear. However, freezing temporal attention during the second part
of training leads to a significant improvement in overall results.

5     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduce a novel video editing scenario called image-driven video editing, which
aims to replace objects in videos with input images. To address this task, we propose a novel LIVE
framework in this paper. By utilizing the proposed LIVE, users can precisely control the editing
process and achieve impressive performance on real-world images, which provides a flexible way
for content modification and creation. We hope that this work can serve as a solid baseline for future
research in image-driven video editing and also become an essential support for future work.


                                                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-
 driven layered image and video editing. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Con-
 ference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XV, pp. 707–723. Springer,
 2022.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural
  image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09800, 2022.
Duygu Ceylan, Chun-Hao Paul Huang, and Niloy J Mitra. Pix2video: Video editing using image
  diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12688, 2023.
Hila Chefer, Yuval Alaluf, Yael Vinker, Lior Wolf, and Daniel Cohen-Or.           Attend-and-
  excite: Attention-based semantic guidance for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.13826, 2023.
Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. Diffedit: Diffusion-
  based semantic image editing with mask guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11427, 2022.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Ger-
  manidis. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.03011, 2023.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
William Harvey, Saeid Naderiparizi, Vaden Masrani, Christian Weilbach, and Frank Wood. Flexible
 diffusion modeling of long videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11495, 2022.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.            Classifier-free diffusion guidance.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Nal Kalchbrenner, Dirk Weissenborn, and Tim Salimans. Axial attention in multidi-
  mensional transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.12180, 2019.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022a.
Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Sali-
  mans. Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 23
  (47):1–33, 2022b.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03458, 2022c.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri,
  and Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.09276, 2022.
Shaoteng Liu, Yuechen Zhang, Wenbo Li, Zhe Lin, and Jiaya Jia. Video-p2p: Video editing with
  cross-attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04761, 2023.
Erika Lu, Forrester Cole, Tali Dekel, Weidi Xie, Andrew Zisserman, David Salesin, William T
  Freeman, and Michael Rubinstein. Layered neural rendering for retiming people in video. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2009.07833, 2020.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09794, 2022.
Eyal Molad, Eliahu Horwitz, Dani Valevski, Alex Rav Acha, Yossi Matias, Yael Pritch, Yaniv
  Leviathan, and Yedid Hoshen. Dreamix: Video diffusion models are general video editors. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.01329, 2023.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
Dong Huk Park, Samaneh Azadi, Xihui Liu, Trevor Darrell, and Anna Rohrbach. Benchmark for
  compositional text-to-image synthesis. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021.
Chenyang Qi, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Chenyang Lei, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng
  Chen. Fatezero: Fusing attentions for zero-shot text-based video editing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.09535, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Elad Richardson, Yuval Alaluf, Or Patashnik, Yotam Nitzan, Yaniv Azar, Stav Shapiro, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. Encoding in style: a stylegan encoder for image-to-image translation. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2287–2296, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2208.12242, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Chaehun Shin, Heeseung Kim, Che Hyun Lee, Sang-gil Lee, and Sungroh Yoon. Edit-a-video:
  Single video editing with object-aware consistency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07945, 2023.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Omer Tov, Yuval Alaluf, Yotam Nitzan, Or Patashnik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Designing an encoder
 for stylegan image manipulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(4):1–14, 2021.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12572, 2022.
Andrey Voynov, Qinghao Chu, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Kfir Aberman. p+: Extended textual condi-
  tioning in text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09522, 2023.
Wen Wang, Kangyang Xie, Zide Liu, Hao Chen, Yue Cao, Xinlong Wang, and Chunhua Shen. Zero-
 shot video editing using off-the-shelf image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17599,
 2023.
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
  Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models
  for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11565, 2022.
Binxin Yang, Shuyang Gu, Bo Zhang, Ting Zhang, Xuejin Chen, Xiaoyan Sun, Dong Chen, and
  Fang Wen. Paint by example: Exemplar-based image editing with diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.13227, 2022.


A    A PPENDIX
You may include other additional sections here.


                                                  12
