Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B ORDA R EGRET M INIMIZATION FOR G ENERALIZED
L INEAR D UELING BANDITS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Dueling bandits are widely used to model preferential feedback prevalent in many
         applications such as recommendation systems and ranking. In this paper, we study
         the Borda regret minimization problem for dueling bandits, which aims to iden-
         tify the item with the highest Borda score while minimizing the cumulative regret.
         We propose a rich class of generalized linear dueling bandit models, which cover
         many existing models. We first prove a regret lower bound of order в„Ұ(d2/3 T 2/3 )
         for the Borda regret minimization problem, where d is the dimension of contex-
         tual vectors and T is the time horizon. To attain this lower bound, we propose an
         explore-then-commit type algorithm for the stochastic setting, which has a nearly
         matching regret upper bound O(d e 2/3 T 2/3 ). We also propose an EXP3-type algo-
         rithm for the adversarial linear setting, where the underlying model parameter can
         change in each round. Our algorithm achieves an O(d   e 2/3 T 2/3 ) regret, which is
         also optimal. Empirical evaluations on both synthetic data and a simulated real-
         world environment are conducted to corroborate our theoretical analysis.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Multi-armed bandits (MAB) (Lattimore & SzepesvaМҒri, 2020) is an interactive game where in each
round, an agent chooses an arm to pull and receives a noisy reward as feedback. In contrast to numer-
ical feedback considered in classic MAB settings, preferential feedback is more natural in various
online learning tasks including information retrieval Yue & Joachims (2009), recommendation sys-
tems Sui & Burdick (2014), ranking Minka et al. (2018), crowdsourcing Chen et al. (2013), etc.
Moreover, numerical feedback is also more difficult to gauge and prone to errors in many real-world
applications. For example, when provided with items to shop or movies to watch, it is more natural
for a customer to pick a preferred one than scoring the options. This motivates Dueling Bandits
(Yue & Joachims, 2009), where the agent repeatedly pulls two arms at a time and is provided with
feedback being the binary outcome of вҖңduelsвҖқ between the two arms.
In dueling bandits problems, the outcome of duels is commonly modeled as Bernoulli random
variables due to their binary nature. In each round, suppose the agent chooses to compare arm
i and j, then the binary feedback is assumed to be sampled independently from a Bernoulli dis-
tribution. For a dueling bandits instance with K arms, the probabilistic model of the instance
can be fully characterized by a K Г— K preference probability matrix with each entry being:
pi,j = P(arm i is chosen over arm j).
In a broader range of applications such as ranking, вҖңarmsвҖқ are often referred to as вҖңitemsвҖқ. We will
use these two terms interchangeably in the rest of this paper. One central goal of dueling bandits
is to devise a strategy to identify the вҖңoptimalвҖқ item as quickly as possible, measured by either
sample complexity or cumulative regret. However, the notion of optimality for dueling bandits
is way harder to define than for multi-armed bandits. The latter can simply define the arm with
the highest numerical feedback as the optimal arm, while for dueling bandits there is no obvious
definition solely dependent on {pi,j |i, j вҲҲ [K]}.
The first few works on dueling bandits imposed strong assumptions on pi,j . For example, Yue et al.
(2012) assumed that there exists a true ranking that is coherent among all items, and the preference
probabilities must satisfy both strong stochastic transitivity (SST) and stochastic triangle inequality
(STI). While relaxations like weak stochastic transitivity (Falahatgar et al., 2018) or relaxed stochas-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tic transitivity (Yue & Joachims, 2011) exist, they typically still assume the true ranking exists and
the preference probabilities are consistent, i.e., pi,j > 21 if and only if i is ranked higher than j. In
reality, the existence of such coherent ranking aligned with item preferences is rarely the case. For
example, pi,j may be interpreted as the probability of one basketball team i beating another team j,
and there can be a circle among the match advantage relations.
In this paper, we do not assume such coherent ranking exists and solely rely on the Borda score
based on preference probabilities. The Borda score B(i) of an item i is theP     probability that it is
                                                                            1
preferred when compared with another random item, namely B(i) := KвҲ’1               jМё=i pi,j . The item
with the highest Borda score is called the Borda winner. The Borda winner is intuitively appealing
and always well-defined for any set of preferential probabilities. The Borda score also does not
require the problem instance to obey any consistency or transitivity, and it is considered one of the
most general criteria.
To identify the Borda winner, estimations of the Borda scores are needed. Since estimating the
Borda score for one item requires comparing it with every other items, the sample complexity is
prohibitively high when there are numerous items. On the other hand, in many real-world applica-
tions, the agent has access to side information that can assist the evaluation of pi,j . For instance,
an e-commerce item carries its category as well as many other attributes, and the user might have a
preference for a certain category (Wang et al., 2018). For a movie, the genre and the plot as well as
the directors and actors can also be taken into consideration when making choices (Liu et al., 2017).
Based on the above motivation, we consider Generalized Linear Dueling Bandits. In each round, the
agent selects two items from a finite set of items and receives a comparison result of the preferred
item. The comparisons depend on known intrinsic contexts/features associated with each pair of
items. The contexts can be obtained from upstream tasks, such as topic modeling (Zhu et al., 2012)
or embedding (Vasile et al., 2016). Our goal is to adaptively select items and minimize the regret
with respect to the optimal item (i.e., Borda winner). Our main contributions are summarized as
follows:
вҖў We show a hardness result regarding the Borda regret minimization for the (generalized) linear
  model. We prove a worst-case regret lower bound в„Ұ(d2/3 T 2/3 ) for our dueling bandit model,
  showing that even in the stochastic setting, minimizing the Borda regret is difficult. The construc-
  tion and proof of the lower bound are new and might be of independent interest.
вҖў We propose an explore-then-commit type algorithm under the stochastic setting, which can
  achieve a nearly matching upper bound O(d  e 2/3 T 2/3 ). When the number of items K is small,

                                                                   e (d log K)1/3 T 2/3 .
  the algorithm can also be configured to achieve a smaller regret O
вҖў We propose an EXP3 type algorithm for linear dueling bandits under  the adversarial setting, which
                                                            1/3 2/3
  can achieve a nearly matching upper bound O (d log K) T
                                                e                    .
вҖў We conduct empirical studies to verify the correctness of our theoretical claims. Under both
  synthetic and real-world data settings, our algorithms can outperform all the baselines in terms of
  cumulative regret.

Notation In this paper, we use normal letters to denote scalars, lowercase bold letters to denote
vectors, and uppercase bold letters to denote matrices. For a vector x, вҲҘxвҲҘ denotes itsвҲҡ
                                                                                       в„“2 -norm. The
weighted в„“2 -norm associated with a positive-definite matrix A is defined as вҲҘxвҲҘA = xвҠӨ Ax. The
minimum eigenvalue of a matrix A is written as О»min (A). We use A вӘ° B to denote that the matrix
A вҲ’ B is positive semi-definite. We use standard asymptotic notations including O(В·), в„Ұ(В·), Оҳ(В·),
and O(В·),
    e     в„Ұ(В·),
           e    e will hide logarithmic factors. For a positive integer N , [N ] := {1, 2, . . . , N }.
                Оҳ(В·)

2   R ELATED W ORK
Multi-armed and Contextual Bandits Multi-armed bandit is a problem of identifying the best
choice in a sequential decision-making system. It has been studied in numerous ways with a wide
range of applications (Even-Dar et al., 2002; Lai et al., 1985; Kuleshov & Precup, 2014). Contextual
linear bandit is a special type of bandit problem where the agent is provided with side information,
i.e., contexts, and rewards are assumed to have a linear structure. Various algorithms (Rusmevichien-
tong & Tsitsiklis, 2010; Filippi et al., 2010; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Li et al., 2017; Jun et al.,
2017) have been proposed to utilize this contextual information.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dueling Bandits and Its Performance Metrics Dueling bandits is a variant of MAB with prefer-
ential feedback (Yue et al., 2012; Zoghi et al., 2014a; 2015). A comprehensive survey can be found
at Bengs et al. (2021). As discussed previously, the probabilistic structure of a dueling bandits prob-
lem is governed by the preference probabilities, over which an optimal item needs to be defined.
Optimality under the Borda score criteria has been adopted by several previous works (Jamieson
et al., 2015; Falahatgar et al., 2017a; Heckel et al., 2018; Saha et al., 2021a). The most relevant
work to ours is Saha et al. (2021a), where they studied the problem of regret minimization for ad-
versarial dueling bandits and proved a T -round Borda regret upper bound O(K  e 1/3 T 2/3 ). They also
                  1/3 2/3
provide an в„Ұ(K T ) lower bound for stationary dueling bandits using Borda regret.
Apart from the Borda score, Copeland score is also a widely used criteria (Urvoy et al., 2013;
ZoghiPet al., 2015; 2014b; Wu & Liu, 2016; Komiyama et al., 2016). It is defined as C(i) :=
   1
KвҲ’1     jМё=i 1{pi,j > 1/2}. A Copeland winner is the item that beats the most number of other items.
It can be viewed as a вҖңthresholdedвҖқ version of Borda winner. In addition to Borda and Copeland
winners, optimality notions such as a von Neumann winner were also studied in Ramamohan et al.
(2016); DudДұМҒk et al. (2015); Balsubramani et al. (2016).
Another line of work focuses on identifying the optimal item or the total ranking, assuming the
preference probabilities are consistent. Common consistency conditions include Strong Stochastic
Transitivity (Yue et al., 2012; Falahatgar et al., 2017a;b), Weak Stochastic Transitivity (Falahatgar
et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2022; Lou et al., 2022), Relaxed Stochastic Transitivity (Yue
& Joachims, 2011) and Stochastic Triangle Inequality. Sometimes the aforementioned transitivity
can also be implied by some structured models like the BradleyвҖ“Terry model. We emphasize that
these consistency conditions are not assumed or implicitly implied in our setting.
Contextual Dueling Bandits In DudДұМҒk et al. (2015), contextual information is incorporated in the
dueling bandits framework. Later, Saha (2021) studied a structured contextual dueling bandits set-
ting where each item i has its own contextual vector xi (sometimes called Linear Stochastic Transi-
tivity). Each item then has an intrinsic score vi equal to the linear product of an unknown parameter
vector Оё вҲ— and its contextual vector xi . The preference probability between two items i and j is as-
sumed to be Вө(vi вҲ’ vj ) where Вө(В·) is the logistic function. These intrinsic scores of items naturally
define a ranking over items. The regret is also computed as the gap between the scores of pulled
items and the best item. While in this paper, we assume that the contextual vectors are associated
with item pairs and define regret on the Borda score. In Section A.1, we provide a more detailed
discussion showing that the setting considered in Saha (2021) can be viewed as a special case of our
model.

3     BACKGROUNDS AND P RELIMINARIES
3.1   P ROBLEM S ETTING

We first consider the stochastic preferential feedback model with K items in the fixed time horizon
setting. We denote the item set by [K] and let T be the total number of rounds. in each round t, the
agent can pick any pair of items (it , jt ) to compare and receive stochastic feedback about whether
item it is preferred over item jt , (denoted by it вү» jt ). We denote the probability of seeing the event
i вү» j as pi,j вҲҲ [0, 1]. Naturally, we assume pi,j + pj,i = 1, and pi,i = 1/2.
In this paper, we are concerned with the generalized linear model (GLM), where there is assumed
to exist an unknown parameter Оё вҲ— вҲҲ Rd , and each pair of items (i, j) has its own known contex-
tual/feature vector П•i,j вҲҲ Rd with вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘ вүӨ 1. There is also a fixed known link function (sometimes
called comparison function) Вө(В·) that is monotonically increasing and satisfies Вө(x) + Вө(вҲ’x) = 1,
e.g. a linear function or the logistic function Вө(x) = 1/(1 + eвҲ’x ). The preference probability is
defined as pi,j = Вө(П•вҠӨ      вҲ—
                       i,j Оё ). In each round, denote rt = 1{it вү» jt }, then we have



                                 E[rt |it , jt ] = pit ,jt = Вө(П•вҠӨ       вҲ—
                                                                it ,jt Оё ).

Then our model can also be written as
                                        rt = Вө(П•вҠӨ       вҲ—
                                                it ,jt Оё ) + Пөt ,



                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the noises {Пөt }tвҲҲ[T ] are zero-mean, 1-sub-Gaussian and assumed independent from each
other. Note that, given the constraint pi,j + pj,i = 1, it is implied that П•i,j = вҲ’П•j,i for any
i вҲҲ [K], j вҲҲ [K].
The agentвҖҷs goal is to maximize the cumulative Borda score. The (slightly modified 1 ) Borda
                                           1
                                             PK                                                 вҲ—
score of item i is defined as B(i) = K          j=1 pi,j , and the Borda winner is defined as i    =
argmaxiвҲҲ[K] B(i). The problem of merely identifying the Borda winner was deemed trivial (Zoghi
et al., 2014a; Busa-Fekete et al., 2018) because for a fixed item i, uniformly random sampling j and
receiving feedback ri,j = Bernoulli(pi,j ) yield a Bernoulli random variable with its expectation
being the Borda score B(i). This so-called Borda reduction trick makes identifying the Borda win-
ner as easy as the best-arm identification for K-armed bandits. Moreover, if the regret is defined as
                PT
Regret(T ) = t=1 (B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(it )), then any optimal algorithms for multi-arm bandits can achieve
   вҲҡ
O(
 e T ) regret.
However, the above definition of regret does not respect the fact that a pair of items is selected in
each round. When the agent chooses two items to compare, it is natural to define the regret so that
both items contribute equally. A commonly used regret, e.g., in Saha et al. (2021a), has the following
form:
                                              T
                                              X
                                                     2B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(it ) вҲ’ B(jt ) ,

                              Regret(T ) =                                                                  (3.1)
                                               t=1

where the regret is defined as the sum of the sub-optimality of both selected arms. Sub-optimality
is measured by the gap between the Borda scores of the compared items and the Borda winner.
This form of regret deems any classical multi-arm bandit algorithm with Borda reduction vacuous
because taking jt into consideration will invoke Оҳ(T ) regret.

Adversarial Setting Saha et al. (2021b) considered an adversarial setting for the multi-armed case,
where in each round t, the comparison follows a potentially different probability model, denoted by
{pti,j }i,jвҲҲ[K] . In this paper, we consider its contextual counterpart. Formally, we assume there is an
underlying parameter ОёtвҲ— , and in round t, the preference probability is defined as pti,j = Вө(П•вҠӨ       вҲ—
                                                                                                  i,j Оёt ).

                                                                            1
                                                                              PK t
The Borda score of item i вҲҲ [K] in round t is defined as Bt (i) = K             j=1 pi,j , and the Borda
                                                           T
winner in round T is defined as iвҲ— = argmaxiвҲҲ[K] t=1 Bt (i). The T -round regret is thus defined
                                                        P
                     PT
as Regret(T ) = t=1 2Bt (iвҲ— ) вҲ’ Bt (it ) вҲ’ Bt (jt ) .



3.2    A SSUMPTIONS

In this section, we present the assumptions required for establishing theoretical guarantees. Due to
the fact that the analysis technique is largely extracted from Li et al. (2017), we follow them to make
assumptions to enable regret minimization for generalized linear dueling bandits.
We make a regularity assumption about the distribution of the contextual vectors:
                                                                    PK PK
Assumption 3.1. There exists a constant О»0 > 0 such that О»min K12 i=1 j=1 П•i,j П•вҠӨ

                                                                                  i,j вүҘ О»0 .
                                                                     PП„
This assumption is only utilized to initialize the design matrix VП„ = t=1 П•it ,jt П•вҠӨ
                                                                                   it ,jt so that the
minimum eigenvalue is large enough. We follow Li et al. (2017) to deem О»0 as a constant.
We also need the following assumption regarding the link function Вө(В·):
Assumption 3.2. Let ВөМҮ be the first-order derivative of Вө.                               We have Оә            :=
inf вҲҘxвҲҘвүӨ1,вҲҘОёвҲ’ОёвҲ— вҲҘвүӨ1 ВөМҮ(xвҠӨ Оё) > 0.

Assuming Оә > 0 is necessary to ensure the maximum log-likelihood estimator can converge to
the true parameter Оё вҲ— (Li et al., 2017, Section 3). This type of assumption is commonly made in
previous works for generalized linear models (Filippi et al., 2010; Li et al., 2017; Faury et al., 2020).
   1
    Previous works define Borda score as BiвҖІ = KвҲ’1     1
                                                          P
                                                             jМё=i pi,j , excluding the diagonal term pi,i = 1/2.
Our definition is equivalent since the difference between two items satisfies B(i) вҲ’ Bj = KвҲ’1      K
                                                                                                     (BiвҖІ вҲ’ BjвҖІ ).
Therefore, the regret will be in the same order for both definitions.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Another common assumption is regarding the continuity and smoothness of the link function.
Assumption 3.3. Вө is twice differentiable. Its first and second-order derivatives are upper-bounded
by constants LВө and MВө respectively.

This is a very mild assumption. For example, it is easy to verify that the logistic link function
satisfies Assumption 3.3 with LВө = MВө = 1/4.

4   T HE H ARDNESS R ESULT
        пЈ® 1       1
                                пЈ№
        ( 2 В·В·В· 2       3
        пЈҜ .. . . ..     4+      пЈә3
                                пЈә + вҹЁbit(0), Оёвҹ©        3
                                                                           В· В· В· 43 + вҹЁbit(0), Оёвҹ©
        пЈҜ 1. . 1. вҹЁП•i,j , Оёвҹ© пЈә 34
 вҖңgoodвҖқ пЈҜ                                              4 + вҹЁbit(0), Оёвҹ©
                                                       3
        пЈҜ В·В·В·                   пЈә 4 + вҹЁbit(1), Оёвҹ©      4 + вҹЁbit(1), Оёвҹ©     В· В· В· 43 + вҹЁbit(1), Оёвҹ©
        пЈҜ 2       2
                     1
                                пЈә
                              1 пЈә..                   .                    . . ..
                     2 В·В·В· 2 пЈә .
                                                      ..
        (
        пЈҜ
        пЈҜ 1                                                                   ..
  вҖңbadвҖқ пЈҜ 4 +        .. . . .. пЈә 3 + вҹЁbit(2d вҲ’ 1), Оёвҹ© 3 + вҹЁbit(2d вҲ’ 1), Оёвҹ© В· В· В· 3 + вҹЁbit(2d вҲ’ 1), Оёвҹ©
          вҹЁП•j,i , Оёвҹ© . . .
        пЈ°                       пЈ»4                     4                         4
                     1        1
                     2  В· В· В· 2


Figure 1: Illustration of the hard-to-learn preference probability matrix {pОёi,j }iвҲҲ[K],jвҲҲ[K] . There are
K = 2d+1 items in total. The first 2d items are вҖңgoodвҖқ items with higher Borda scores, and the
last 2d items are вҖңbadвҖқ items. The upper right block {pi,j }i<2d ,jвүҘ2d is defined as shown in the blue
bubble. The lower left block satisfies pi,j = 1 вҲ’ pj,i . For any Оё, there exist one and only best item i
such that bit(i) = sign(Оё).
This section presents Theorem 4.1, a worst-case regret lower bound for the stochastic linear dueling
bandits. The proof of Theorem 4.1 relies on a class of hard instances, as shown in Figure 1. We show
that any algorithm will incur a certain amount of regret when applied to this hard instance class. The
constructed hard instances follow a stochastic linear model, which is a sub-class of the generalized
linear model. Saha et al. (2021b) first proposed a similar construction for finite many arms with no
contexts. Their design contains K вҲ’ 1 identical arms against one best arm. This design will not
work in our setting as it leads to lower bounds sub-optimal in dimension d. The new construction
of our lower bound is based on the hardness of identifying the best arm in the d-dimensional linear
bandit model and the proof of the lower bound takes a rather different route.
For any d > 0, we construct the class of hard instances as follows. An instance is specified by a
vector Оё вҲҲ {вҲ’вҲҶ, +вҲҶ}d . The instance contains 2d+1 items (indexed from 0 to 2d+1 вҲ’ 1). The
preference probability for an instance is defined by pОёi,j as:
                         пЈұ1             d         d          d      d
                         пЈІ 2 , if i < 2 , j < 2 or if i вүҘ 2 , j вүҘ 2
                  Оё        3            d         d
                pi,j = 4 , if i < 2 , j вүҘ 2                           + вҹЁП•i,j , Оёвҹ©,
                         пЈі1             d         d
                           4 , if i вүҘ 2   , j < 2
and the d-dimensional feature vectors П•i,j are given by
                                            d       d         d       d
                              пЈұ
                              пЈІ0, if i < 2 , j < 2 or if i вүҘ 2 , j вүҘ 2
                                                d
                       П•i,j = bit(i), if i < 2 , j вүҘ 2  d

                                вҲ’bit(j), if i вүҘ 2d , j < 2d ,
                              пЈі

where bit(В·) is the (shifted) bit representation of non-negative integers, i.e., suppose x has the binary
representation x = b0 Г— 20 + b1 Г— 21 + В· В· В· + bdвҲ’1 Г— 2dвҲ’1 , then
                       bit(x) = (2b0 вҲ’ 1, 2b1 вҲ’ 1, . . . , 2bdвҲ’1 вҲ’ 1) = 2b вҲ’ 1.
Note that bit(В·) вҲҲ {вҲ’1, +1}d , and that П•i,j = вҲ’П•j,i is satisfied. The definition of pОёi,j can be
slightly tweaked to fit exactly the model described in Section 3 (see Remark B.1 in Appendix).
Some calculation shows that the Borda scores of the 2d+1 items are:
                                     5 1
                                          + вҹЁbit(i), Оёвҹ©, if i < 2d ,
                           B Оё (i) = 83 2          d
                                       8 , if i вүҘ 2 .



                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Intuitively, the former half of items (those indexed from 0 to 2d вҲ’ 1) are вҖңgoodвҖқ items (one among
them is optimal, others are nearly optimal), while the latter half of items are вҖңbadвҖқ items. Under
such hard instances, every time one of the two pulled items is a вҖңbadвҖқ item, then a one-step regret
B Оё (iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B Оё (i) вүҘ 1/4 is incurred. To minimize regret, we should thus try to avoid pulling вҖңbadвҖқ
items. However, in order to identify the best item among all вҖңgoodвҖқ items, comparisons between
вҖңgoodвҖқ and вҖңbadвҖқ items are necessary. The reason is simply that comparisons between вҖңgoodвҖқ
items give no information about the Borda scores as the comparison probabilities are pОёi,j = 21 for
all i, j < 2d . Hence, any algorithm that can decently distinguish among the вҖңgoodвҖқ items has to pull
вҖңbadвҖқ ones for a fair amount of times, and large regret is thus incurred. A similar observation is also
made by Saha et al. (2021a).
This specific construction emphasizes the intrinsic hardness of Borda regret minimization: to dif-
ferentiate the best item from its close competitors, the algorithm must query the bad items to gain
information.
Formally, this class of hard instances leads to the following regret lower bound for both stochastic
and adversarial settings:
Theorem 4.1. For any algorithm A, there exists a hard instance {pОёi,j } with T > 4d2 , such that A
will incur expected regret at least в„Ұ(d2/3 T 2/3 ).

The construction of this hard instance for linear dueling bandits is inspired by theвҲҡworst-case lower
bound for the stochastic linear bandit (Dani et al., 2008), which has the order в„Ұ(d T ), while ours is
в„Ұ(d2/3 T 2/3 ). The difference is that for the linear or multi-armed stochastic bandit, eliminating bad
arms can make further exploration less expensive. But in our case, any amount of exploration will
not reduce the cost of further exploration. This essentially means that exploration and exploitation
must be separate, which is also supported by the fact that a simple explore-then-commit algorithm
shown in Section 5 can be nearly optimal.
To prove the lower bound, we first apply a new reduction step to restrict the choice of it . Then
we bound from below the regret by the expected number of sub-optimal arm pulls. The proof in
Saha et al. (2021b) is directly based on hypothesis testing: either identifying the best arm with gap
                                K                                        K
Пө within T rounds (if T > 1440Пө    3 ) or incurring ПөT regret (if T вүӨ 1440Пө3 ). In contrast, our proof
technique bounds from below the regret by the expected number of sub-optimal arm pulls and does
                                                                       K
not divide the problem instances into two cases (i.e. whether T вүӨ 1440Пө   3 ).


5     S TOCHASTIC C ONTEXTUAL D UELING BANDIT

5.1   A LGORITHM D ESCRIPTION

We propose an algorithm named Borda Explore-Then-Commit for Generalized Linear Models
(BETC-GLM), presented in Algorithm 1. Our algorithm is inspired by the algorithm for gener-
alized linear models proposed by Li et al. (2017).
At the high level, Algorithm 1 can be divided into two phases: the exploration phase (Line 2-11)
and the exploitation phase (Line 12-14). The exploration phase ensures that the MLE estimator Оёb
is accurate enough so that the estimated Borda score is within O(Пө)-range
                                                                 e          of the true Borda score
(ignoring other quantities). Then the exploitation phase simply chooses the empirical Borda winner
to incur small regret.
During the exploration phase, the algorithm first performs вҖңpure explorationвҖқ (Line 2-5), which can
be seen as an initialization step for the algorithm. The purpose of this step is to ensure the design
                 PП„ +N
matrix VП„ +N = t=1 П•it ,jt П•вҠӨ     it ,jt is positive definite.

After that, the algorithm will perform the вҖңdesigned explorationвҖқ. Line 6 will find the G-optimal
design, which minimizes the objective function g(ПҖ) = maxi,j вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘ2V(ПҖ)вҲ’1 , where V(ПҖ) :=
                    вҠӨ                           вҲ—                     2
P
   i,j ПҖ(i, j)П•i,j П•i,j . The G-optimal design ПҖ (В·) satisfies вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘV(ПҖ вҲ— )вҲ’1 вүӨ d, and can be efficiently
approximated by the Frank-Wolfe algorithm (See Remark 5.4 for a detailed discussion). Then the
algorithm will follow ПҖ(В·) found at Line 6 to determine how many samples (Line 7) are needed.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 BETC-GLM
 1: Input: time horizon T , number of items K, feature dimension d, feature vectors П•i,j for i вҲҲ
      [K], j вҲҲ [K], exploration rounds П„ , error tolerance Пө, failure probability Оҙ.
 2: for t = 1, 2, . . . , П„ do
 3:   sample it вҲј Uniform([K]), jt вҲј Uniform([K])
 4:   query pair (it , jt ) and receive feedback rt
 5: end for
 6: Find the G-optimal
                     l         m ПҖ(i, j) based on П•i,j for i вҲҲ [K], j вҲҲ [K]
                            design
                                                                                   PK PK
                       dПҖ(i,j)
 7: Let N (i, j) =       Пө2      for any (i, j) вҲҲ supp(ПҖ) , denote N =                 i=1   j=1 N (i, j)
 8: for i вҲҲ [K], j вҲҲ [K], s вҲҲ [N (i, j)] do
 9:   set t вҶҗ t + 1, set (it , jt ) = (i, j)
10:   query pair (it , jt ) and receive feedback rt
11: end for
12: Calculate the empirical MLE estimator ОёbП„ +N based on all П„ + N samples via (5.1)
13: Estimate the Borda score for each item:
                                    K
                            b = 1
                                   X
                            B(i)       Вө(П•вҠӨ
                                          i,j ОёП„ +N ),
                                              b                         bi = argmax B(i)
                                                                                    b
                                 K j=1                                           iвҲҲ[K]


14: Keep querying (b
                   i, bi) for the rest of the time.
                                        PK PK
At Line 8-11, there are in total N = i=1 j=1 N (i, j) samples queried, and the algorithm shall
index them by t = П„ + 1, П„ + 2, . . . , П„ + N .
At Line 12, the algorithm collects all the П„ + N samples and performs the maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE). For the generalized linear model, the MLE estimator ОёbП„ +N satisfies:
                                 П„X
                                  +N                                 П„X
                                                                      +N
                                       Вө(П•вҠӨ
                                          it ,jt ОёП„ +N )П•it ,jt =
                                                 b                          rt П•it ,jt ,                    (5.1)
                                 t=1                                  t=1
or equivalently, it can be determined by solving a strongly concave optimization problem:
                                           П„X
                                            +N
                                                      вҠӨ             вҠӨ
                          ОёП„ +N вҲҲ argmax
                          b                       rt П•it ,jt Оё вҲ’ m(П•it ,jt Оё) ,
                                               Оё   t=1
where mМҮ(В·) = Вө(В·). For the logistic link function, m(x) = log(1 + ex ). As a special case of our
generalized linear model, the linear model has a closed-form solution for (5.1). For example, if
Вө(x) = 12 + x, i.e. pi,j = 12 + П•вҠӨ    вҲ—
                                 i,j Оё , then (5.1) becomes:
                                                         П„X
                                                          +N
                                   ОёbП„ +N = VП„вҲ’1
                                               +N              (rt вҲ’ 1/2)П•it ,jt ,
                                                         t=1
                   PП„ +N
where VП„ +N =        t=1   П•it ,jt П•вҠӨ
                                    it ,jt .

After the MLE estimator is obtained, Line 13 will calculate the estimated Borda score B(i)
                                                                                      b for each
item based on ОёП„ +N , and pick the empirically best one.
              b

5.2    A M ATCHING R EGRET U PPER B OUND

Algorithm 1 can be configured to tightly match the worst-case lower bound. The configuration and
performance are described as follows:
Theorem 5.1. Suppose Assumption 3.1-3.3 hold and T = в„Ұ(d2 ). For any Оҙ > 0, if we set П„ =
C4 О»вҲ’2
    0 (d + log(1/Оҙ)) (C4 is a universal constant) and Пө = d
                                                            1/6 вҲ’1/3
                                                               T     , then with probability at least
1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, Algorithm 1 will incur regret bounded by:
                                                  q
                                 O ОәвҲ’1 d2/3 T 2/3 log T /dОҙ .

By setting Оҙ = T вҲ’1 , the expected regret is bounded as O(Оә
                                                        e вҲ’1 d2/3 T 2/3 ).


                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For linear bandit models, such as the hard-to-learn instances in Section 4, Оә is a universal constant.
Therefore, Theorem 5.1 tightly matches the lower bound in Theorem 4.1, up to logarithmic factors.
The detailed proof can be found in Appendix C.1.
Remark 5.2 (Regret for Fewer Arms). In typical scenarios, the number of items K is not expo-
nentially large in the dimension d. In this case, we can choose a different parameter    set of П„ and
                                                                   вҲ’1          1/3 2/3
Пө such that Algorithm 1 can achieve a smaller regret bound O Оә (d log K) T
                                                               e                         with smaller
dependence on the dimension d. See Theorem A.1 in Appendix A.2.
Remark 5.3 (Regret for Infinitely Many Arms). In most practical scenarios of dueling bandits, it
is adequate to consider a finite number K of items (e.g., ranking items). Nonetheless, BETC-GLM
can be easily adapted to accommodate infinitely many arms in terms of regret. We can construct a
covering over all П•i,j and perform optimal design and exploration on the covering set. The resulting
                                                  e 2/3 T 2/3 ) up to some error caused by the epsilon
regret will be the same as our upper bound, i.e., O(d
net argument.
Remark 5.4 (Approximate G-optimal Design). Algorithm 1 assumes an exact G-optimal design ПҖ is
obtained. In the experiments, we use the Frank-Wolfe algorithm to solve the constraint optimization
problem (See Algorithm 5, Appendix G.3). To find a policy ПҖ such that g(ПҖ) вүӨ (1 + Оө)g(ПҖ вҲ— ),
roughly O(d/Оө) optimization steps are needed. Such a near-optimal design will introduce a factor
of (1 + Оө)1/3 into the upper bounds.

6     A DVERSARIAL C ONTEXTUAL D UELING BANDIT
This section addresses Borda regret minimization under the adversarial setting. As we introduced in
Section 3.1, the unknown parameter Оёt can vary for each round t, while the contextual vectors П•i,j
are fixed.
Our proposed algorithm, BEXP3, is designed for the contextual linear model. Formally, in round t
and given pair (i, j), we have pti,j = 21 + вҹЁП•i,j , ОёtвҲ— вҹ©.

6.1 A LGORITHM D ESCRIPTION
Algorithm 2 BEXP3
 1: Input: time horizon T , number of items K, feature dimension d, feature vectors П•i,j for i вҲҲ
      [K], j вҲҲ [K], learning rate О·, exploration parameter Оі.
                            1
 2: Initialize: q1 (i) = K    .
 3: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 4:   Sample items it вҲј qt , jt вҲј qt .
 5:   Query pair (it , jt ) and receive feedback rt
                                                                вҲ’1
      Calculate Qt = iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K] qt (i)qt (j)П•i,j П•вҠӨ
                          P       P
 6:                                                 i,j , Оёt = Qt П•it ,jt rt .
                                                          b
                                                        bt (i) = вҹЁ 1 P
 7:     Calculate the (shifted) Borda score estimates B                 jвҲҲ[K] П•i,j , Оёt вҹ©.
                                                                                     b
                                                                  K
 8:     Update for all i вҲҲ [K], set
                                     Pt b
                               exp(О· l=1 B    l (i))                                           Оі
              qet+1 (i) = P              Pt b           ;       qt+1 (i) = (1 вҲ’ Оі)e  qt+1 (i) + .
                             jвҲҲ[K] exp(О·    l=1 Bl (j))
                                                                                               K

 9: end for
Algorithm 2 is adapted from the DEXP3 algorithm in Saha et al. (2021b), which deals with the ad-
versarial multi-armed dueling bandit. Algorithm 2 maintains a distribution qt (В·) over [K], initialized
as uniform distribution (Line 2). In every round t, two items are chosen following qt independently.
Then Line 6 calculates the one-sample unbiased estimate Оёbt of the true underlying parameter ОёtвҲ— .
Line 7 further calculates the unbiased estimate of the (shifted) Borda score. Note that the true Borda
                                                             вҲ—
score in round t satisfies Bt (i) = 12 + вҹЁ K
                                           1
                                             P
                                               jвҲҲ[K] П•i,j , Оёt вҹ©. Bt instead only estimates the second
                                                                  b
term of the Borda score. This is a choice to simplify the proof. The cumulative estimated score
Pt b
   l=1 Bl (i) can be seen as the estimated cumulative reward of item i in round t. In Line 8, qt+1 is
defined by the classic exponential weight update, along with a uniform exploration policy controlled
by Оі.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.2    U PPER B OUNDS

Algorithm 2 can also be configured to tightly match the worst-case lower bound:
Theorem 6.1. Suppose Assumption 3.1 holds. If we set О· = (log K)2/3 dвҲ’1/3 T вҲ’2/3 and Оі =
p                                 вҲ’1/2
  О·d/О»0 = (log K)1/3 d1/3 T вҲ’1/3 О»0 , then the expected regret is upper-bounded by
                                    O (d log K)1/3 T 2/3 .



Note that the lower bound construction in Theorem 4.1 is for the linear model and has K = O(2d ),
thus exactly matching the upper bound. Meanwhile, it is viable to slightly modify Algorithm 2
                         e 2/3 T 2/3 ) for very large K. The high-level idea is to use an Пө-cover
to improve the regret to O(d
argument. In the d-dimensional space, it suffices to choose O((1/Пө)d ) representative vectors to
                                             1
                                               PK
cover all the K average contextual vectors K      j=1 П•i,j . The detailed reasoning and algorithm
design can be found in Appendix H.

7     E XPERIMENTS
This section compares the proposed algorithm             Г—10              4
                                                                                          Г—10        4


                                                              UCB-Borda               3.5       UCB-Borda
BETC-GLM with existing ones that are capa-           2.5      DEXP3
                                                                                      3.0
                                                                                                DEXP3

ble of minimizing Borda regret. We use ran-          2.0
                                                              ETC-Borda
                                                              BETC-GLM                2.5
                                                                                                ETC-Borda
                                                                                                BETC-GLM

dom responses (generated from fixed preferen-                 BETC-GLM-Match                    BETC-GLM-Match
                                                              Regret(T)


                                                                                         Regret(T)
                                                     1.5      BEXP3                   2.0       BEXP3
tial matrices) to interact with all tested algo-     1.0
                                                                                      1.5

rithms. Each algorithm is run for 50 times over                                       1.0
                           6                         0.5
a time horizon of T = 10 . We report both the                                         0.5

mean and the standard deviation of the cumu-         0.0                              0.0
                                                          0  25000 50000 75000 100000      0   25000 50000 75000 100000
lative Borda regret and supply some analysis.                         T                                 T

The following list summarizes all methods we       (a) Generated Hard Case                  (b) EventTime
study in this section, a more complete descrip-
tion of the methods and parameters is available Figure 2: The regret of the proposed algorithms
in Appendix E: BETC-GLM(-M ATCH ): Al- (BETC-GLM, BEXP3) and the baseline algo-
gorithm 1 proposed in this paper with differ- rithms (UCB-B ORDA, DEXP3, ETC-B ORDA).
ent parameters. UCB-B ORDA: The UCB al-
gorithm (Auer et al., 2002) using Borda reduction. DEXP3: Dueling-Exp3 developed by Saha et al.
(2021a). ETC-B ORDA: A simple explore-then-commit algorithm that does not take any contextual
information into account. BEXP3: The proposed method for adversarial Borda bandits displayed
in Algorithm 2.

Generated Hard Case We first test the algorithms on the hard instances constructed in Section 4.
We generate Оё вҲ— randomly from {вҲ’вҲҶ, +вҲҶ}d with вҲҶ = 4d        1
                                                             so that the comparison probabilities
   вҲ—
 Оё
pi,j вҲҲ [0, 1] for all i, j вҲҲ [K]. We pick the dimension d = 6 and the number of arms is therefore
K = 2d+1 = 128. Note the dual usage of d in our construction and the model setup in Section 3.1.
We refer readers to Remark B.1 in Appendix B for more details.
As depicted in Figure 2a, the proposed algorithms (BETC-GLM, BEXP3) outperform the baseline
algorithms in terms of cumulative regret when reaching the end of time horizon T . For UCB-
B ORDA, since it is not tailored for the dueling regret definition, it suffers from a linear regret as its
second arm is always sampled uniformly at random, leading to a constant regret per round. DEXP3
and ETC-B ORDA are two algorithms designed for K-armed dueling bandits. Both are unable to
utilize contextual information and thus demand more exploration. As expected, their regrets are
higher than BETC-GLM or BEXP3. We do not fine-tune the hyper-parameters of both algorithms.
In Appendix I, we show fine-tuning the error tolerance Пө of BETC-GLM can further reduce the
regret, and the two algorithms perform equally well.

Real-world Dataset To showcase the performance of the algorithms in a real-world setting, we
use the EventTime dataset (Zhang et al., 2016). In this dataset, K = 100 historical events are com-
pared in a pairwise fashion by crowd-sourced workers. We first calculate the empirical preference
probabilities pei,j from the collected responses, and construct a generalized linear model based on the


                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


empirical preference probabilities. The algorithms are tested under this generalized linear model.
Due to space limitations, more details are deferred to Appendix F.
As depicted in Figure 2b, the proposed algorithm BETC-GLM outperforms the baseline algorithms
in terms of cumulative regret when reaching the end of time horizon T . The other proposed al-
gorithm BEXP3 performs equally well even when misspecified (the algorithm is designed for the
linear setting, while the comparison probability follows a logistic model).

8   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced Borda regret into the generalized linear dueling bandits setting, along
with an explore-then-commit type algorithm BETC-GLM and an EXP3 type algorithm BEXP3.
The algorithms can achieve a nearly optimal regret upper bound, which we corroborate with a match-
ing lower bound. The theoretical performance of the algorithms is verified empirically. It demon-
strates superior performance compared to other baseline methods.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, DaМҒvid PaМҒl, and Csaba Szepesvari. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. In NIPS, 2011.
Peter Auer, NicoloМҖ Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit
  problem. Machine Learning, 47:235вҖ“256, 2002.
Akshay Balsubramani, Zohar Karnin, Robert E Schapire, and Masrour Zoghi. Instance-dependent
  regret bounds for dueling bandits. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 336вҖ“360. PMLR, 2016.
Viktor Bengs, RoМҒbert Busa-Fekete, Adil El Mesaoudi-Paul, and Eyke HuМҲllermeier. Preference-based
  online learning with dueling bandits: A survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22:7вҖ“1,
  2021.
RoМҒbert Busa-Fekete, Eyke HuМҲllermeier, and Adil El Mesaoudi-Paul. Preference-based online learn-
  ing with dueling bandits: A survey. ArXiv, abs/1807.11398, 2018.
Xi Chen, Paul N Bennett, Kevyn Collins-Thompson, and Eric Horvitz. Pairwise ranking aggregation
  in a crowdsourced setting. In Proceedings of the sixth ACM international conference on Web
  search and data mining, pp. 193вҖ“202, 2013.
Varsha Dani, Thomas P. Hayes, and Sham M. Kakade. Stochastic linear optimization under bandit
  feedback. In Annual Conference Computational Learning Theory, 2008.
Miroslav DudДұМҒk, Katja Hofmann, Robert E. Schapire, Aleksandrs Slivkins, and Masrour Zoghi.
  Contextual dueling bandits. ArXiv, abs/1502.06362, 2015.
Eyal Even-Dar, Shie Mannor, and Y. Mansour. Pac bounds for multi-armed bandit and markov
  decision processes. In Annual Conference Computational Learning Theory, 2002.
Moein Falahatgar, Yi Hao, Alon Orlitsky, Venkatadheeraj Pichapati, and Vaishakh Ravindrakumar.
  Maxing and ranking with few assumptions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  30, 2017a.
Moein Falahatgar, Alon Orlitsky, Venkatadheeraj Pichapati, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Maxi-
  mum selection and ranking under noisy comparisons. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1088вҖ“1096. PMLR, 2017b.
Moein Falahatgar, Ayush Jain, Alon Orlitsky, Venkatadheeraj Pichapati, and Vaishakh Ravindraku-
  mar. The limits of maxing, ranking, and preference learning. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 1427вҖ“1436. PMLR, 2018.
Louis Faury, Marc Abeille, CleМҒment CalauzeМҖnes, and Olivier Fercoq. Improved optimistic algo-
  rithms for logistic bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3052вҖ“3060.
  PMLR, 2020.
Sarah Filippi, Olivier Cappe, AureМҒlien Garivier, and Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Parametric bandits: The
  generalized linear case. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 23, 2010.
Reinhard Heckel, Max Simchowitz, Kannan Ramchandran, and Martin Wainwright. Approximate
  ranking from pairwise comparisons. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 1057вҖ“1066. PMLR, 2018.
Kevin Jamieson, Sumeet Katariya, Atul Deshpande, and Robert Nowak. Sparse dueling bandits. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 416вҖ“424. PMLR, 2015.
Kwang-Sung Jun, Aniruddha Bhargava, Robert Nowak, and Rebecca Willett. Scalable generalized
  linear bandits: Online computation and hashing. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.
Junpei Komiyama, Junya Honda, and Hiroshi Nakagawa. Copeland dueling bandit problem: Re-
  gret lower bound, optimal algorithm, and computationally efficient algorithm. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1235вҖ“1244. PMLR, 2016.
Volodymyr Kuleshov and Doina Precup. Algorithms for multi-armed bandit problems. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1402.6028, 2014.
Tze Leung Lai, Herbert Robbins, et al. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Advances
  in applied mathematics, 6(1):4вҖ“22, 1985.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Bandit Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020. doi:
  10.1017/9781108571401.
Lihong Li, Yu Lu, and Dengyong Zhou. Provably optimal algorithms for generalized linear contex-
  tual bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2071вҖ“2080. PMLR, 2017.
Chenghao Liu, Tao Jin, Steven C. H. Hoi, Peilin Zhao, and Jianling Sun. Collaborative topic regres-
  sion for online recommender systems: an online and bayesian approach. Machine Learning, 106:
  651вҖ“670, 2017.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hao Lou, Tao Jin, Yue Wu, Pan Xu, Quanquan Gu, and Farzad Farnoud. Active ranking without
   strong stochastic transitivity. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2022.
Thomas P. Minka, Ryan Cleven, and Yordan Zaykov. Trueskill 2: An improved bayesian skill rating
   system. 2018.
S. Ramamohan, A. Rajkumar, and Shivani Agarwal. Dueling bandits: Beyond condorcet winners to
   general tournament solutions. In NIPS, 2016.
Wenbo Ren, Jia Kevin Liu, and Ness Shroff. On sample complexity upper and lower bounds for
   exact ranking from noisy comparisons. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
   2019.
Paat Rusmevichientong and John N Tsitsiklis. Linearly parameterized bandits. Mathematics of
   Operations Research, 35(2):395вҖ“411, 2010.
Aadirupa Saha. Optimal algorithms for stochastic contextual preference bandits. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 34:30050вҖ“30062, 2021.
Aadirupa Saha, Tomer Koren, and Y. Mansour. Adversarial dueling bandits. ArXiv, abs/2010.14563,
   2021a.
Aadirupa Saha, Tomer Koren, and Yishay Mansour. Adversarial dueling bandits. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9235вҖ“9244. PMLR, 2021b.
Yanan Sui and Joel Burdick. Clinical online recommendation with subgroup rank feedback. In
   Proceedings of the 8th ACM conference on recommender systems, pp. 289вҖ“292, 2014.
Tanguy Urvoy, Fabrice CleМҒrot, RaphaeМҲl FeМҒraud, and Sami Naamane. Generic exploration and k-
   armed voting bandits. In ICML, 2013.
Flavian Vasile, Elena Smirnova, and Alexis Conneau. Meta-prod2vec: Product embeddings using
   side-information for recommendation. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on recom-
   mender systems, pp. 225вҖ“232, 2016.
Jizhe Wang, Pipei Huang, Huan Zhao, Zhibo Zhang, Binqiang Zhao, and Lee. Billion-scale com-
   modity embedding for e-commerce recommendation in alibaba. Proceedings of the 24th ACM
   SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2018.
Huasen Wu and Xin Liu. Double thompson sampling for dueling bandits. ArXiv, abs/1604.07101,
   2016.
Yue Wu, Tao Jin, Hao Lou, Pan Xu, Farzad Farnoud, and Quanquan Gu. Adaptive sampling for
   heterogeneous rank aggregation from noisy pairwise comparisons. In International Conference
   on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 11014вҖ“11036. PMLR, 2022.
Yisong Yue and Thorsten Joachims. Interactively optimizing information retrieval systems as a
   dueling bandits problem. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine
   Learning, pp. 1201вҖ“1208, 2009.
Yisong Yue and Thorsten Joachims. Beat the mean bandit. In International Conference on Machine
   Learning, 2011.
Yisong Yue, Josef Broder, Robert D. Kleinberg, and Thorsten Joachims. The k-armed dueling
   bandits problem. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 78:1538вҖ“1556, 2012.
Xiaohang Zhang, Guoliang Li, and Jianhua Feng. Crowdsourced top-k algorithms: An experimental
   evaluation. Proc. VLDB Endow., 9:612вҖ“623, 2016.
Jun Zhu, Amr Ahmed, and Eric P. Xing. Medlda: maximum margin supervised topic models. J.
   Mach. Learn. Res., 13:2237вҖ“2278, 2012.
Masrour Zoghi, Shimon Whiteson, ReМҒmi Munos, and M. de Rijke. Relative upper confidence bound
   for the k-armed dueling bandit problem. ArXiv, abs/1312.3393, 2014a.
Masrour Zoghi, Shimon Whiteson, Remi Munos, and Maarten Rijke. Relative upper confidence
   bound for the k-armed dueling bandit problem. In International conference on machine learning,
   pp. 10вҖ“18. PMLR, 2014b.
Masrour Zoghi, Zohar S. Karnin, Shimon Whiteson, and M. de Rijke. Copeland dueling bandits. In
   NIPS, 2015.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

A.1    E XISTING R ESULTS FOR S TRUCTURED C ONTEXTS

A structural assumption made by some previous works (Saha, 2021) is that П•i,j = xi вҲ’ xj , where
xi can be seen as some feature vectors tied to the item. In this work, we do not consider minimizing
the Borda regret under the structural assumption.
The immediate reason is that, when pi,j = Вө(xвҠӨ      вҲ—    вҠӨ вҲ—
                                                 i Оё вҲ’ xj Оё ), with Вө(В·) being the logistic function,
the probability model pi,j effectively becomes (a linear version of) the well-known Bradley-Terry
model. Namely, each item is tied to a value vi = xвҠӨ       вҲ—
                                                      i Оё , and the comparison probability follows
          evi
pi,j = evi +evj . More importantly, this kind of model satisfies both the strong stochastic transitivity
(SST) and the stochastic triangle inequality (STI), which are unlikely to satisfy in reality.
Furthermore, when stochastic transitivity holds, there is a true ranking among the items, determined
by xвҠӨ   вҲ—
    i Оё . A true ranking renders concepts like the Borda winner or Copeland winner redundant be-
cause the rank-one item will always be the winner in every sense. When П•i,j = xi вҲ’xj , Saha (2021)
                                                                  вҲҡ
proposed algorithms that can achieve nearly optimal regret O(de     T ), with regret being defined as
                                       T
                                       X
                        Regret(T ) =         2вҹЁxiвҲ— , Оё вҲ— вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁxit , Оё вҲ— вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁxjt , Оё вҲ— вҹ©,         (A.1)
                                       t=1

where iвҲ— = argmaxi вҹЁxi , Оё вҲ— вҹ©, which also happens to be the Borda winner. Meanwhile, by Assump-
tion 3.3,
                          K
                        1 X
      B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(j) =       Вө(вҹЁxiвҲ— вҲ’ xk , Оё вҲ— вҹ©) вҲ’ Вө(вҹЁxj вҲ’ xk , Оё вҲ— вҹ©) вүӨ LВө В· вҹЁxiвҲ— вҲ’ xj , Оё вҲ— вҹ©,

                        K
                           k=1

where LВө is the upper bound on the derivative of Вө(В·). For logistic function LВө = 1/4. The Borda
regret (3.1) is thus at most a constant multiple of (A.1). This shows Borda regret minimization can
be sufficiently solved by Saha (2021) when structured contexts are present. We consider the most
general case where the only restriction is the implicit assumption that П•i,j = вҲ’П•j,i .

A.2    R EGRET B OUND FOR F EWER A RMS

In typical scenarios, the number of items K is not exponentially large in the dimension d. If this is
the case, then we can choose a different parameter set of П„ and Пө such that Algorithm 1 can achieve
a regret bound depending on log K, and reduce the dependence on d. The performance can be
characterized by the following theorem:
Theorem A.1. For any Оҙ > 0, suppose the number of total rounds T satisfies,
                                                           2
                                  C3        n
                                              5/2 log(K /Оҙ)
                                                               o
                          T вүҘ       3/2
                                        max  d    ,     вҲҡ       ,                                 (A.2)
                                Оә6 О»0                     d

where C3 is some large enough universal constant. Then if we set П„ = (d log(K/Оҙ))1/3 T 2/3 and
Пө = d1/3 T вҲ’1/3 log(3K 2 /Оҙ)вҲ’1/6 , Algorithm 1 will incur regret bounded by:

                                   O ОәвҲ’1 (d log(K/Оҙ))1/3 T 2/3 .



By setting Оҙ = T вҲ’1 , the expected regret is bounded as O
                                                        e ОәвҲ’1 (d log K)1/3 T 2/3 .


The detailed proof can be found in Appendix C.2.


B     O MITTED P ROOF IN S ECTION 4

The proof relies on a class of hard-to-learn instances. We first present the construction again for
completeness.


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For any d > 0, we construct a hard instance with 2d+1 items (indexed from 0 to 2d+1 вҲ’ 1). We
construct the hard instance pОёi,j for any Оё вҲҲ {вҲ’вҲҶ, +вҲҶ}d as:
                                     пЈұ1
                                          , if i < 2d , j < 2d
                                     пЈІ 21
                                     пЈҙ
                                          , if i вүҘ 2d , j вүҘ 2d
                                     пЈҙ
                            pОёi,j = 23                         + вҹЁП•i,j , Оёвҹ©,            (B.1)
                                          , if i < 2d , j вүҘ 2d
                                     пЈі 41
                                     пЈҙ
                                     пЈҙ
                                                    d        d
                                        4 , if i вүҘ 2 , j < 2

where the feature vectors П•i,j and the parameter Оё are of dimension d, and have the following forms:
                                         0, if i < 2d , j < 2d
                                      пЈұ
                                      пЈҙ
                                         0, if i вүҘ 2d , j вүҘ 2d
                                      пЈҙ
                                      пЈІ
                               П•i,j =
                                      пЈҙ
                                      пЈҙ  bit(i), if i < 2d , j вүҘ 2d
                                         вҲ’bit(j), if i вүҘ 2d , j < 2d ,
                                      пЈі

where bit(В·) is the (shifted) bit representation of non-negative integers, i.e., suppose x = b0 Г— 20 +
b1 Г— 21 + В· В· В· + bdвҲ’1 Г— 2dвҲ’1 , then bit(x) = 2b вҲ’ 1. Note that bit(В·) вҲҲ {вҲ’1, +1}d , and П•i,j = вҲ’П•j,i .
Remark B.1 (d + 1-dimensional instance). The hard instance described above does not strictly
satisfy the assumption that pОёi,j = вҹЁОё, П•i,j вҹ©, but can be easily fixed by appending an additional
dimension to address the bias term defined in (B.1). More specifically, we can set F (x) = 21 + x and
pОёi,j = F (вҹЁП•        e where Оёe вҲҲ {вҲ’вҲҶ, +вҲҶ}d Г— { 1 } вҠӮ Rd+1 and П•
              ei,j , Оёвҹ©),                                                ei,j = (П•i,j , ci,j ), with ci,j =
                                                       4
пЈұ               d         d
пЈҙ  0, if i < 2 , j < 2
   0, if i вүҘ 2d , j вүҘ 2d
пЈҙ
пЈІ
                                To ensure вҲҘП•                                ei,j вҶҗ (d + 1)вҲ’1/2 П•
                                            ei,j вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1, we can further set П•                      ei,j and
пЈҙ1, if i < 2d , j вүҘ 2d
пЈҙ
   вҲ’1, if i вүҘ 2d , j < 2d .
пЈі

Оёe вҶҗ (d + 1)1/2 Оё.  e

We rewrite (B.1) as:
                     пЈұ1
                          , if i < 2d , j < 2d       0, if i < 2d , j < 2d
                                                    пЈұ
                     пЈҙ 21
                     пЈҙ                              пЈҙ
                          , if i вүҘ 2d , j вүҘ 2d       0, if i вүҘ 2d , j вүҘ 2d
                     пЈІ                              пЈҙ
                                                    пЈІ
              pОёi,j = 23            d        d    +                                                   (B.2)
                     пЈҙ 4 , if i < 2 , j вүҘ 2
                     пЈҙ                              пЈҙ
                                                    пЈҙ вҹЁbit(i), Оёвҹ©, if i < 2d , j вүҘ 2d
                        1           d        d
                                                      вҲ’вҹЁbit(j), Оёвҹ©, if i вүҘ 2d , j < 2d ,
                     пЈі                              пЈі
                       4 , if i вүҘ 2 , j < 2

and the Borda scores are:
                                           5     1                    d
                              B Оё (i) =    8 + 2 вҹЁbit(i), Оёвҹ©, if i < 2 ,
                                           3           d
                                           8 , if i вүҘ 2 .

Intuitively, the former half arms indexed from 0 to 2d вҲ’ 1 are вҖңgoodвҖқ arms (one among them is
optimal), while the latter half arms are вҖңbadвҖқ arms. It is clear that choosing a вҖңbadвҖқ arm i will incur
regret B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(i) вүҘ 1/4.
Now we are ready to present the proof.

Proof of Theorem 4.1. First, we present the following lemma:
Lemma B.2. Under the hard instance we constructed above, for any algorithm A that ever makes
queries it вүҘ 2d , there exists another algorithm AвҖІ that only makes queries it < 2d for every t > 0
and always achieves no larger regret than A.

Proof of Lemma B.2. The proof is done by reduction. For any algorithm A, we wrap A with such a
agent AвҖІ :

      1. If A queries (it , jt ) with it < 2d , the agent AвҖІ will pass the same query (it , jt ) to the
         environment and send the feedback rt to A;
      2. If A queries (it , jt ) with it вүҘ 2d , jt < 2d , the agent AвҖІ will pass the query (jt , it ) to the
         environment and send the feedback 1 вҲ’ rt to A;


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3. If A queries (it , jt ) with it вүҘ 2d , jt вүҘ 2d , the agent AвҖІ will uniform-randomly choose iвҖІt
         from 0 to 2d вҲ’ 1, pass the query (iвҖІt , iвҖІt ) to the environment and send the feedback rt to A.

For each of the cases defined above, the probabilistic model of bandit feedback for A is the same as
if A is directly interacting with the original environment. For Case 1, the claim is trivial. For Case
2, the claim holds because of the symmetry of our model, that is pОёi,j = 1 вҲ’ pОёj,i . For Case 3, both
will return rt following Bernoulli(1/2). Therefore, the expected regret of A in this environment
wrapped by AвҖІ is equal to the regret of A in the original environment.
Meanwhile, we will show AвҖІ will incur no larger regret than A. For the first two cases, AвҖІ will
incur the same one-step regret as A. For the third case, we know that B Оё (it ) = B Оё (jt ) = 38 ,
while E[B Оё (iвҖІt )] = 58 + 12 вҹЁEiвҖІt [bit(iвҖІt )], Оёвҹ© = 58 + 12 вҹЁ0, Оёвҹ© = 58 , meaning that the one-step regret is
smaller.

Lemma B.2 ensures it is safe to assume it < 2d . For any Оё and k вҲҲ [d], define
                                    X T
                                                                           T
                      PОё,k := PОё         1{bit[k] (it ) Мё= sign(Оё [k] )} вүҘ    ,
                                     t=1
                                                                           2
where the superscript [k] over a vector denotes taking the k-th entry of the vector. Meanwhile, we
define Оё \k to satisfy (Оё \k )[k] = вҲ’Оё [k] and be the same as Оё at all other entries. We have
                                      X   T
                                                                                    T
                                             1 bit[k] (it ) Мё= sign (Оё \k )[k] вүҘ

                     PОё\k ,k := PОё\k
                                         t=1
                                                                                    2
                                      X  T
                                                                              T
                              = PОё\k        1{bit[k] (it ) = sign(Оё [k] )} вүҘ
                                        t=1
                                                                              2
                                      X  T
                                                  [k]               [k]       T
                              = PОё\k        1{bit (it ) Мё= sign(Оё )} <            .
                                        t=1
                                                                              2
Denote PОё,A (i1 , j1 , r1 , i2 , j2 , r2 , . . . ) as the canonical probability distribution of algorithm A under
the model PОё . By the BretagnolleвҖ“Huber inequality and the decomposition of the relative entropy,
we have
                                          1
               PОё,k + PОё\k ,k вүҘ exp вҲ’ KL(PОё,A вҲҘPОё\k ,A )
                                          2
                                                             X T
                                          1
                                                                        Оё       Оё \k
                                      вүҘ exp вҲ’ EОё                  KL pi,j pi,j
                                          2                   t=1
                                                             X T
                                          1
                                      вүҘ exp вҲ’ EОё                  10вҹЁП•it ,jt , Оё вҲ’ Оё \k вҹ©2
                                          2                   t=1
                                                                     T
                                          1                       2
                                                                    X
                                                                                     d        d
                                      = exp вҲ’ EОё 40вҲҶ                    1{it < 2 вҲ§ jt вүҘ 2 } ,
                                          2                         t=1
where the first inequality comes from the BretagnolleвҖ“Huber inequality; the second inequality is
the decomposition of the relative entropy; the third inequality holds because the Bernoulli KL
divergence KL(pвҲҘp + x) is 10-strongly convex in x for any fixed p вҲҲ [1/8, 7/8], and indeed
pОёi,j вҲҲ [1/8, 7/8] as long as dвҲҶ вүӨ 1/8; the last equation holds because П•it ,jt has non-zero en-
tries only when (it , jt ) belongs to that specific regions.
                                           PT                d         d
From now on, we denote N (T ) :=             t=1 1{it < 2 вҲ§ jt вүҘ 2 }. Further averaging over all
                 d
Оё вҲҲ {вҲ’вҲҶ, +вҲҶ} , we have
                1        X                 1 1        X
                                                               exp вҲ’ 40вҲҶ2 EОё [N (T )]

                                  P Оё,k вүҘ
               2d                          4 2d
                   ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d                   ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d

                                           1                   1   X
                                        вүҘ exp вҲ’ 40вҲҶ2 d                     EОё [N (T )] ,
                                           4                  2          d
                                                                   ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}



                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the first inequality is from averaging over all Оё; the second inequality is from JensenвҖҷs in-
equality.
Utilizing the inequality above, we establish that

                                                                  T
                                                                  X
 1          X                            1          X
                   Regret(T ; Оё, A) вүҘ                       EОё          B Оё (iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B Оё (it )
 2d                                      2d                       t=1
      ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d                              ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d
                                                                  T
                                                                  X
                                      1             X
                                    = d                     EОё          вҹЁОё, sign(Оё) вҲ’ bit(it )вҹ©
                                     2                            t=1
                                              ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d
                                                                  T X
                                                                  X d
                                      1             X
                                                                                         [k]                [k]
                                    = d                     EОё              2вҲҶ 1{bit (it ) Мё= sign(Оё )}
                                     2                            t=1 k=1
                                              ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d
                                                              d         T
                                                                        X
                                         2вҲҶ         X         X
                                    =                             EОё            1{bit[k] (it ) Мё= sign(Оё [k] )}
                                         2d                              t=1
                                              ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d k=1
                                                              d
                                         2вҲҶ         X         X             T
                                    вүҘ                             PОё,k В·
                                         2d                                 2
                                              ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d k=1

                                         вҲҶdT                     1          X
                                    вүҘ        exp          вҲ’ 40вҲҶ2 d                      EОё [N (T )] ,         (B.3)
                                          4                     2
                                                                       ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d


where the first inequality comes from the Borda regret; the second inequality comes from the in-
equality E[X] вүҘ aP(X вүҘ a) for any non-negative random variable; the last inequality is from
rearranging terms and invoking the results above.
                                           PT
Meanwhile, we have (remember N (T ) := t=1 1{it < 2d вҲ§ jt вүҘ 2d })

                                                                         X T
       1        X                              1          X             1
                         Regret(T ; Оё, A) вүҘ                       EОё          1{it < 2d вҲ§ jt вүҘ 2d }
       2d                                      2d                       4 t=1
            ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d                              ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d
                                               1 1         X
                                          =                         EОё [N (T )],                              (B.4)
                                               4 2d
                                                      ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d


where the first inequality comes from that any items i вүҘ 2d will incur at least 1/4 regret.
Combining (B.3) and (B.4) together and denoting that X = 21d ОёвҲҲ{вҲ’вҲҶ,+вҲҶ}d EОё [N (T )], we have
                                                                P
                                                                            вҲ’1/3    вҲ’1/3
that for any algorithm A, there exists some Оё, such that (set вҲҶ = d              вҲҡT
                                                                                  40
                                                                                         )


                                         вҲҶdT               X
            Regret(T ; Оё, A) вүҘ max           exp(вҲ’40вҲҶ2 X),
                                          4                4
                                      2/3 2/3
                                       d T                            X
                             = max        вҲҡ     exp(вҲ’dвҲ’2/3 T вҲ’2/3 X),
                                        4 40                          4
                                2/3 2/3

                               d T                    вҲ’2/3 вҲ’2/3        вҲ’2/3 вҲ’2/3
                             вүҘ    вҲҡ        max exp(вҲ’d      T      X), d    T     X
                                4 40
                               d2/3 T 2/3
                             вүҘ    вҲҡ       ,
                                8 40

where the first inequality is the combination of (B.3) and (B.4); the second inequality is a rear-
rangement and loosely lower bounds the constant; the last is due to max{eвҲ’y , y} > 1/2 for any
y.


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     O MITTED P ROOF IN S ECTION 5
We first introduce the lemma about the theoretical guarantee of G-optimal design: given an action
             d
P X вҠҶ R that is compact and P
set                               span(X ) = Rd . A fixed design ПҖ(В·) : X вҶ’ [0, 1] satisfies
                                                  вҠӨ                           2
   xвҲҲX ПҖ(x) = 1. Define V(ПҖ) :=      xвҲҲX ПҖ(x)xx and g(ПҖ) := maxxвҲҲX вҲҘxвҲҘV(ПҖ)вҲ’1 .
Lemma C.1 (The KieferвҖ“Wolfowitz Theorem, Section 21.1, Lattimore & SzepesvaМҒri (2020)).
There exists an optimal design ПҖ вҲ— (В·) such that |supp(ПҖ)| вүӨ d(d + 1)/2, and satisfies:
      1. g(ПҖ вҲ— ) = d.
      2. ПҖ вҲ— is the minimizer of g(В·).
The following lemma is also useful to show that under mild conditions, the minimum eigenvalue of
the design matrix can be lower-bounded:
                                                          PП„
Lemma C.2 (Proposition 1, Li et al. 2017). Define VП„ = t=1 П•it ,jt П•вҠӨ               , where each (it , jt ) is
                                                                             it ,jt
drawn i.i.d. from some distribution ОҪ. Suppose О»min E(i,j)вҲјОҪ [П•вҠӨ
                                                               i,j П• i,j ]   вүҘ    О»  0 , and
                                    вҲҡ          p           2
                                    C1 d + C2 log(1/Оҙ)            2B
                             П„вүҘ                               +        ,
                                              О»0                   О»0
where C1 and C2 are some universal constants. Then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                         О»min (VП„ ) вүҘ B.

C.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1

The proof relies on the following lemma to establish an upper bound on |вҹЁП•i,j , ОёbП„ +N вҲ’ Оё вҲ— вҹ©|.
Lemma C.3 (extracted from Lemma 3, Li et al. (2017)). Suppose О»min (VП„ +N ) вүҘ 1. For any
Оҙ > 0, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                                            r
                              вҲ—           1 d
                  вҲҘОёП„ +N вҲ’ Оё вҲҘVП„ +N вүӨ
                   b                            log(1 + 2(П„ + N )/d) + log(1/Оҙ).
                                          Оә 2

Proof of Theorem 5.1. The proof can be divided into three steps: 1. invoke Lemma C.2 to show that
the initial П„ rounds for exploration will guarantee О»min (VП„ ) вүҘ 1; 2. invoke Lemma C.1 to obtain an
optimal design ПҖ and utilize Cauchy-Schwartz inequality to show that |вҹЁОёbП„ +N вҲ’ Оё, П•i,j вҹ©| вүӨ 3Пө/Оә;
3. balance the not yet determined Пө to obtain the regret upper bound.
Since we set П„ such that
                              П„ = C4 О»вҲ’2
                                       0 (d + log(1/Оҙ))
                                     вҲҡ           p             2
                                     C1 d + C2 log(1/Оҙ)                2
                                вүҘ                                   + ,
                                               О»0                     О»0
with a large enough universal constant C4 , by Lemma C.2 to obtain that with probability at least
1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                           О»min (VП„ ) вүҘ 1.                                      (C.1)
From now on, we assume (C.1) always holds.
                                           PП„ +N
Define N := i,j N (i, j), VП„ +1:П„ +N := t=П„ +1 П•it ,jt П•вҠӨ
              P
                                                            it ,jt , VП„ +N := VП„ + VП„ +1:П„ +N . Given
the optimal design ПҖ(i, j), the algorithm queries the pair (i, j) вҲҲ supp(ПҖ) for exactly N (i, j) =
вҢҲdПҖ(i, j)/Пө2 вҢү times. Therefore, the design matrix VП„ +N satisfies
                                   VП„ +N вӘ° VП„ +1:П„ +N
                                             X
                                           =     N (i, j)П•i,j П•вҠӨi,j
                                                  i,j
                                                  X dПҖ(i, j)
                                              вӘ°                   П•i,j П•вҠӨ
                                                                        i,j
                                                  i,j
                                                             Пө2
                                                  d
                                              =      V(ПҖ),
                                                  Пө2


                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       вҠӨ
                    P
where V(ПҖ) :=         i,j ПҖ(i, j)П•i,j П•i,j . The first inequality holds because VП„ is positive semi-
definite, and the second inequality holds due to the choice of N (i, j).
When (C.1) holds, from Lemma C.3, we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, that for each П•i,j ,


                   |вҹЁОёb вҲ’ Оё вҲ— , П•i,j вҹ©| вүӨ вҲҘОёbП„ +N вҲ’ Оё вҲ— вҲҘVП„ +N В· вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘVвҲ’1
                                                                        П„ +N

                                                              ПөвҲҘП•i,j вҲҘV(ПҖ)вҲ’1
                                     вүӨ вҲҘОёbП„ +N вҲ’ Оё вҲ— вҲҘVП„ +N В·      вҲҡ
                                                                      d
                                                   вҲ—
                                     вүӨ вҲҘОёП„ +N вҲ’ Оё вҲҘVП„ +N В· Пө
                                         b
                                            r
                                       Пө      d
                                     вүӨ В·        log(1 + 2(П„ + N )/d) + log(1/Оҙ)                   (C.2)
                                       Оә      2

where the first inequality is due to the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality; the second inequality holds
because VП„ +N вӘ° Пөd2 V(ПҖ); the third inequality holds because ПҖ is an optimal design and by
Lemma C.1, вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘ2V(ПҖ)вҲ’1 вүӨ d; the last inequality comes from Lemma C.3.
To summarize, we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, for every i вҲҲ [K],

                                         K
                                     1 X
                                           Вө(П•вҠӨ    вҲ—       вҠӨ b

                  |B(i)
                   b вҲ’ B(i)| =
                                              i,j Оё ) вҲ’ Вө(П•i,j Оё)
                                     K j=1
                                         K
                                     1 X
                                 вүӨ         Вө(П•вҠӨ    вҲ—       вҠӨ b
                                              i,j Оё ) вҲ’ Вө(П•i,j Оё)
                                     K j=1
                                         K
                                   LВө X вҠӨ вҲ— b
                                 вүӨ         П• Оё вҲ’ Оё)
                                   K j=1 i,j
                                           r
                                   3LВө Пө     d
                                 вүӨ       В·     log(1 + 2(П„ + N )/d) + log(1/Оҙ),                   (C.3)
                                    Оә        2

where the first equality is by the definition of the empirical/true Borda score; the first inequality is
due to the triangle inequality; the second inequality is from the Lipschitz-ness of Вө(В·) (LВө = 1/4
for the logistic function); the last inequality holds due to (C.2). This further implies the gap between
the empirical Borda winner and the true Borda winner is bounded by:


                  B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(bi) = B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(i
                                             b вҲ— ) + B(i
                                                      b вҲ— ) вҲ’ B(bi)
                                 вүӨ B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(i
                                             b вҲ— ) + B(
                                                      b bi) вҲ’ B(bi)
                                            r
                                   6LВө Пө      d
                                 вүӨ        В·     log(1 + 2(П„ + N )/d) + log(1/Оҙ),
                                    Оә         2

                                                                    b bi) вүҘ B(i)
where the first inequality holds due to the definition of bi, i.e., B(      b    for any i; the last
inequality holds due to (C.3).
                         P
Meanwhile, since N := (i,j)вҲҲsupp(ПҖ) N (i, j) and |supp(ПҖ)| вүӨ d(d + 1)/2 from Lemma C.1, we
have that

                                                              d
                                       N вүӨ d(d + 1)/2 +          ,
                                                              Пө2

because вҢҲxвҢү < x + 1.


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, the regret is bounded by:
             Regret(T ) = Regret1:П„ + RegretП„ +1:П„ +N + RegretП„ +N +1:T
                                             r
                                   12LВө ПөT      d
                        вүӨП„ +N +            В·      log(1 + 2(П„ + N )/d) + log(1/Оҙ)
                                      Оә         2
                                                                    s    !
                                           d      12LВө ПөT       1/2        T
                        вүӨ П„ + d(d + 1)/2 + 2 +             В·O d      log
                                           Пө          Оә                    dОҙ
                                          s    !
                               вҲ’1 2/3 2/3          T
                        =O Оә d T            log          ,
                                                   dОҙ
where the first equation is simply dividing the regret into 3 stages: 1 to П„ , П„ + 1 to П„ + N , and
П„ + N + 1 to T ; the second inequality is simply bounding the one-step regret from 1 to П„ + N
by 1, whilepfor t > П„ + N , we have shown that вҲҡ   the one-step regret is guaranteed to be smaller
than 12LВө Пө d log(1 + 2(П„ + N )/d) + log(1/Оҙ)/ 2Оә. The last line holds because we set П„ =
O(d + log(1/Оҙ)) and Пө = d1/6 T вҲ’1/3 . Note that to ensure П„ + N < T , it suffices to assume
T = в„Ұ(d2 ).
By setting Оҙ = T вҲ’1 , we can show that the expected regret of Algorithm 1 is bounded by
                                        e ОәвҲ’1 (d2/3 T 2/3 ) .

                                        O



C.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM A.1

The following lemma characterizes the non-asymptotic behavior of the MLE estimator. It is ex-
tracted from Li et al. (2017).
                                                       Ps             вҠӨ
Lemma C.4 (Theorem 1, Li et al. 2017). Define Vs =       t=1 П•it ,jt П•it ,jt , and Оёs as the MLE
                                                                                   b
estimator (5.1) in round s. If Vs satisfies
                                              512MВө2 (d2 + log(3/Оҙ))
                               О»min (Vs ) вүҘ                          ,                           (C.4)
                                                        Оә4
then for any fixed x вҲҲ Rd , with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                  3q
                              |вҹЁОёbs вҲ’ Оё вҲ— , xвҹ©| вүӨ     вҲҘxвҲҘ2VвҲ’1 log(3/Оҙ).
                                                  Оә         s



Proof of Theorem A.1. The proof can be essentially divided into three steps: 1. invoke Lemma C.2
to show that the initial П„ rounds for exploration will guarantee (C.4) be satisfied; 2. invoke
Lemma C.1 to obtain an optimal design ПҖ and utilize Lemma C.4 to show that |вҹЁОёbП„ +N вҲ’ Оё, П•i,j вҹ©| вүӨ
3Пө/Оә; 3. balance the not yet determined Пө to obtain the regret upper bound.
First, we explain why we assume
                                      C3         n       log(K 2 /Оҙ) o
                              T вүҘ       3/2
                                              max d5/2 ,     вҲҡ        .
                                    Оә6 О»0                      d
To ensure (C.4) in Lemma C.4 can hold, we resort to Lemma C.2, that is
                                  вҲҡ           p            2
                                  C1 d + C2 log(1/Оҙ)           2B
                           П„вүҘ                                +     ,
                                            О»0                 О»0
                                 512MВө2 (d2 + log(3/Оҙ))
                          B :=                          .
                                           Оә4
Since we set П„ = (d log(K 2 /Оҙ))1/3 T 2/3 , this means T should be large enough, so that
                                 вҲҡ                          2
                                                                 1024MВө2 (d2 + log(3K 2 /Оҙ))
                                                 p
               2    1/3 2/3      C1 d + C2 log(1/Оҙ)
     (d log(K /Оҙ)) T         вүҘ                                +                              .
                                               О»0                            Оә4 О»0


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


With a large enough universal constant C3 , it is easy to verify that the inequality above will hold as
long as
                                                                 2
                                    C3            n
                                                     5/2 log(K /Оҙ)
                                                                       o
                             T вүҘ       3/2
                                           max      d   ,     вҲҡ         .
                                  Оә6 О»0                         d

By Lemma C.2, we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                           512MВө2 (d2 + log(3K 2 /Оҙ))
                             О»min (VП„ ) вүҘ                                .                     (C.5)
                                                       Оә4
From now on, we assume (C.5) always holds.
                                           PП„ +N
Define N := i,j N (i, j), VП„ +1:П„ +N := t=П„ +1 П•it ,jt П•вҠӨ
              P
                                                           it ,jt , VП„ +N := VП„ + VП„ +1:П„ +N . Given
the optimal design ПҖ(i, j), the algorithm queries each pair (i, j) вҲҲ supp(ПҖ) for exactly N (i, j) =
вҢҲdПҖ(i, j)/Пө2 вҢү times. Therefore, the design matrix VП„ +N satisfies
                                   VП„ +N вӘ° VП„ +1:П„ +N
                                           X
                                         =    N (i, j)П•i,j П•вҠӨ
                                                            i,j
                                                i,j
                                                X dПҖ(i, j)
                                            вӘ°                   П•i,j П•вҠӨ
                                                                      i,j
                                                i,j
                                                           Пө2
                                                d
                                            =      V(ПҖ),
                                                Пө2
                                       вҠӨ
                    P
where V(ПҖ) :=         i,j ПҖ(i, j)П•i,j П•i,j . The first inequality holds because VП„ is positive semi-
definite, and the second inequality holds due to the choice of N (i, j).
To invoke Lemma C.4, notice that О»min (V) вүҘ О»min (VП„ ). Along with (C.5), by Lemma C.4, we
have for any fixed П•i,j , with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/K 2 , that
                                             3q
                      |вҹЁОёb вҲ’ Оё вҲ— , П•i,j вҹ©| вүӨ     вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘ2VвҲ’1 log(3K 2 /Оҙ)
                                             Оә             П„ +N
                                               r
                                             3 Пө2
                                           вүӨ         В· вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘ2V(ПҖ)вҲ’1 log(3K 2 /Оҙ)
                                             Оә d
                                               s
                                                          2
                                             3Пө вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘV(ПҖ)вҲ’1 p
                                           =                       В· log(3K 2 /Оҙ)
                                             Оә           d
                                             3Пө p
                                           вүӨ    В· log(3K 2 /Оҙ),                        (C.6)
                                             Оә
where the first inequality comes from Lemma C.4; the second inequality holds because
VП„ +N вӘ° Пөd2 V(ПҖ); the last inequality holds because ПҖ is an optimal design and by Lemma C.1,
вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘ2V(ПҖ)вҲ’1 вүӨ d.
Taking union bound for each (i, j) вҲҲ [K] Г— [K], we have that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for
every i вҲҲ [K],
                                               K
                                            1 X
                                                  Вө(П•вҠӨ    вҲ—       вҠӨ b

                         |B(i)
                          b вҲ’ B(i)| =                i,j Оё ) вҲ’ Вө(П•i,j Оё)
                                            K j=1
                                                 K
                                            1 X
                                        вүӨ         Вө(П•вҠӨ    вҲ—       вҠӨ b
                                                     i,j Оё ) вҲ’ Вө(П•i,j Оё)
                                            K j=1
                                                  K
                                            LВө X вҠӨ вҲ— b
                                        вүӨ        П• Оё вҲ’ Оё)
                                            K j=1 i,j
                                            3LВө Пө p
                                        вүӨ        В· log(3K 2 /Оҙ),                                 (C.7)
                                             Оә


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the first equality is by the definition of the empirical/true Borda score; the first inequality is
due to the triangle inequality; the second inequality is from the Lipschitz-ness of Вө(В·) (LВө = 1/4
for the logistic function); the last inequality holds due to (C.6). This further implies the gap between
the empirical Borda winner and the true Borda winner is bounded by:
                           B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(bi) = B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(ib вҲ— ) + B(i
                                                                 b вҲ— ) вҲ’ B(bi)
                                       вүӨ B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(i
                                                    b вҲ— ) + B(b bi) вҲ’ B(bi)
                                          6LВө Пө p
                                       вүӨ        В· log(3K 2 /Оҙ),
                                            Оә
                                                                    b bi) вүҘ B(i)
where the first inequality holds due to the definition of bi, i.e., B(      b    for any i; the last
inequality holds due to (C.7).
                         P
Meanwhile, since N := (i,j)вҲҲsupp(ПҖ) N (i, j) and |supp(ПҖ)| вүӨ d(d + 1)/2 from Lemma C.1, we
have that
                                                           d
                                     N вүӨ d(d + 1)/2 + 2 ,
                                                           Пө
because вҢҲxвҢү < x + 1.
Therefore, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, the regret is bounded by:
                  Regret(T ) = Regret1:П„ + RegretП„ +1:П„ +N + RegretП„ +N +1:T
                                           12LВө Пө      p
                              вүӨП„ +N +              T В· log(3K 2 /Оҙ)
                                              Оә
                                                     d      12LВө Пө    p
                              вүӨ П„ + d(d + 1)/2 + 2 +               T В· log(3K 2 /Оҙ)
                                                     Пө        Оә
                              = O ОәвҲ’1 (d log(K/Оҙ))1/3 T 2/3 ,


where the first equation is simply dividing the regret into 3 stages: 1 to П„ , П„ + 1 to П„ + N , and
П„ + N + 1 to T . the second inequality is simply bounding the one-step regret from 1 to П„ + N
by 1, whilepfor t > П„ + N , we have shown that the one-step regret is guaranteed to be smaller
than 12LВө Пө log(3K 2 /Оҙ)/Оә. The last line holds because we set П„ = (d log(3K 2 /Оҙ))1/3 T 2/3 and
Пө = d1/3 T вҲ’1/3 log(3K 2 /Оҙ)вҲ’1/6 .
By setting Оҙ = T вҲ’1 , we can show that the expected regret of Algorithm 1 is bounded by
                                 O ОәвҲ’1 (d log(KT ))1/3 T 2/3 ) .


Note that if there are exponentially many contextual vectors (K вүҲ 2d ), the upper bound becomes
e 2/3 T 2/3 ).
O(d

D    O MITTED P ROOF IN S ECTION 6
We make the following notation. Let HtвҲ’1 := (q1 , P1 , (i1 , j1 ), r1 , . . . , qt , Pt ) denotes the history
up to time t. Here Pt means the comparison probability pti,j in round t. The following lemmas are
used in the proof. We first bound the estimate B
                                               bt (i).
Lemma D.1. For all t вҲҲ [T ], i вҲҲ [K], it holds that Bbt (i) вүӨ О»вҲ’1 /Оі 2 .
                                                                   0

Proof of Lemma D.1. Using our choice of qt вүҘ Оі/K, we have the following result for the matrix
Qt :
                                                         2 1
                     X X                                      X X
               Qt =            qt (i)qt (j)П•i,j П•вҠӨ
                                                 i,j вӘ° Оі    2
                                                                   П•i,j П•вҠӨ
                                                                         i,j .          (D.1)
                                                          K
                         iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K]                                iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K]

Furthermore, we can use the definition of the estimate B
                                                       bt (i) to show that
                      *                   + *                               +
                         1 X                      1 X              вҲ’1
             Bt (i) =
              b                  П•i,j , Оёt =
                                        b                  П•i,j , Qt П•it ,jt rt (it , jt )
                        K                         K
                               jвҲҲ[K]                      jвҲҲ[K]
                        1 X
                      вүӨ     вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘ2QвҲ’1 ,
                        K            t
                             jвҲҲ[K]



                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                     PK PK
where we use the fact that |rt | вүӨ 1. Let ОЈ = K12 i=1 j=1 П•i,j П•вҠӨ
                                                                i,j . With (D.1) we have
      2
Qt вӘ° Оі ОЈ. Therefore, we can further bound Bbt (i) with

                                                      1 X
                                          bt (i) вүӨ
                                          B               вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1
                                                     KОі 2
                                                           jвҲҲ[K]
                                                  1
                                                вүӨ 2 max вҲҘП•i.j вҲҘ2ОЈвҲ’1
                                                 Оі i,j
                                                 О»вҲ’1
                                                вүӨ 02 ,
                                                  Оі

where the first inequality holds due to (D.1) and that вҲҘxвҲҘ2AвҲ’1 вүӨ вҲҘxвҲҘ2BвҲ’1 if A вӘ° B; the third
                                                   PK PK
inequality holds because we assume О»0 вүӨ О»min K12 i=1 j=1 П•i,j П•вҠӨ

                                                                   i,j and вҲҘП•i,j вҲҘ вүӨ 1.



The following lemma proves that our (shifted) estimate is unbiased.
Lemma D.2. For all t вҲҲ [T ], i вҲҲ [K], the following equality holds:

                                                bt (i)] = Bt (i) вҲ’ 1 .
                                              E[B
                                                                   2


Proof of Lemma D.2. Using our definition of B
                                            bt (i), we have
                      *                 + *                              +
                        1 X                     1 X             вҲ’1
             Bt (i) =
             b                 П•i,j , Оёt =
                                      b                 П•i,j , Qt П•it ,jt rt (it , jt ).
                        K                       K
                                  jвҲҲ[K]                        jвҲҲ[K]

Therefore, by the law of total expectation (tower rule), we have
                                       hD 1 X                        E                            i
                                                          вҲ’1
      E[Bt (i)] = EHtвҲ’1 E(it ,jt ,rt )
         b                                        П•i,j , Qt П•it ,jt rt (it , jt )|HtвҲ’1
                                          K
                                            jвҲҲ[K]
                                   hD 1 X                          E                                          i
                = EHtвҲ’1 E(it ,jt )              П•i,j , QвҲ’1
                                                        t  П•i  ,j
                                                              t t
                                                                    E  r t
                                                                           [r t (i t , jt )|(it , jt )] H tвҲ’1
                                        K
                                          jвҲҲ[K]
                                   hD 1 X                          E                          i
                = EHtвҲ’1 E(it ,jt )              П•i,j , QвҲ’1
                                                        t  П•it ,jt  p   (i
                                                                      t t t  , j  )    H tвҲ’1
                                        K
                                                jвҲҲ[K]

Then we use the definition of pt and the expectation. We can further get the equality
                                       hD 1 X                                        E       i
                                                             вҲ’1           вҠӨ        вҲ—
      E[Bbt (i)] = EH
                      tвҲ’1
                           E (it ,jt )              П• i,j , Qt  П•i  ,j
                                                                   t t
                                                                       П•  it ,jt Оё     H tвҲ’1
                                         K
                                            jвҲҲ[K]
                           D
                              1 X                 вҲ’1
                                                        X X
                                                                                           вҠӨ
                                                                                                E
                                                                                                вҲ—
                 = EHtвҲ’1                  П•i,j , Qt                   qt (i)qt (j)П•i,j П•i,j Оё HtвҲ’1
                             K
                                  jвҲҲ[K]                 iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K]
                           D
                              1 X                 вҲ—
                                                    E
                 = EHtвҲ’1                  П•i,j , Оё HtвҲ’1
                             K
                                      jвҲҲ[K]
                              1
                    = Bt (i) вҲ’ .
                              2
Therefore, we have completed the proof of Lemma D.2.


The following lemma is similar to Lemma 5 in Saha et al. (2021b).
Lemma D.3. EHt [qtвҠӨ B
                                                         1
                               tвҲ’1 ExвҲјqt [Bt (x)|HtвҲ’1 ] вҲ’ 2 , вҲҖt вҲҲ [T ].
                     bt ] = EH


                                                          22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma D.3. Taking conditional expectation, we have
                                     "K                #
                                       X
                         вҠӨb
                   EH [qt Bt ] = EH
                          t
                                           qt (i)Bt (i)
                                           t
                                                 b
                                                i=1
                                                "K                                           #
                                                 X                         h             i
                                    = EHtвҲ’1                                  b HtвҲ’1
                                                        qt (i)E(it ,jt ,rt ) B(i)
                                                  i=1
                                                "K                   #
                                                 X                1
                                    = EHtвҲ’1       qt (i) Bt (i) вҲ’
                                              i=1
                                                                  2
                                            h        h            ii 1
                                    = EHtвҲ’1 ExвҲјqt Bt (x) HtвҲ’1 вҲ’ ,
                                                                       2
where we use the law of total expectation again as well as Lemma D.2.

                                 P
The last lemma bounds a summation iвҲҲ[K] qt (i)B  bt (i)2 , which will be important in our proof.
                            P            bt (i)2 ] вүӨ d/Оі.
Lemma D.4. At any time t, E[ iвҲҲ[K] qt (i)B


Proof of Lemma D.4. Let Pbt (i, j) = вҹЁП•i,j , Оёbt вҹ©. Using the definition of B
                                                                            bt and Pbt (i, j), we have the
following inequality:
                    пЈ®                    пЈ№      пЈ®              пЈ«                  пЈ¶2 пЈ№
                      X
                                 bt (i)2 пЈ» = E пЈҜ
                                                    X            1 X b
                         qt (i)B                        qt (i) пЈӯ         Pt (i, j)пЈё пЈ»
                                                                                     пЈә
                 EпЈ°
                                                                 K
                                                пЈ°
                       iвҲҲ[K]                          iвҲҲ[K]                 jвҲҲ[K]
                                                  пЈ®                               пЈ№
                                                        X            1 X b2
                                               вүӨ EпЈ°           qt (i)     Pt (i, j)пЈ»
                                                                     K
                                                      iвҲҲ[K]           jвҲҲ[K]
                                                  пЈ®                                пЈ№
                                                        X            1 X Оі b2
                                               = EпЈ°           qt (i)       P (i, j)пЈ»
                                                                     Оі   K t
                                                      iвҲҲ[K]           jвҲҲ[K]
                                                      пЈ®                       пЈ№
                                                1 пЈ°X X
                                               вүӨ E     qt (i)qt (j)Pbt2 (i, j)пЈ» .
                                                Оі
                                                        iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K]

The first inequality holds due to the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality; the second inequality holds be-
cause the definition of qt satisfies qt вүҘ Оі/K.
Expanding the definition of Pbt2 (i, j), we have
                                                                  вҲ’1
                                                                             2
                               Pbt2 (i, j) = rt2 (it , jt ) П•вҠӨ
                                                             i,j Qt П•it ,jt
                                                    вҲ’1           вҲ’1
                                         вүӨ П•вҠӨ               вҠӨ
                                            it ,jt Qt П•i,j П•i,j Qt П•it ,jt ,

where we use 0 вүӨ rt2 (it , jt ) вүӨ 1. Therefore, the following inequality holds,
      X X                                X X
                                                                          вҲ’1           вҲ’1
               qt (i)qt (j)Pbt2 (i, j) вүӨ             qt (i)qt (j)П•вҠӨ               вҠӨ
                                                                  it ,jt Qt П•i,j П•i,j Qt П•it ,jt
      iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K]                         iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K]
                                                        пЈ«                                        пЈ¶
                                                             X X
                                                  вҲ’1 пЈӯ                                           пЈё QвҲ’1
                                       = П•вҠӨ
                                          it ,jt Qt                        qt (i)qt (j)П•i,j П•вҠӨ
                                                                                             i,j    t П•it ,jt
                                                             iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K]
                                                   вҲ’1
                                       = П•вҠӨit ,jt Qt П•it ,jt
                                                                вҲ’1
                                       = trace(П•it ,jt П•вҠӨ
                                                        it ,jt Qt ).



                                                        23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the property of trace, we have
        пЈ®                                   пЈ№         пЈ«                               пЈ¶
          X X                                           X X
                                                                                   вҲ’1 пЈё
      EпЈ°             qt (i)qt (j)Pbt2 (i, j)пЈ» вүӨ trace пЈӯ     qt (i)qt (j)П•i,j П•вҠӨ
                                                                              i,j Qt    = d.
          iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K]                                        iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K]

Therefore, we finish the proof of Lemma D.4.

Proof of Theorem 6.1. Our regret is defined as follows,
                                      " T                                  #
                                        X
                                                   вҲ—
                   EHT [RT ] = EHT         [2Bt (i ) вҲ’ Bt (it ) вҲ’ Bt (jt )]
                                             t=1
                                                   " T                                     #
                                                    X
                               = max EHT                 [2Bt (i) вҲ’ Bt (it ) вҲ’ Bt (jt )] .
                                  iвҲҲ[K]
                                                   t=1

The second equality holds because Bt and iвҲ— are independent of the randomness of the algorithm.
Furthermore, we can write the expectation of the regret as
                                       T
                                       X                 T
                                                         X
                EHT [RT ] = 2 max            Bt (i) вҲ’          EHT [Bt (it ) + Bt (jt )]
                               iвҲҲ[K]
                                       t=1               t=1
                                       T
                                       X                  T
                                                          X
                           = 2 max           Bt (i) вҲ’ 2         EHtвҲ’1 [ExвҲјqt [Bt (x)|HtвҲ’1 ]]
                               iвҲҲ[K]
                                       t=1                t=1
                                      T
                                     X            1         h      i
                           = 2 max       Bt (i) вҲ’     вҲ’ 2EHt qtвҠӨ B
                                                                 bt ,                              (D.2)
                               iвҲҲ[K]
                                     t=1
                                                  2

where the last equality is due to Lemma D.3.
Then we follow the standard proof of EXP3 algorithm (Lattimore & SzepesvaМҒri, 2020). Let St,k =
Pt              1
                             Pt                  P
  s=1 Bs (k) вҲ’ 2 , St,k =      s=1 Bs (k), Пүt =    kвҲҲ[K] exp(вҲ’О· St,k ) and Пү0 = K. We have
                     b              b                           b
вҲҖa вҲҲ [K],
                                                                                    T
                                       X                                           Y   Пүt
                   exp(вҲ’О· SbT,a ) вүӨ            exp(вҲ’О· SbT,k ) = ПүT = Пү0 В·                  .       (D.3)
                                                                                      Пү
                                                                                   t=1 tвҲ’1
                                       kвҲҲ[K]

For each term in the product, we have

                           Пүt     X exp(вҲ’О· SbtвҲ’1,k )
                               =                         В· exp(вҲ’О· B
                                                                  bt (k))
                          ПүtвҲ’1                 ПүtвҲ’1
                                 kвҲҲ[K]
                                  X
                               =       qet (k) exp(вҲ’О· B
                                                      bt (k)),                                     (D.4)
                                    kвҲҲ[K]

where the second equality holds because of the definition of qet . For any О· вүӨ О»0 Оі 2 , Lemma D.1
            bt (k)| вүӨ 1. Thus, using the basic inequality exp(x) вүӨ 1 + x + x2 /2 when x вүӨ 1, and
presents |О· B
exp(x) вүҘ 1 + x, we have
                     Пүt     X
                                                 bt (k) + О· 2 B
                                                              bt2 (k)

                         вүӨ       qet (k) 1 вҲ’ О· B
                    ПүtвҲ’1
                           kвҲҲ[K]
                                   X                         X
                         =1вҲ’О·                  bt (k) + О· 2
                                        qet (k)B                          bt2 (k)
                                                                   qet (k)B
                                  kвҲҲ[K]                           kвҲҲ[K]
                                пЈ«                                                           пЈ¶
                                        X                               X
                         вүӨ exp пЈӯвҲ’О·                    bt (k) + О· 2
                                               qet (k)B                               b 2 (k)пЈё .
                                                                               qet (k)B            (D.5)
                                                                                        t
                                       kвҲҲ[K]                           kвҲҲ[K]



                                                        24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Combining (D.3), (D.4) and (D.5), we have
                               пЈ«     пЈ®                                          пЈ№пЈ¶
                                  XT      X                     X
       exp(вҲ’О· SbT,a ) вүӨ K exp пЈӯ      пЈ°вҲ’О·           bt (k) + О· 2
                                            qet (k)B                     bt2 (k)пЈ»пЈё ,
                                                                  qet (k)B
                                       t=1          kвҲҲ[K]                     kвҲҲ[K]

and therefore
                   T                 T                           T
                   X                 X                 log K    X   X
                          bt (a) вҲ’
                          B                qetвҠӨ B
                                                bt вүӨ         +О·              bt2 (k).
                                                                      qet (k)B
                   t=1               t=1
                                                         О·      t=1   kвҲҲ[K]

Since qet = qt вҲ’Оі/K
               1вҲ’Оі , we have

                          T                T                           T
                          X                X                 log K    X   X
                (1 вҲ’ Оі)         bt (a) вҲ’
                                B                qtвҠӨ B
                                                     bt вүӨ          +О·              b 2 (k).
                                                                            qet (k)B t
                          t=1              t=1
                                                               О·      t=1 kвҲҲ[K]

Choosing a = iвҲ— , changing the summation index to i and taking expectation on both sides, we have
                                                                  пЈ®                         пЈ№
                  XT             XT     h      i log K               XT X
    (1 вҲ’ Оі)EHT        bt (iвҲ— ) вҲ’
                      B              EHT qtвҠӨ B
                                             bt вүӨ         + EHT пЈ°О·                   bt2 (i)пЈ» .
                                                                               qt (i)B
                  t=1            t=1
                                                      О·              t=1              iвҲҲ[K]

Substituting the above inequality into (D.2) and using Lemma D.2, D.3, we can bound the regret as
                                            пЈ®                    пЈ№
                                    T
                    2 log K        X           X
  E[RT ] вүӨ 2ОіT +            + 2О·       EHT пЈ°       qt (i)st (i)2 пЈ»
                        О·          t=1               iвҲҲ[K]

                   log K   2О·dT
         вүӨ 2ОіT + 2       +
                     О·       Оі
                               p                                                       p
                   1/3 1/3 2/3
         вүӨ 2(log K) d T          1/О»0 + 2(log K)1/3 d1/3 T 2/3 + 2(log K)1/3 d1/3 T 2/3 О»0 ,
where the second inequality holds due to Lemma D.4. In the last inequality, we put in our choice
                                                 p                                    вҲ’1/2
of parameters О· = (log K)2/3 dвҲ’1/3 T вҲ’2/3 and Оі = О·d/О»0 = (log K)1/3 d1/3 T вҲ’1/3 О»0 . This
finishes our proof of Theorem 6.1.


                                                        25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    D ETAILED E XPLANATION OF S TUDIED A LGORITHMS IN E XPERIMENTS


The following list summarizes all methods we implemented:
BETC-GLM(-M ATCH ): Algorithm 1 proposed in this paper. For general link function, to find Оёb
by MLE in (5.1), 100 rounds of gradient descent are performed. The failure probability is set to
Оҙ = 1/T . Parameters П„ and Пө are set to values listed in Theorem A.1. For BETC-GLM-M ATCH,
we use the П„ and Пө outlined in Theorem 5.1.
UCB-B ORDA: The UCB algorithm (Auer et al., 2002) using Borda reduction technique mentioned
by Busa-Fekete et al. (2018). The complete listing is displayed in Algorithm 3.
DEXP3: Dueling-Exp3 is an adversarial Borda bandit algorithm developed by Saha et al. (2021a),
which also applies to our stationary bandit case. Relevant tuning parameters are set according to
their upper-bound proof.
ETC-B ORDA: We devise a simple explore-then-commit algorithm, named ETC-B ORDA. Like
DEXP3, ETC-B ORDA does not take any contextual information into account. The complete pro-
cedure of ETC-B ORDA is displayed in Algorithm 4, Appendix G.2. The failure probability Оҙ is
optimized as 1/T .
BEXP3: The proposed method for adversarial Borda bandits displayed in Algorithm 2. О· and Оі are
chosen to be the value stated in Theorem 6.1.


F    R EAL - WORLD DATA E XPERIMENTS


To showcase the performance of the algorithms in a real-world setting, we use EventTime dataset
(Zhang et al., 2016). In this dataset, K = 100 historical events are compared in a pairwise fashion
by crowd-sourced workers.
We first calculate the empirical preference probabilities pei,j from the collected responses. A visual-
ized preferential matrix consisting of pei,j is shown in Figure 5 in Appendix F.1, which demonstrates
that STI and SST conditions hardly hold in reality. During simulation, pei,j is the parameter of the
Bernoulli distribution that is used to generate the responses whenever a pair (i, j) is queried. The
contextual vectors П•i,j are generated randomly from {вҲ’1, +1}5 . For simplicity, we assign the item
pairs that have the same probability value with the same contextual vector, i.e., if pei,j = pek,l then
П•i,j = П•k,l . The MLE estimator Оёb in (5.1) is obtained to construct the recovered preference prob-
ability pbi,j := Вө(П•вҠӨi,j Оё) where Вө(x) = 1/(1 + e
                         b                             вҲ’x
                                                            ) is the logistic function. We ensure that the
recovered preference probability pbi,j is close to pei,j , so that П•i,j are informative enough. As shown
in Figure 3, our algorithm outperforms the baseline methods as expected. In particular, the gap be-
tween our algorithm and the baselines is even larger than that under the generated hard case. In both
settings, our algorithms demonstrated a stable performance with negligible variance.
                                                          Г—104
                                                    3.5          UCB-Borda
                                                                 DEXP3
                                                    3.0
                                                                 ETC-Borda
                                                    2.5          BETC-GLM
                                                                 BETC-GLM-Match
                                        Regret(T)


                                                    2.0          BEXP3

                                                    1.5

                                                    1.0

                                                    0.5

                                                    0.0
                                                          0      25000   50000   75000 100000
                                                                           T


                                               Figure 3: EventTime

Figure 4: The regret of the proposed algorithm (BETC-GLM,BEXP3) and the baseline algorithms
(UCB-B ORDA, DEXP3, ETC-B ORDA).


                                                                     26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.1   DATA V ISUALIZATION

The events in EventTime dataset are ordered by the time they occurred. In Figure 5, the magnitude
of each pei,j is color coded. It is apparent that there is no total/consistent ordering (i.e., pei,j > 12 вҮ”
i вү» j) can be inferred from this matrix due to inconsistencies in the ordering and many potential
paradoxes. Hence STI and SST can hardly hold in this case.


        Figure 5: Estimated preferential matrix consists of pei,j from the EventTime dataset.


G     A DDITIONAL I NFORMATION FOR E XPERIMENTS


G.1    T HE UCB-B ORDA A LGORITHM

The UCB-B ORDA procedure, displayed in Algorithm 3 is a UCB algorithm with Borda reduction
only capable of minimization of regret in the following form:


                                                 T
                                                 X
                                                         B(iвҲ— ) вҲ’ B(it ) .

                                  Regret(T ) =
                                                 t=1


Let ni be the number of times arm i вҲҲ [K] has been queried. Let wi be the number of times arm i
wins the duel. B(i)
               b is the estimated Borda score. Оұ is set to 0.3 in all experiments.
Algorithm 3 UCB-B ORDA
 1: Input: time horizon T , number of items K, exploration parameter Оұ.
                                b = 1 , i вҲҲ [K]
 2: Initialize: n = w = {0}K , B(i)      2
 3: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do q
                              bk + Оұ log(t)

 4:   it = argmaxkвҲҲ[K] B                 nk
 5:   sample jt вҲј Uniform([K])
 6:   query pair (it , jt ) and receive feedback rt вҲј Bernoulli(pit ,jt )
 7:   nit = nit + 1, wit = wit + rt , B(i  b t ) = wit
                                                   nit
 8: end for


G.2    T HE ETC-B ORDA A LGORITHM

The ETC-B ORDA procedure, displayed in Algorithm 4 is an explore-then-commit type algorithm
capable of minimizing the Borda dueling regret. It can be shown that the regret of Algorithm 4 is
e 1/3 T 2/3 ).
O(K


                                                    27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 4 ETC-B ORDA
 1: Input: time horizon T , number of items K, target failure probability Оҙ
                                 b = 1 , i вҲҲ [K]
 2: Initialize: n = w = {0}K , B(i)      2
 3: Set N = вҢҲK вҲ’2/3 T 2/3 log(K/Оҙ)1/3 вҢү
 4: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do (
                               1 + (t вҲ’ 1) mod K, if t вүӨ KN,
 5:    Choose action it вҶҗ
                               argmaxiвҲҲ[K] B(i),
                                            b    if t > KN.
                              (
                                Uniform([K]), if t вүӨ KN,
 6:   Choose action jt =
                                argmaxiвҲҲ[K] B(i),
                                              b     if t > KN.
 7:   query pair (it , jt ) and receive feedback rt вҲј Bernoulli(pit ,jt )
 8:   if t вүӨ N then
 9:      nit = nit + 1, wit = wit + rt , B(i b t ) = wit
                                                      nit
10:   end if
11: end for


G.3   F RANK -W OLFE ALGORITHM USED TO FIND APPROXIMATE SOLUTION FOR G- OPTIMAL
      DESIGN

In order to find a solution for the G-optimal design problem, we resort to the Frank-Wolfe algorithm
to find an approximate solution. The detailed procedure is listed in Algorithm 5. In Line 4, each
outer product costs d2 multiplications, K 2 such matrices are scaled and summed into a d-by-d matrix
V(ПҖ), which costs O(K 2 d2 ) operations in total. In Line 5, one matrix inversion costs approximately
O(d3 ). The weighted norm requires O(d2 ) and the maximum is taken over K 2 such calculated
values. The scaling and update in the following lines only require O(K 2 ). In summary, the algorithm
is dominated by the calculation in Line 5 which costs O(d2 K 2 ).
In experiments, the G-optimal design ПҖ(i, j) is approximated by running 20 iterations of Frank-
Wolfe algorithm, which is more than enough for its convergence given our particular problem in-
stance. (See Note 21.2 in (Lattimore & SzepesvaМҒri, 2020)).
Algorithm 5 G- OPTIMAL DESIGN BY F RANK -W OLFE
 1: Input: number of items K, contextual vectors П•i,j , i вҲҲ [K], j вҲҲ [K], number of iterations R
 2: Initialize: ПҖ1 (i, j) = 1/K 2
 3: for r = 1, 2,P В· В· В· , R do
 4:   V(ПҖr ) = i,j ПҖr (i, j)П•i,j П•вҠӨ i,j
 5:   iвҲ—r , jrвҲ— = argmax(i,j)вҲҲ[K]Г—[K] ||П•i,j ||V(ПҖr )вҲ’1
 6:   gr = ||П•iвҲ—r ,jrвҲ— ||V(ПҖr )вҲ’1
             g вҲ’1/d
 7:   Оіr = rgr вҲ’1
 8:   ПҖr+1 (i, j) = (1 вҲ’ Оіr )ПҖr (i, j) + Оіr 1(iвҲ—r = i)1(jrвҲ— = j)
 9: end for
10: Output: Approximate G-optimal design solution ПҖR+1 (i, j)


                                                   28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H       BEXP3 WITH MANY ARMS


In this section, we discuss how our algorithm BEXP3 can be modified to obtain a O(d  e 2/3 T 2/3 )
regret, when the number of arms K is exponentially large (log K = Пү(d)).
                                                                         1 P
The idea is to first construct an Пө-cover S over the set of mean vectors K    jвҲҲ[K] П•i,j iвҲҲ[K] , so
                                                                1
                                                                  P
that for any i вҲҲ [K], there exist a vector ПҲi вҲҲ S such that K            П•
                                                                    jвҲҲ[K] i,j вҲ’ ПҲi 2 вүӨ Пө. In the
                                                            d
d-dimensional space, it suffices to choose |S| = O((1/Пө) ) representative vectors to cover all the
vectors.
Algorithm 6 BEXP3 with large K
    1: Input: time horizon T , number of items K, feature dimension d, feature vectors П•i,j for i вҲҲ
       [K], j вҲҲ [K], learning rate О·, exploration parameter Оі, covering radius Пө.
                            1
    2: Initialize: q1 (i) = K .
                                  1
                                                               , with |S| = O((1/Пө)d ).
                                    P
    3: Calculate an Пө-cover S of K   jвҲҲ[K] П•i,j        iвҲҲ[K]
                                            1
                                              P
    4: Denote the vector in S closest to K      jвҲҲ[K] П•i,j as ПҲi for all i вҲҲ [K].
    5: for t = 1, . . . , T do
    6:   Sample items it вҲј qt , jt вҲј qt .
    7:   Query pair (it , jt ) and receive feedback rt .
                                                                         вҲ’1
         Calculate Qt = iвҲҲ[K] jвҲҲ[K] qt (i)qt (j)П•i,j П•вҠӨ
                             P       P
    8:                                                       i,j , Оёt = Qt П•it ,jt rt .
                                                                   b
 9:      Calculate the (shifted) Borda score estimates B bt (i) = вҹЁПҲi , Оёbt вҹ©.
10:      Update for all i вҲҲ [K], set
                                      Pt b
                                exp(О· l=1 B    l (i))                                        Оі
               qet+1 (i) = P              Pt b           ;       qt+1 (i) = (1 вҲ’ Оі)e
                                                                                   qt+1 (i) + .
                              jвҲҲ[K] exp(О·    l=1 Bl (j))
                                                                                             K

11: end for
Now BEXP3 will be performed as the original case except that at Line 9 in Algorithm 6, we replace
                               1
                                 PK
the average contextual vectors K    j=1 П•i,j with those nearest representative vectors П•i . Since
                            d
there are only |S| = O((1/Пө) ) unique rewards, the EXP3 argument (D.3) can be performed on |S|
unique arms instead of K arms:


                                                                                T
                                           X                                   Y   Пүt
                        exp(вҲ’О· SbT,a ) вүӨ         exp(вҲ’О· SbT,П• ) = ПүT = Пү0 В·            ,
                                                                                  Пү
                                                                               t=1 tвҲ’1
                                           П•вҲҲS


where Пү0 = |S| instead of K.
                                             e 2/3 T 2/3 log1/3 (1/Пө)). The Пө-net incurs an additional
Eventually the algorithm suffers a regret of O(d
approximation error of order O(ПөT ). Setting Пө = T вҲ’1 will improve the regret to d2/3 T 2/3 up to log
factors.


I      A DDITIONAL C OMPARISON BETWEEN BETC AND BEXP3


Here we show under the same experimental setting, tuning the error tolerance Пө in BETC can further
reduce its total regret up to a constant factor, showing that under suitable hyper-parameter choices,
BETC can outperform BEXP3.


                                                       29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: The performance of BETC under different choices of error tolerance Пө, compared with
BEXP3. We examined BETC with Пө, 2Пө, 4Пө, 8Пө where Пө = d1/6 T вҲ’1/3 .


                                             30
