Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ISEN B OOTH : I DENTITY-P RESERVING D ISENTAN -
GLED T UNING FOR S UBJECT-D RIVEN T EXT- TO -I MAGE
G ENERATION
  Hong Chen1 , Yipeng Zhang1 , Simin Wu3 , Xin Wang1,2∗,
  Xuguang Duan1 , Yuwei Zhou1 , Wenwu Zhu1,2∗
 1
   Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
 2
   Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
 3
   Lanzhou University
 {h-chen20,zhang-yp22,dxg18,zhou-yw21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
 {xin wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn, wusm21@lzu.edu.cn



                                               A BSTRACT

            Subject-driven text-to-image generation aims to generate customized images of
            the given subject based on the text descriptions, which has drawn increasing atten-
            tion. Existing methods mainly resort to finetuning a pretrained generative model,
            where the identity-relevant information (e.g., the boy) and the identity-irrelevant
            information (e.g., the background or the pose of the boy) are entangled in the
            latent embedding space. However, the highly entangled latent embedding may
            lead to the failure of subject-driven text-to-image generation as follows: (i) the
            identity-irrelevant information hidden in the entangled embedding may dominate
            the generation process, resulting in the generated images heavily dependent on the
            irrelevant information while ignoring the given text descriptions; (ii) the identity-
            relevant information carried in the entangled embedding can not be appropriately
            preserved, resulting in identity change of the subject in the generated images. To
            tackle the problems, we propose DisenBooth, an identity-preserving disentangled
            tuning framework for subject-driven text-to-image generation. Specifically, Dis-
            enBooth finetunes the pretrained diffusion model in the denoising process. Dif-
            ferent from previous works that utilize an entangled embedding to denoise each
            image, DisenBooth instead utilizes disentangled embeddings to respectively pre-
            serve the subject identity and capture the identity-irrelevant information. We fur-
            ther design the novel weak denoising and contrastive embedding auxiliary tuning
            objectives to achieve the disentanglement. Extensive experiments show that our
            proposed DisenBooth framework outperforms baseline models for subject-driven
            text-to-image generation with the identity-preserved embedding. Additionally, by
            combining the identity-preserved embedding and identity-irrelevant embedding,
            DisenBooth demonstrates more generation flexibility and controllability1 .


1       I NTRODUCTION

Training on billions of text-image pairs, large-scale text-to-image models (Rombach et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022) have recently achieved unprecedented success in gener-
ating photo-realistic images that conform to the given text descriptions. Thanks to their remarkable
generation ability, a more customized generation topic, subject-driven text-to-image generation, has
attracted an increasing number of attention in the community (Gal et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2022;
Wei et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Kawar et al., 2022; Kumari et al., 2022). Given a
small set of images of a subject, e.g., 3 to 5 images of your favorite toy, subject-driven text-to-image
generation aims to generate new images of the same subject according to the text prompts, e.g., an
image of your favorite toy with green hair on the moon. The challenge of subject-driven text-to-
    ∗
        Corresponding Authors.
    1
        Our code is available at https://github.com/forchchch/DisenBooth


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


image generation lies in the requirement that in addition to aligning well with the text prompts, the
generated images are expected to preserve the subject identity (Shi et al., 2023) as well.
Existing subject-driven text-to-image generation methods (Gal et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2022; Kumari
et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2022) mainly rely on finetuning strategy, which finetune the pretrained
text-to-image diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022) through mapping the
images containing the subject to a special text embedding. However, since the text embedding
is designed to align with the given images, information regarding the subject will be inevitably
entangled with information irrelevant to the subject identity, such as the background or the pose of
the subject. This entanglement tends to impair the image generation in two ways: (i) the identity-
irrelevant information hidden in the entangled embedding may dominate the generation process,
resulting in the generated images heavily dependent on the irrelevant information while ignoring
the given text descriptions, e.g., DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2022) ignores the “in the snow” text
prompts, and overfits to the input image background as shown in row 2 column 4 of Figure 1.
(ii) the identity-relevant information carried in the entangled embedding can not be appropriately
preserved, resulting in identity change of the subject in the generated images, e.g., DreamBooth
generates a backpack with a different color from the input image in row 3 column 4 of Figure 1.
Other works (Wei et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2023a; Ma et al.,
2023) focus on reducing the computational burden, and investigate the problem of subject-driven
text-to-image generation without finetuning. They rely on additional datasets that contain many
subjects for training additional modules to customize the new subject. Once the additional modules
are trained, they can be used for subject-driven text-to-image generation without further finetuning.
However, these methods still suffer poor generation ability without considering the disentanglement,
e.g., ELITE (Wei et al., 2023) fails to maintain the subject identity in row 2 column 2 and ignores
the action “running” from the text prompt in row 1 column 2 of Figure 1.

                input image   text description     ELITE   InstructPix2Pix   Dreambooth   DisenBooth(ours)


                              “ a S* dog running
                                 on the grass
                              with sunflowers ”


                               “ a S* backpack
                                in the snow ”


                               “ a S* backpack
                                stands in the
                               white flowers ”


Figure 1: Comparisons between different existing methods and our proposed DisenBooth. “a S ∗
dog” is a special token that represents the subject identity. The non-finetuning method ELITE and
the image editing method InstructPix2Pix struggle in preserving the subject identity. The existing
finetuning method DreamBooth suffers from overfitting on the input image background (row 2 col-
umn 4) and subject identity changes (row 3 column 4).

To tackle the entanglement problem in subject-driven text-to-image generation, we propose Disen-
Booth, an identity-preserving disentangled tuning framework based on pretrained diffusion models.
Specifically, DisenBooth conducts the disentangled tuning during the diffusion denoising process.
As shown in Figure 2, different from previous works that only rely on an entangled text embedding
as the condition to denoise, DisenBooth simultaneously utilizes a textual identity-preserved embed-
ding and a visual identity-irrelevant embedding as the condition to denoise for each image containing
the subject. To guarantee that the textual embedding and the visual embedding can respectively cap-
ture the identity-relevant and identity-irrelevant information, we propose two auxiliary disentangled
objectives, i.e., the weak denoising objective and the contrastive embedding objective. To further
enhance the tuning efficiency, parameter-efficient tuning strategies are adopted. During the inference
stage, only the identity-preserved embedding is utilized for subject-driven text-to-image generation.
Additionally, through combining the two disentangled embeddings together, we can achieve more
flexible and controllable image generation. Extensive experiments show that DisenBooth can si-


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                           𝑧1             Add Noise                       𝑧1,𝑡1
            Diffusion                                        ℰ             𝑧2          sampled time step:
                                                                                                                          𝑧2,𝑡2
                                                                                            𝑡1 , 𝑡2 , 𝑡3
            Forward                                                        𝑧3                                             𝑧3,𝑡3
                              𝑥1      𝑥2      𝑥3                                     sampled noise: 𝜖1 , 𝜖2 , 𝜖3

                              small image set C𝑠                 latent space                                       noisy latent

           Identity-Irrelevant Branch                                           𝐿3
                                                                      𝑓1
                         𝑥1                                                                       denoise
                                     CLIP


                                                   Adapter
            C𝑠           𝑥2
                                    Image                             𝑓2                                                           𝐿1
                                   Encoder                                                        denoise
                         𝑥3           𝑬𝑰                              𝑓3
                                                                                                  denoise


           Identity-Preserving Branch                                                             weak               LoRA
                 “𝑎 𝑆 ∗               CLIP Text                                                  denoise
            𝑃𝑠 𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘”                                              𝑓𝑠                                           U-Net(𝜖𝜃 )      𝐿2
                                     Encoder 𝑬𝑻



Figure 2: DisenBooth conducts finetuning in the denoising process, where each input image is
denoised with the textual embedding fs shared by all the images to preserve the subject identity, and
visual embedding fi to capture the identity-irrelevant information. To make the two embeddings
disentangled, the weak denoising objective L2 and the contrastive embedding objective L3 are pro-
posed. Fine-tuned parameters include the adapter and the LoRA parameters.


multaneously capture the identity-relevant and the identity-irrelevant information, and demonstrates
superior generation ability over state-of-the-art methods in subject-driven text-to-image generation.
To summarize, our contributions are listed as follows. (i) To the best of our knowledge, we are
the first to investigate the disentangled finetuning for subject-driven text-to-image generation. (ii)
We propose DisenBooth, an identity-preserving disentangled tuning framework for subject-driven
text-to-image generation, which is able to learn a textual identity-preserved embedding and a visual
identity-irrelevant embedding for each image containing the subject, through two novel disentan-
gled auxiliary objectives. (iii) Extensive experiments show that DisenBooth has superior generation
ability in subject-driven text-to-image generation over existing baseline models, and brings more
flexibility and controllability for image generation.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-Image Generation Training on large-scale datasets, the text-to-image generation mod-
els (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023; Xu et al., 2018; Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh
et al., 2021; Nichol et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2022) have achieved great success
recently. Among these models, diffusion-based models like Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022),
DALLE-2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) have attracted a lot of attention
due to their outstanding controllability in generating photo-realistic images according to the text de-
scriptions. Despite their superior ability, they still struggle with the more personalized generation,
where we want to generate images about some specific or user-defined concepts, whose identities
are hard to be precisely described with text descriptions. This leads to the emergence of the recently
popular topic, subject-driven text-to-image generation (Ruiz et al., 2022; Gal et al., 2022).
Text-Guided Image Editing Text-guided image editing (Li et al., 2020; Meng et al.; Bar-Tal et al.,
2022; Brooks et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022; Hertz et al., 2022) aims to edit an input image ac-
cording to the given textual descriptions. SDEdit (Meng et al.) and Blended-Diffusion (Avra-
hami et al., 2022) blend the noisy input to the generated image in the diffusion denoising pro-
cess. Prompt2Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) combines the attention map of the input image and
that of the text prompt to generate the edited image. Imagic (Kawar et al., 2022) utilizes a 3-step
optimization-based strategy to achieve more detailed visual edits. A more recent SOTA method In-
structPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2022) utilized GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), Stable Diffusion (Rombach
et al., 2022) and Prompt2Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) to generate a dataset with (original image, text
prompt, edited image) triplets to train a new diffusion model for text-guided image editing. Despite


                                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


their effectiveness, they are generally not suitable for subject-driven text-to-image generation (Chen
et al., 2023), which needs to perform more complex transformations to the images, e.g., rotating the
view, changing the pose, etc. Also, since these methods are not customized for the subject, their
ability to preserve the subject identity is not guaranteed. Some examples of InstructPix2Pix for
subject-driven text-to-image generation are presented in Figure 1, the pose of the dog is not changed
to “running” in row 1 column 3, and the subject identity is changed in row 2 and 3.
Subject-Driven Text-to-Image Generation Given few images of the subject, subject-driven text-
to-image generation (Kumari et al., 2022; Gal et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2022; Han et al., 2023)
aims to generate new images according to the text descriptions while keeping the subject identity
unchanged. DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2022) and TI (Gal et al., 2022) are two popular subject-driven
text-to-image generation methods based on finetuning. They will both map the images of the subject
into a special prompt token S ∗ during the finetuning process. The difference between them is that
TI finetunes the prompt embedding and DreamBooth finetunes the U-Net model. Several concurrent
works (Chen et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023; Jia et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2023a) propose
to conduct subject-driven text-to-image generation without finetuning, which largely reduces the
computational cost. They generally rely on additional modules trained on additional new datasets,
like the visual encoder in Wei et al. (2023), Shi et al. (2023) to directly map the image of the new
subject to the textual space. However, all the existing methods learn the subject embedding in a
highly entangled manner, which will easily cause the generated image to have a changed subject
identity or to be inconsistent with the text prompt. Although some works (Wei et al., 2023; Dong
et al., 2022) use the segmentation mask to exclude the influence of the background, there are some
other identity-irrelevant factors that these methods fail to tackle, such as the pose of the subject as
shown in row 1 column 2 of Figure 1. Additionally, these methods rely on an additional segmentation
model or user-labeled mask, our method is free of additional annotations.

3    P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we will introduce the preliminaries about Stable Diffusion and subject-driven text-
to-image generation, and also some notations we will use in this paper.
Stable Diffusion Models. The Stable Diffusion model is a large text-to-image model pretrained on
large-scale text-image pairs {(P, x)}, where P is the text prompt of the image x. Stable Diffusion
contains an autoencoder (E(·), D(·)), a CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) text encoder ET (·), and a U-
Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) based conditional diffusion model ϵθ (·). Specifically, the encoder
E(·) is used to transform the input image x into the latent space z = E(x), and the decoder D(·) is
used to reconstruct the input image from the latent z, x ≈ D(z). The diffusion denoising process of
Stable Diffusion is conducted in the latent space. With a randomly sampled noise ϵ ∼ N (0, I) and
the time step t, we can get a noisy latent code zt = αt z + σt ϵ, where αt and σt are the coefficients
that control the noise schedule. Then the conditional diffusion model ϵθ will be trained with the
following objective for denoising (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020):
                                min EP,z,ϵ,t [||ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, ET (P ))||22 ].                       (1)
The goal of the conditional model ϵθ (·) in Eq.(1) is to predict the noise by taking the noisy latent zt ,
the text conditional embedding obtained by ET (P ), and the time step t as input.
Finetuning for Subject-Driven Text-to-Image Generation. Denote the small set of images of the
specific subject s as Cs = {xi }K i=1 , where xi means the i
                                                             th
                                                                image and K is the image number,
usually 3 to 5. Previous works (Gal et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2022; Kumari et al., 2022) will bind
a special text token Ps , e.g., “a S ∗ backpack” in Figure 1, to the subject s, with the following
finetuning objective:
                          min Ez=E(x),x∼Cs ,ϵ,t [||ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, ET (Ps ))||22 ].                   (2)
Different methods use the objective in Eq. (2) to finetune different parameters, e.g., Dream-
Booth (Ruiz et al., 2022) will finetune the U-Net model ϵθ (·), while TI (Gal et al., 2022) finetunes
the embedding of Ps in the CLIP text encoder ET (·). DreamBooth finetunes more parameters than
TI and achieves better subject-driven text-to-image generation ability. However, these methods bind
Ps to several images {xi }, making the textual embedding ET (Ps ) inevitably entangled with infor-
mation irrelevant to the subject identity, which will impair the generation results.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To tackle the problem, in this paper, we propose DisenBooth, an identity-preserving disentangled
tuning framework for subject-driven text-to-image generation, whose framework is presented in Fig-
ure 2. DisenBooth utilizes the textual embedding ET (Ps ) and a visual embedding to denoise each
image. Then, with our proposed two disentangled objectives, the text embedding ET (Ps ) can pre-
serve the identity-relevant information and the visual embedding can capture the identity-irrelevant
information. During generation, by combining Ps with other text descriptions, DisenBooth can gen-
erate images that conform to the text while preserving the identity. DisenBooth can also generate
images that preserve some characteristics of the input images by combining the textual identity-
preserved embedding and the visual identity-irrelevant embedding, which provides a more flexible
and controllable generation. Next, we will describe how DisenBooth obtains the disentangled em-
beddings, how DisenBooth finetunes the model with the designed disentangled auxiliary objectives,
and then how it conducts subject-driven text-to-image generation with the finetuned model.

4     T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD : D ISEN B OOTH
4.1   T HE I DENTITY-P RESERVED AND I DENTITY-I RRELEVANT E MBEDDINGS

DisenBooth will use a textual embedding to preserve the identity-relevant information and a visual
embedding to capture the identity-irrelevant information. Then, a better subject-driven text-to-image
generation can be conducted with the textual identity-preserved embedding.
The Identity-Preserved Embedding. We obtain the identity-preserved embedding fs shared by
{xi } through the Identity-Preserving Branch as shown in Figure 2, where we want to map the iden-
tity of subject s to a special text token Ps . Then the textual identity-preserved embedding can be
obtained through the CLIP text encoder,
                                                 fs = ET (Ps ).                                     (3)
The Identity-Irrelevant Embedding. To extract the identity-irrelevant embedding of each image
xi , we design an Identity-Irrelevant Branch in Figure 2, where the pretrained CLIP image encoder
                                                    (p)
EI is adopted, and we can first obtain a feature fi = EI (xi ). However, this feature obtained from
the pretrained image encoder may contain the identity information, while we only need the identity-
                                                                                        (p)
irrelevant information in this embedding. To filter out the identity information from fi , we design
a learnable mask M with the same dimension as the feature, whose element values belong to (0,1),
                                                                                            (p)
to filter out the identity-relevant information. Therefore, we obtain a masked feature M ∗fi , by the
element-wise product between the mask and the pretrained feature. Additionally, considering that
during the Stable Diffusion pretraining stage, the text encoder is jointly pretrained with the U-Net,
while the image encoder is not jointly trained, we use the MLP with skip connection to transform
        (p)
M ∗ fi into the same space as the text feature fs as follows,
                                       (p)                      (p)
                          fi = M ∗ fi        + MLP(M ∗ fi ), i = 1, 2, · · · , K,                   (4)
and in Figure 2, we denote the skip connection with the mask as the Adapter.

4.2   T UNING WITH D ISENTANGLED O BJECTIVES

With the above extracted identity-preserved and identity-irrelevant embeddings, we can conduct the
finetuning with a similar denoising objective in Eq. (2) on the K images in Cs ,
                                        K
                                        X
                                L1 =          ||ϵi − ϵθ (zi,ti , ti , fi + fs )||22 .               (5)
                                        i=1

As shown in Figure 2, ϵi is the randomly sampled noise for the ith image, ti is the randomly sampled
time step for the ith image, and zi,ti is the noisy latent of image xi obtained by zi,ti = αti E(xi ) +
σti ϵi as mentioned in Sec. 3. This objective means that we will use the sum of the identity-preserved
embedding and the identity-irrelevant embedding as the condition to denoise each image. Since each
image has an image-specific identity-irrelevant embedding, fs does not have to restore the identity-
irrelevant information. Additionally, considering that fs is shared when denoising all the images, it
will tend to capture the common information of the images, i.e., the subject identity. However, only
utilizing Eq. (5) to denoise may cause a trivial solution, where the visual embedding fi captures all


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the information of image xi , including the identity-relevant information and the identity-irrelevant
information, while the shared embedding fs becomes a meaningless conditional vector. To avoid
this trivial solution, we introduce the following two auxiliary disentangled objectives.
Weak Denoising Objective. Since we expect that fs can capture the identity-relevant information
instead of becoming a meaningless vector, fs should have the ability of denoising the common part
of the images. Therefore, we add the following objective:
                                            K
                                            X
                                  L2 = λ2         ||ϵi − ϵθ (zi,ti , ti , fs )||22 .                  (6)
                                            i=1

In this objective, we expect only with the identity-preserved embedding, the model can also denoise
each image. Note that we add a hyper-parameter λ2 < 1 for this denoising objective, because we do
not need fs to precisely denoise each image, or fs will again contain the identity-irrelevant infor-
mation. Combining this objective and the objective in Eq. (5) together, we can regard the process in
Eq. (5) as a precise denoising process, and regard the process in Eq. (6) as a weak denoising process.
The precise denoising process with fs + fi as the condition should denoise both the subject identity
and some irrelevant information such as the background, while the weak denoising process with fs
as the condition only needs to denoise the subject identity, so it requires a smaller regularization
weight λ2 < 1. We use λ2 = 0.01 for all our experiments.
Contrastive Embedding Objective. Since we expect fs and fi to capture disentangled information
of the image xi , the embeddings fs and fi should be contrastive and their similarities are expected
to be low. Therefore, we add the contrastive embedding objective as follows,
                                                     K
                                                     X
                                        L3 = λ3             cos(fs , fi ).                            (7)
                                                     i=1

Minimizing the cosine similarity between fs and fi will make them less similar to each other, thus
easier to capture the disentangled identity-relevant and identity-irrelevant information of xi . λ3 is
a hyper-parameter which is set to 0.001 for all our experiments. Therefore, the disentangled tuning
objective of DisenBooth is the sum of the above three parts:
                                          L = L1 + L2 + L3 .                                          (8)

Parameters to Finetune. In previous works, DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2022) finetunes the whole
U-Net model and achieves better subject-driven text-to-image generation performance. However,
DreamBooth requires higher computational and memory cost during finetuning. To reduce the cost
while still maintaining the generation ability, we borrow the idea of LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) to
conduct parameter-efficient finetuning. Specifically, for each pretrained weight matrix W0 ∈ Rd×k
in the U-Net ϵθ (·), LoRA inserts a low-rank decomposition to it, W0 ← W0 + BA, where B ∈
Rd×r , A ∈ Rr×k , r ≪ min(d, k). A is initialized as Gaussian and B is initialized as 0, and during
finetuning, only B and A are learnable, while W0 is fixed. Therefore, the parameters to finetune are
largely reduced from d × k to (d + k) × r. Parameters for DisenBooth contain the parameters in the
previous adapter and the LoRA parameters in the U-Net, as shown in the yellow block in Figure 2.

4.3   M ORE F LEXIBLE AND C ONTROLLABLE G ENERATION

After the above finetuning process, DisenBooth binds the identity of the subject s to the text prompt
Ps , e.g., “a S ∗ backpack”. When generating new images of subject s, we can combine other text
descriptions with Ps to obtain the new text prompt Ps′ , e.g., “a S ∗ backpack on the beach”. Then, the
CLIP text encoder will transform it to its text embedding fs′ = ET (Ps′ ). With fs′ as the condition, the
U-Net model can denoise a randomly sampled Gaussian noise to an image that conforms to Ps′ while
preserving the identity of s. Moreover, if we want the generated image to inherit some characteristics
of one of the input images xi , e.g., the pose, we can obtain its visual identity-irrelevant embedding
fi through the image encoder and the finetuned adapter, and then, use fs′ + ηfi as the condition of
the U-Net model. Finally, the generated image will inherit the characteristic of the reference image
xi , and η is a hyper-parameter that can be defined by the user to decide how many characteristics
can be inherited. DisenBooth not only enables the user to control the generated image by the text,
but also by the preferred reference images in the small set, which is more flexible and controllable.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                             ∗
                                                “ a S ∗ can     “ a S ∗ can on the   “ a S ∗ can on a “ a S ∗ can on top “a S can on top of
                                                                                                                          green grass with    “ a red S ∗ can ” “ a cube shaped
             input images                     in the forest ”         beach”          cobblestone       of pink fabric”                                              S ∗ can”
                                                                                         street”                        sunflowers around it”



                            InstructPix2Pix


                                  TI


                             DreamBooth


                             DisenBooth


      Figure 3: Generated images of the can given different text prompts with different methods.


5       E XPERIMENTS
5.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Dataset. We adopt the subject-driven text-to-image generation dataset DreamBench proposed
by Ruiz et al. (2022), which are downloaded from Unsplash2 . This dataset contains 30 subjects,
including unique objects like backpacks, stuffed animals, cats, etc. For each subject, there are 25
text prompts, which contain recontextualization, property modification, accessorization, etc. To-
tally, there are 750 unique prompts, and we follow Ruiz et al. (2022) to generate 4 images for each
prompt, and total 3,000 images for robust evaluation.
Evaluation Metrics. (i) The first aspect is the subject fidelity, i.e., whether the generated image
has the same subject as the input images. To evaluate the subject fidelity, we adopt the DINO score
proposed by Ruiz et al. (2022), i.e., the average pairwise cosine similarity between the ViT-S/16
DINO embeddings of the generated images and the input real images. A higher DINO score means
that the generated images have higher similarity to the input images, but may risk overfitting the
identity-irrelevant information. (ii) The second is the text prompt fidelity, i.e., whether the generated
images conform to the text prompts, which is evaluated by the average cosine similarity between the
text prompt and image CLIP embeddings. This metric is denoted as CLIP-T (Gal et al., 2022; Ruiz
et al., 2022). Besides these two metrics, we also use human evaluation to compare our proposed
method and baselines. Specifically, we asked 40 users to rank different methods in their identity-
preserving ability, with randomly sampled 15 unique prompts for each user, and we denote the
average rank of the 600 ranks as Identity Avg. Rank. Additionally, we asked another 30 users to
rank the generated images in the overall performance of the subject-driven text-to-image generation
ability, i.e., jointly considering whether the generated images have the same subject as the input
images and whether they are consistent with the text prompts. With randomly sampled 30 unique
prompts for each user, we finally obtain 900 ranks, and denote this rank as Overall Avg. Rank.
Baselines. TI (Gal et al., 2022) and DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2022) are finetuning methods for
subject-driven text-to-image generation. InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2022) is a SOTA pretrained
method for text-guided text-to-image editing. We also include the pretrained Stable Diffusion
(SD) (Rombach et al., 2022) without finetuning as a reference model. We provide the detailed
implementation of DisenBooth in A.1.
5.2      C OMPARISON WITH BASELINES

The scores of different methods are shown in Table 1, and some visualized generated results are
shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4. More generated results can be found in the Appendix. From these
results, we have the following observations: (i) as the reference model, the pretrained SD has the
lowest DINO score and the highest CLIP-T score as expected. The pretrained SD is not customized
    2
        https://unsplash.com/.


                                                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            input image      TI       InstructPix2Pix Dreambooth DisenBooth            TI      InstructPix2Pix Dreambooth DisenBooth


                                         “ a cube shaped S* can ”                           “ a S* can is in the hand of a girl”


                               “ a purple S* dog is running under the starry            “ a S* dog is playing with a boy in the water”
                                         sky with a bright moon”


                          “ a S* dog is playing with a butterfly in the red flowers”    “ a S* dog is running beside an airplane”



                            Figure 4: Generated examples of different subjects.


for the subject, thus having the lowest image similarity, but it has the highest CLIP-T score because
it does not overfit the input images. (ii) The image editing method InstructPix2Pix is not very suit-
able for the subject-driven text-to-image generation, which has the lowest CLIP-T, i.e., the lowest
text prompt fidelity, because it cannot support the complex subject transformations. (iii) TI has a
weaker ability to maintain the subject identity and a lower prompt fidelity than DreamBooth and
DisenBooth. (iv) DreamBooth has the highest DINO score, which means that the generated images
are very similar to the input images. However, as observed in the generated images, this too high
DINO score results from overfitting the identity-irrelevant information, e.g., in Figure 3, the gener-
ated images by DreamBooth have a similar background to the last input image, making the prompts
like “on the beach” and “on top of pink fabric” ignored. (v) In contrast, our DisenBooth achieves
the highest CLIP-T score except the reference model, and generates images that conform to the
text prompts while preserving the subject identity. Considering the images generated by our Disen-
Booth have very different backgrounds from the input images, it has a little lower DINO score than
DreamBooth, but it receives a higher Identity Avg. Rank from users, showing its superior ability
in preserving the subject identity instead of overfitting the identity-irrelevant information. Addi-
tionally, the Overall Avg. Rank collected from the users demonstrates that DisenBooth outperforms
existing methods in subject-driven text-to-image generation. We also provide more visualizations in
the Appendix, which further shows the superiority of DisenBooth.

Table 1: DINO, CLIP-T, and the user preferences of different methods on DreamBench. Except the
referenced model pretrained SD, we bold the method with the best performance w.r.t. each metric.
                                  pretrained SD                 InstructPix2Pix           TI           DreamBooth                   DisenBooth
      DINO Score↑                     0.362                          0.605              0.546             0.685                        0.675
      CLIP-T Score↑                   0.352                          0.303              0.318             0.319                        0.330
      Identity Avg. Rank↓                -                            2.69               3.73              2.20                        1.37
      Overall Avg. Rank↓                 -                            2.89               3.07              2.45                        1.59

5.3     A BLATION S TUDY

Disentanglement. In our design, the textual embedding fs obtained through the special text prompt
Ps aims to preserve the subject identity, and the visual embedding fi aims to capture the identity-
irrelevant information. We verify the relationship in Figure 5. In each row, we generate identity-
relevant images only using fs as the U-Net condition with 4 random seeds. Then, we generate
identity-irrelevant images using fi as the U-Net condition. The results show that DisenBooth can
faithfully disentangle the identity-relevant and the identity-irrelevant information. Additionally, in
the second row, we can see that the identity-irrelevant information not only contains the background,
but also the pose of the dog, which is described with the pose of a human by Stable Diffusion. The
disentanglement explains why our DisenBooth outperforms current methods. The shared textual
embedding only contains the information about the subject identity, making generating new back-
ground, pose or property easier and resulting in better generation results.
More Flexible and Controllable Generation with fi . As aforementioned, if we want to inherit
some characteristics of the input image xi , we can add the visual embedding fi to fs′ with a user-
defined weight η, i.e., the condition is fs′ + ηfi . In Figure 6, with the same text prompt “a S ∗ dog on


                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



     Input images   Identity-relevant Visualization           Identity-irrelevant Visualization


Figure 5: Visualization for disentanglement. The identity-relevant images are generated using
the text prompt Ps . The identity-irrelevant images are generated with the image-specific identity-
irrelevant embedding fi . All generations are with 4 random seeds.

                          “a 𝑆 ∗ dog on the Great Wall”


                                                                                             input image 𝑥𝑖          “a cat” + 𝑓𝑖         “a bird” + 𝑓𝑖


                          𝜂 increases from 0.0 to 0.8         reference image 𝑥𝑖                  input image 𝑥𝑖   “a white cat” + 𝑓𝑖 “a colorful umbrella” + 𝑓𝑖



Figure 6: Generating images with different reference images with Figure 7: Generating other ob-
different η.                                                     jects with characteristics of fi .


the Great Wall” to obtain fs′ , we select two different images of the dog to obtain fi , and the weight
η is changed linearly from 0.0 to 0.8. The results show that with larger η, the generated image
will be more similar to the reference image. With a relatively small η, the generated image can
simultaneously conform to the text and inherit some reference image characteristics, which gives
a more flexible and controllable generation. However, as η becomes large, the text prompt will be
ignored and the generated image will be the same as the reference image. This phenomenon means
the identity-irrelevant part will impair the subject-driven text-to-image generation, which inspires
us to disentangle the tuning process. Additionally, we can also use fi to generate other images
that have the characteristics of the identity-irrelevant information of xi . In Figure 7, we use fi to
generate other objects, such as “a cat”. We can see that the generated image inherits the pose and
the background of the input image, which further shows the flexibility of our DisenBooth.
We provide more ablation in the Appendix, the effectiveness validation of the disentangled loss
in A.2, the mask in A.3, etc., in both qualitative and quantitative ways.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose DisenBooth for subject-driven text-to-image generation. Different from
existing methods which learn an entangled embedding for the subject, DisenBooth will use an
identity-preserved embedding and several identity-irrelevant embeddings for all the images in the
finetuning process. During generation, with the identity-preserved embedding, DisenBooth can
generate images that simultaneously preserve the subject identity and conform to the text descrip-
tions. Additionally, DisenBooth shows superior subject-driven text-to-image generation ability and
can serve as a more flexible and controllable framework.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China No.
2023YFF1205001, National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62250008, 62222209,
62102222), Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology under Grant
No. BNR2023RC01003, BNR2023TD03006, and Beijing Key Lab of Networked Multimedia.

R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 18208–18218, 2022.

Omri Avrahami, Kfir Aberman, Ohad Fried, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski. Break-a-scene:
 Extracting multiple concepts from a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16311, 2023.

Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-
 driven layered image and video editing. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Con-
 ference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XV, pp. 707–723. Springer,
 2022.

Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09800, 2022.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, AJ Maschinot, Jose Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan
  Yang, Kevin Murphy, William T Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, et al. Muse: Text-to-image gen-
  eration via masked generative transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00704, 2023.

Hong Chen, Yudong Chen, Xin Wang, Ruobing Xie, Rui Wang, Feng Xia, and Wenwu Zhu. Curricu-
  lum disentangled recommendation with noisy multi-feedback. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:26924–26936, 2021.

Wenhu Chen, Hexiang Hu, Yandong Li, Nataniel Rui, Xuhui Jia, Ming-Wei Chang, and William W
 Cohen. Subject-driven text-to-image generation via apprenticeship learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.00186, 2023.

Ziyi Dong, Pengxu Wei, and Liang Lin. Dreamartist: Towards controllable one-shot text-to-image
  generation via contrastive prompt-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11337, 2022.

Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.

Rinon Gal, Moab Arar, Yuval Atzmon, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-
  Or. Designing an encoder for fast personalization of text-to-image models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.12228, 2023a.

Rinon Gal, Moab Arar, Yuval Atzmon, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
  Encoder-based domain tuning for fast personalization of text-to-image models. ACM Transac-
  tions on Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–13, 2023b.

Abel Gonzalez-Garcia, Joost van de Weijer, and Yoshua Bengio. Image-to-image translation for
  cross-domain disentanglement. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.

Ligong Han, Yinxiao Li, Han Zhang, Peyman Milanfar, Dimitris Metaxas, and Feng Yang. Svdiff:
  Compact parameter space for diffusion fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11305, 2023.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. International Conference on Learn-
 ing Representations, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Edward J Hu, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Xuhui Jia, Yang Zhao, Kelvin CK Chan, Yandong Li, Han Zhang, Boqing Gong, Tingbo Hou,
  Huisheng Wang, and Yu-Chuan Su. Taming encoder for zero fine-tuning image customization
  with text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02642, 2023.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri,
  and Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.09276, 2022.
Gwanghyun Kim, Taesung Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusionclip: Text-guided diffusion models
 for robust image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2426–2435, 2022.
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04488, 2022.
Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Jia-Bin Huang, Maneesh Singh, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diverse
  image-to-image translation via disentangled representations. In Proceedings of the European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), September 2018.
Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Philip HS Torr. Manigan: Text-guided image
  manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 7880–7889, 2020.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2018.
Yiyang Ma, Huan Yang, Wenjing Wang, Jianlong Fu, and Jiaying Liu. Unified multi-modal
  latent diffusion for joint subject and text conditional image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.09319, 2023.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations.
Alexander Quinn Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob
  Mcgrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and
  editing with text-guided diffusion models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  16784–16804. PMLR, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2208.12242, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Jing Shi, Wei Xiong, Zhe Lin, and Hyun Joon Jung. Instantbooth: Personalized text-to-image
   generation without test-time finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03411, 2023.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Xin Wang, Hong Chen, and Wenwu Zhu. Multimodal disentangled representation for recommenda-
  tion. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME), pp. 1–6. IEEE,
  2021.
Xin Wang, Hong Chen, Si’ao Tang, Zihao Wu, and Wenwu Zhu. Disentangled representation learn-
  ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11695, 2022.
Xin Wang, Zirui Pan, Yuwei Zhou, Hong Chen, Chendi Ge, and Wenwu Zhu. Curriculum co-
  disentangled representation learning across multiple environments for social recommendation. In
  International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2023.
Yuxiang Wei, Yabo Zhang, Zhilong Ji, Jinfeng Bai, Lei Zhang, and Wangmeng Zuo. Elite: Encoding
  visual concepts into textual embeddings for customized text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.13848, 2023.
Tao Xu, Pengchuan Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Han Zhang, Zhe Gan, Xiaolei Huang, and Xiaodong
  He. Attngan: Fine-grained text to image generation with attentional generative adversarial net-
  works. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  1316–1324, 2018.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.
Zeyang Zhang, Xin Wang, Ziwei Zhang, Haoyang Li, Zhou Qin, and Wenwu Zhu. Dynamic graph
  neural networks under spatio-temporal distribution shift. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Zeyang Zhang, Xin Wang, Ziwei Zhang, Zhou Qin, Weigao Wen, Hui Xue, Haoyang Li, and Wenwu
  Zhu. Spectral invariant learning for dynamic graphs under distribution shifts. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAIL

We implement DisenBooth based on the Stable Diffusion 2-1 (Rombach et al., 2022). The learning
rate is 1e-4 with the AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018) optimizer. The finetuning process is
conducted on one Tesla V100 with batch size of 1, while the finetuning iterations are ∼3,000. As
for the LoRA rank, we use r = 4 for all the experiments. The MLP used in the adapter is 2-layer
with ReLU as the activation function. The LoRA and adapter make the parameters to finetune about
2.9M , which is small compared to the whole 865.9M U-Net parameters. Additionally, the special
token Ps we use to obtain the identity-preserved embedding is the same as that of (Ruiz et al., 2022),
i.e., “a + S ∗ + class”, where S ∗ is a rare token and class is the class of the subject. When comparing
with the baselines, we only use the textual embedding fs′ mentioned in Sec. 4.3 as the condition.

A.2   T HE E FFECTIVENESS OF THE D ISENTANGLED O BJECTIVES .

We validate the effectiveness of the proposed two disentangled objectives in Table 2, on half of
the DreamBench dataset. We can see that without the weak denoising objective (L2), the DINO
score will decrease, which means the subject identity cannot be well preserved. The contrastive
embedding objective (L3) can further improve the DINO score and the CLIP-T. We also provide the
generated images of the variants in Figure 8, which are consistent with the quantitative results. It
can be seen that without the weak denoising objective, the subject identity cannot be well-preserved,
e.g., as circled out, the input images have 3 logos but the generated images with this variant have
fewer. Without the contrastive embedding objective which makes the textual identity-preserved em-
bedding contain different information from the visual identity-irrelevant embedding, the identity of
the subject will be changed when the prompt is “in the white flowers” in row 2 column 3. Addition-
ally, in row 2, the generated images seem to have the same angle, which may be entangled in the
shared identity-preserved embedding.

                         w/o weak(L2)       w/o contrast(L3)     w/o both     DisenBooth
             DINO↑           0.684               0.689            0.683          0.693
            CLIP-T↑          0.329               0.328            0.331          0.331

                       Table 2: Ablations about the disentangled objectives.


A.3   A BLATIONS ABOUT THE M ASK

We use a learnable vector M to act as a mask to filter out the identity-relevant information. We
compare the performance of our method with and without the mask on half of DreamBench, and
the results are shown in Table 3. We can see that without the mask, the DINO score will degrade

                                             w/o mask      DisenBooth
                                 DINO↑         0.673          0.693
                                CLIP-T↑        0.330          0.331

                            Table 3: Ablations about the learnable mask.
significantly. Considering that the mask is used to filter out the identity information, without the
mask, the visual branch will also include some identity information, which may cause the text branch
to capture less subject identity information, thus resulting in a low DINO score. We also conduct
disentanglement visualization about the mask in Figure 9, where we use the learned fs to generate
4 identity-relevant images about the subject, and use fi to generate 4 identity-irrelevant images. It
can be seen that without the mask, the subject identity cannot be well preserved (e.g., in the identity-
relevant images of w/o mask, the color and the logos are different from the input image) and the
identity-irrelevant feature will contain identity information (e.g., the identity-irrelevant images of
w/o mask will contain the backpack color).
Comparison between the feature-level mask or pixel-level mask. In our proposed method, we
apply a learnable mask in the adapter to conduct feature selection. A natural question is whether


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   “a 𝑆 ∗ backpack under   “a 𝑆 ∗ backpack in the      “a 𝑆 ∗ backpack in     “a 𝑆 ∗ backpack
                       the starry sky”             forest”            the white flowers”    beside the blue river”



      w/o weak
       denoise


        w/o
     contrastive
     embedding


        w/o
        both


                                                                                                                               Input images


    DisenBooth


                      Figure 8: The effectiveness of the disentangled auxiliary objectives.


   input image                                  identity-relevant                                               identity-irrelevant


                                   DisenBooth                       w/o mask                       DisenBooth                         w/o mask



Figure 9: Disentanglement comparison between with and without the mask. Identity-relevant im-
ages are generated with the text prompt with 4 random seeds. Identity-irrelevant images are gen-
erated with the image-specific identity-irrelevant embedding. The results show that mask M can
prevent the identity information into the identity-irrelevant feature, e.g., the red color.


                                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         DreamBooth      Pixel Mask   DisenBooth
                         DINO               0.671           0.666        0.666
                        CLIP-T              0.321           0.327        0.336

      Table 4: Comparison between using pixel-level masks or learnable feature-level masks.

           Subject images                        Pixel-level              Feature-level


                             Identity-
                            irrelevant


                             Identity-
                            irrelevant


Figure 10: The generated identity-irrelevant image comparison between using the pixel-level mask
and feature-level mask.


we can use an explicit pixel-level mask before the image encoding. We compare the results of
using pixel-level masks and feature-level masks on 10 subjects in Table 4. We can see that both
applying pixel-level masks (Pixel Mask) and feature-level masks (DisenBooth) can improve the
CLIP-T score compared to DreamBooth, alleviating overfitting the identity-irrelevant information
problem. However, it shows that applying the feature-level mask brings better performance. The
reasons are as follows:

       • Masks at the feature level filter information at the semantic level instead of the pixel level,
         enabling it to capture more identity-irrelevant factors such as the pose or position of the
         subject. Therefore, the identity-preserving branch does not have to overfit these factors,
         thus achieving a better CLIP-T score and better text fidelity. However, using the masks on
         the pixels can only disentangle the foreground and the background, ignoring other identity-
         irrelevant factors such as pose.
       • The mask at the feature level is learnable and jointly optimized in the finetuning process,
         while adding an explicit mask to the image is a two-stage process, whose performance will
         be a little worse.

In Figure 10, we use the identity-irrelevant features extracted with the feature-level mask and the
pixel-level mask to generate images. We can see that when the subject is the dog, the pixel-level
mask can only learn the background information of the input subject image. In contrast, our feature-
level mask can not only learn the background, but also the pose and the position of the dog, repre-
senting it with a human. The qualitative results are consistent with our previous analysis.

A.4   T UNING WITH 1 I MAGE

We compare different methods when there is only 1 image for finetuning for each subject, on 1/3
of the DreamBench dataset. The average quantitative results are presented in Table 5. We can see
that our proposed method achieves both the best image and text fidelity, which further shows the
superiority of our proposed method in this scenario.
Additionally, we also try to explore whether our method can disentangle the identity-relevant and
identity-irrelevant information under this 1-image setting. The corresponding results are presented in
Figure 11. We can see that, under the 1-image finetuning setting, the identity-relevant and identity-
irrelevant information can still be disentangled by our method. For example, in the first subject
customization, we can disentangle the beach and the duck toy. In the fourth example, we can disen-
tangle the cat, and its background and pose.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               pretrain SD          Pix2Pix          TI      DreamBooth        DisenBooth
                     DINO         0.352              0.613          0.538       0.610             0.617
                    CLIP-T        0.351              0.302          0.288       0.297             0.321

Table 5: Comparison among different methods when tuning with only 1 image for each subject.
Except for the reference pretrain SD baseline, we bold the method with the best performance.
      Input Image        Identity-relevant   Identity-irrelevant        Input Image   Identity-relevant   Identity-irrelevant


   Figure 11: The disentanglement achieved by DisenBooth using only 1 image for finetuning.


A.5      I NFLUENCE OF FINETUNING TEXT ENCODER

We also try to explore the influence of finetuning the CLIP text encoder, where we both finetune
the text encoder of DreamBooth and our DisenBooth on 20 subjects in DreamBench. We report
the average quantitative results in Table 6. We can see that finetuning the text encoder for both
DreamBooth and DisenBooth will increase their DINO score, which means the generated images
will be more similar to the input images. However, they suffer a significant CLIP-T drop, which
means they overfit the input images while ignoring the given textual prompts. Therefore, finetuning
the text encoder will result in more overfitting, but it can be also seen that DisenBooth can alleviate
the overfitting problem with a clear margin, whether training the text encoder or not. We also provide
the corresponding qualitative comparison in Figure 12, which is consistent with the quantitative
results.

A.6      C OMPARE WITH MORE BASELINES

In our main manuscript, we compare DisenBooth mainly with the finetuning method for subject
customization. Here, we compare our method with the following more baselines on DreamBench.
CustomDiffusion (short as Custom) Kumari et al. (2022) proposes to only finetune the parameters
in the attention layers of the U-Net. SVDiff Han et al. (2023) decomposes the parameters with SVD
and only finetunes the corresponding singular values. Break-A-Scene Avrahami et al. (2023) focuses
on the scenario where one image may contain several subjects and can customize each subject in the
image. ELITE Wei et al. (2023) trains an image-to-text encoder to directly customize each image
without further finetuning. E4T Gal et al. (2023b) proposes to train an encoder for each domain and
then only very few steps of finetuning are needed for customization.
The corresponding quantitative comparison is presented in Table 7, and the results show that our
proposed DisenBooth has a better subject-driven text-to-image generation ability than all the base-
lines. Note that E4T is a pretrained method and its open-source version is only for human subjects,


                             DreamBooth         DreamBooth+text              DisenBooth      DisenBooth+text
           DINO↑                0.703                0.728                      0.694             0.719
          CLIP-T↑               0.322                0.286                      0.333             0.301

Table 6: The influence of finetuning the CLIP text encoder. “+text” means the version of finetuning
the text encoder.


                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Input Images         DisenBooth        DisenBooth+text                DreamBooth           DreamBooth+text


                                                    “A 𝑆 ∗ backpack on the beach”


                                            “A 𝑆 ∗ backpack with mountains in the background”


                                                         “A red 𝑆 ∗ backpack”


                    Figure 12: The influence of finetuning the CLIP text encoder.

                    Custom     SVDiff       Break-A-Scene             E4T          ELITE        DisenBooth
        DINO         0.675      0.668           0.639                 0.241         0.606          0.675
       CLIP-T        0.314      0.318           0.313                 0.262         0.291          0.330

                     Table 7: Comparison with more baselines on DreamBench.


which faces a severe out-of-domain problem and cannot achieve satisfying performance on Dream-
Bench. This phenomenon also indicates that although there are some non-finetuning methods for
fast customization, effective finetuning to adapt to new out-of-domain concepts is still important.
We also provide qualitative comparisons with the baselines in Figure 13, which further demonstrates
the superiority of our method.

 Input image         Custom        SVDiff        Break-A-Scene            E4T               ELITE       DisenBooth


                                              “ A 𝑆 ∗ backpack on top of pink fabric ”


                                                     “ A 𝑆 ∗ bowl on the beach ”


                                              “ A 𝑆 ∗ dog with cities in the background ”


                      Figure 13: Qualitative comparison with more baselines.



                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7   H YPER - PARAMETERS

There are 2 hyper-parameters in our method, one is the weight of the weak denoising loss, λ2 , and
the other is the weight of the contrastive embedding loss, λ3 . We use different values of λ2 and
λ3 to tune the model on the “berry bowl” subject. The results are reported in Table 8 and Table 9.
We can see from the results that increasing λ2 will make the identity-relevant embedding contain
more input image information, which will result in a high DINO score, but faces the problem of
overfitting and a low CLIP-T score. Also, increasing λ3 will make the embedding disentangled and
improve performance, but a too large value like 0.1 will make this objective dominate the optimiza-
tion process, which will harm the denoising process, and result in a low DINO score and CLIP-T
score. Empirically, setting these two parameters to 0.001-0.01 will be OK.

                               λ2         0.0     0.001     0.01     0.1
                              DINO       0.770    0.790    0.792    0.891
                             CLIP-T      0.259    0.267    0.274    0.207

                            Table 8: Hyper-parameter experiments on λ2

                               λ3         0.0     0.001     0.01     0.1
                              DINO       0.777    0.792    0.797    0.749
                             CLIP-T      0.264    0.274    0.265    0.255

                            Table 9: Hyper-parameter experiments on λ3


A.8   C USTOMIZING MULTIPLE SUBJECTS IN A SCENE

We also try to explore whether our DisenBooth can be used when there are multiple subjects in a
scene, and the example is shown in Figure 14. As shown on the left of the figure, we first prepare
two images for the two subjects, i.e., the duck toy and the cup in the figure, and we want to generate
subject-driven images for the two subjects. During disentangled finetuning, most finetuning tech-
niques are the same, except that we will change the input text prompt to “a S ∗ toy and a V ∗ cup”,
which contains the two subjects we are interested in. In the middle and right of the figure, we present
the generation results. In the middle, we send the input images to the identity-irrelevant branch to
obtain identity-irrelevant features, and generate images using the features with two random seeds.
We can see that the generated identity-irrelevant images indeed contain the identity-irrelevant in-
formation. On the right, we provide the subject-driven generation results. The first column is the
images containing both subjects, where we use “a S ∗ toy and a V ∗ cup on the snowy mountain/on
the cobblestone street” as the prompt. The second column and the third column are about a single
subject, where we use “a S ∗ toy on the snowy mountain/on the cobblestone street” and “a V ∗ cup
on the snowy mountain/on the cobblestone street”, respectively.
The preliminary exploration shows that our proposed method can provide overall satisfying genera-
tion results on the multi-subject scenario, showing its potential for broader applications. However,
looking carefully at the generated images, we can see that although overall the generated cup is
similar to the given cup, some visual texture details are a little different. The detail differences may
come from that since the identity-relevant branch needs to customize more subjects, and the pixels
for each subject become fewer, it is hard for the model to notice every detail of each subject. Beyond
the scope of this work, we believe customizing multiple subjects in a scene is an interesting topic
and there are more problems worth exploring in future works.

A.9   P ERFORMANCE ON NON - CENTER - LOCATED IMAGES

In the previous examples, we follow previous works Ruiz et al. (2022) to use clear and center-located
images of the subject. We also try to see whether our method can still work when the subject only
covers fewer pixels and is not center-located. The results are shown in Figure 15. From the results,
we can see that the image encoder can still learn the identity-irrelevant information. With the text
description and text encoder, the subject can still be generated. Although the generated subject is
similar to the given subject, the very few pixels of the subject make it hard to precisely preserve the


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


𝑃𝑠 = “ A 𝑆 ∗ toy and a 𝑉 ∗ cup ”                                                    A 𝑆 ∗ toy and a 𝑉 ∗ cup      A 𝑆 ∗ toy            A 𝑉 ∗ cup


                                                                                                         on the snowy mountain


                                                                                                       on the cobble stone street
      Input Images                           Identity-irrelevant                                  Subject-Driven Generation Results

Figure 14: Preliminary exploration on customizing multiple subjects in a scene. The left are the
images used for the two subjects, and the text Ps to finetune them. In the middle, we present the
generated images using the identity-irrelevant feature as the condition, with two random seeds. On
the right, we provide the subject-driven text-to-image generation results, where in the first column
we generate images about two subjects with “a S ∗ toy and a V ∗ cup”, in the second column we
generate images about the duck toy with “a S ∗ toy”, and in the third column we generate images
about the cup with the prompt “a V ∗ cup”.


details, especially for the second subject. A possible solution to tackle the problem in this scenario
is that we can first crop the image and then use a hyper-resolution network to get a clear image for
the subject, and then conduct finetuning with DisenBooth.

    Input Images         Identity-irrelevant Subject-driven Generation              Input Images       Identity-irrelevant   Subject-driven Generation


                                            A 𝑆 ∗ toy under the Eiffel Tower                                                   A 𝑆 ∗ toy on the beach


       A 𝑆 ∗ toy                              A 𝑆 ∗ toy on the Great Wall             A 𝑆 ∗ toy                              A 𝑆 ∗ toy in the Times Square



Figure 15: Generation results when the given subject is not located in the center of the image and
covers fewer pixels.


A.10         G ENERATION WITH H UMAN S UBJECTS

We also compare our proposed DisenBooth and baselines in generating human subjects. The quali-
tative results are shown in Figure 16, where we also indicate the used images for each method. For
the finetuning baseline TI and DreamBooth, we use 3 images, and E4T only needs a few steps of
finetuning with 1 image. ELITE can directly infer without finetuning. For our method, we provide
the finetuning results with both 1 image and 3 images. The results show that our method also has
clear advantage in both preserving the human identity and conforming to the textual prompt.

A.11         M ORE G ENERATION E XAMPLES ON D REAM B ENCH

More generation results of different methods on DreamBench are shown in Figure 17, Figure 18,
and Figure 19. Denoting the position of the first generated image of InstructPix2Pix as row 1 column
1, from the results, we can observe that:


                                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Input Image        TI      DreamBooth           ELITE                   E4T                        DisenBooth
                      3 images      3 images       Non-finetuning           1 image                 1 image        3 images


                                                     “A 𝑆 ∗ man under the Eiffel Tower”


                                                  “A 𝑆 ∗ man with ink painting style”


                                               “A 𝑆 ∗ woman in front of trees with autumn leaves”


                                                    “A 𝑆 ∗ woman under the Eiffel Tower”


                        Figure 16: Generation results with human subjects.


       • InstructPix2Pix is not suitable for subject-driven text-to-image generation. The generated
         pictures of InstructPix2Pix always have the same pose as the input images. Additionally, it
         does not have the idea of the subject, easily making the identity of the subject change. For
         example, in row 1 column 3 of Figure 17, the color of the backpack is changed to orange. In
         row 1 column 4 of Figure 18, the color of the can is changed to pink, and in row 1 column
         2 of Figure 19, the dog is changed to blue but in fact, we only need a blue house behind the
         original dog.
       • TI usually suffers severe identity change of the subject. For example, in Figure 17, the
         colors of the backpacks generated by TI are often different from the input images. In
         Figure 18, in column 3 and column 4 of row 2, the cans also have different identities from
         the input images.
       • DreamBooth suffers from overfitting the identity-irrelevant information in the input images.
         For example, in Figure 18, almost all the images of the generated cans have the same back-
         ground as the last input image, making it ignore the text prompts such as “on the beach”
         in row 3 column 2, and “on top of pink fabric” in row 3 column 4. Similar phenomenons
         are also observed in Figure 19, where “on top of a purple rug” in row 3 column 3 and “a
         purple S ∗ dog” in row 3 column 6 are also ignored.
       • DisenBooth shows satisfactory subject-driven text-to-image generation results, where the
         subject identity is preserved and the generated images also conform to the text descriptions.

A.12    G ENERATION WITH A NIME S UBJECTS

In previous examples, we finetune the subjects on DreamBench. We also use DisenBooth to fine-
tune on some anime characters, and the results are shown in Figure 20. The results show that our
DisenBooth works well for these anime subjects.

A.13    U SER S TUDY G UIDANCE

We include the guidance for the two user studies. The first one is for the user preference on which
method has the best ability to preserve the subject identity. Below is the detailed guidance.


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                             “a S ∗ backpack on top
          input images                      “ a S ∗ backpack   “ a S ∗ backpack on “ a S ∗ backpack on a “ a S ∗ backpack on of green grass with “ a S ∗ backpack on     “ a purple S ∗
                                             in the forest ”       the beach”      cobblestone street” top of pink fabric” sunflowers around it” top of a mirror”         backpack”


                         InstructPix2Pix


                               TI


                           DreamBooth


                           DisenBooth


Figure 17: Generated images of the backpack given different text prompts with different methods.


                                                                                                                             ∗
                                               “ a S ∗ can      “ a S ∗ can on the   “ a S ∗ can on a “ a S ∗ can on top “a S can on top of
                                                                                                                          green grass with    “ a red S ∗ can ” “ a cube shaped
          input images                       in the forest ”          beach”          cobblestone       of pink fabric”                                              S ∗ can”
                                                                                         street”                        sunflowers around it”



                          InstructPix2Pix


                                TI


                            DreamBooth


                            DisenBooth


   Figure 18: Generated images of the can given different text prompts with different methods.


                                              “ a S ∗ dog
                                                                                         ∗
                                                               “ a S ∗ dog in front “ a S dog on top        “ a S ∗ dog       “a S ∗ dog in a       “ a purple
         input images                                                                                       wearing a                                                  “ a wet S ∗ dog”
                                            in the jungle ”     of a blue house” of a purple rug in                           police outfit”          S ∗ dog ”
                                                                                       the forest”       rainbow scarf”



                         InstructPix2Pix


                               TI


                          DreamBooth


                          DisenBooth


   Figure 19: Generated images of the dog given different text prompts with different methods.



                                                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       input images of an anime girl      “a 𝑺∗ girl on the      “a 𝑺∗ girl on the    “a 𝑺∗ girl with        “a 𝑺∗ girl is    “a 𝑺∗ girl is flying on
                                             beach”               Great Wall”          red hair”          playing with a dog”
                                                                                                                            the sky with angel wings”


       input images of an anime girl      “a 𝑺∗ girl is in          “a 𝑺∗ girl is       “a 𝑺∗ girl is        “a 𝑺∗ girl with “a 𝑺∗ girl is playing
                                          the forest”             under the sakura     under the Eiffel     green clothes” with a dog in the snow”
                                                                      tree”               Tower”


       input images of an anime girl    “a 𝑺∗ girl with a city     “a 𝑺∗ girl is      “a 𝑺∗ girl is in     “a 𝑺∗ girl wearing    “a 𝑺∗ girl with the
                                        in the background”        on the beach”      the moonlight”       glasses with autumn    Eiffel Tower in the
                                                                                                                leaves”            background”


       input images of an anime girl      “a 𝑺∗ girl is on the “a 𝑺∗ girl is on     “a 𝑺∗ girl is             “a 𝑺∗ girl is      “a 𝑺∗ girl is under
                                       grass with sunflowers” the ship”         dancing in the forest”       wearing black        the Pyramid”
                                                                                                           sunglasses with red
                                                                                                                 hair”


                    Figure 20: DisenBooth generated examples on some anime subjects.


       • Read several reference images of the subject, and keep the subject in mind.
       • Rank the given four images. The image that has a more similar subject as the previously
         given reference images should be ranked top. If two or more images satisfy both require-
         ments, you can give the images with higher quality a top rank.
       • During ranking, identity-irrelevant factors like the background and pose should are not
         considered for similarity.

The second one is for the user preference on which method has the best subject-driven text-to-image
generation ability. Below is the detailed guidance.

       • Read several reference images of the subject, and keep the subject in mind.
       • Read the textual description carefully and then we will show several images generated with
         the textual description.
       • Rank the given four images. The image that has a more similar subject as the previously
         given reference images and conforms better to the text descriptions should be ranked top. If
         two or more images satisfy both requirements, you can give the images with higher quality
         a top rank.

A.14    L IMITATION D ISCUSSION

The limitations of DisenBooth lie in the following two aspects. The first one is that since our Dis-
enBooth is a finetuning method on pretrained Stable Diffusion, it inherits the limitations of the
pretrained Stable Diffusion. The second limitation is that since our proposed method does not re-
quire any additional supervision, it can only disentangle the subject identity and identity-irrelevant
information. How to conduct more fine-grained disentanglement in the identity-irrelevant informa-
tion, e.g., the pose, the background, and the image style, to achieve a more flexible and controllable
generation is worth exploring in the future.


                                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.15    OTHER RELATED WORKS

Disentangled Representation Learning Disentangled representation learning Wang et al. (2022)
aims to discover the explainable latent factors behind data, which has been applied in various fields
such as computer vision Lee et al. (2018); Gonzalez-Garcia et al. (2018), recommendation Wang
et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2023), and graph neural networks Zhang et al. (2023;
2022). Learning disentangled representations can not only help to improve the inference explain-
ability, but also makes the model more controllable. In this paper, since we primarily focus on the
subject, it is natural for us to disentangle the identity-relevant and identity-irrelevant information for
more controllable generation. Particularly, our learned disentangled representations are in a multi-
modal fashion, where the identity-relevant information is extracted from the text description and the
identity-irrelevant information is extracted from the image.

A.16    S OCIETAL I MPACTS

Since our work is based on the pretrained text-to-image models, it has a similar societal impact
to these base works. On the one hand, this work has great potential to complement and augment
human creativity, promoting related fields like painting, virtual fashion try-on, etc. On the other
hand, generative methods can be leveraged to generate fake pictures, which may raise some social
or cultural concerns. Therefore, we hope that users can judge these factors for using the proposed
method in the correct way.


                                                   23
