Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D REAM TO A DAPT: M ETA R EINFORCEMENT L EARN -
ING BY L ATENT C ONTEXT I MAGINATION AND MDP
I MAGINATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                                                 A BSTRACT

                Meta reinforcement learning (Meta RL) has been amply explored to quickly learn
                an unseen task by transferring previously learned knowledge from similar tasks.
                However, most state-of-the-art algorithms require the meta-training tasks to have
                a dense coverage on the task distribution and a great amount of data for each of
                them. In this paper, we propose MetaDreamer, a context-based Meta RL algorithm
                that requires less real training tasks and data by doing meta-imagination and MDP-
                imagination. We perform meta-imagination by interpolating on the learned latent
                context space with disentangled properties, as well as MDP-imagination through
                the generative world model where physical knowledge is added to plain VAE net-
                works. Our experiments with various benchmarks show that MetaDreamer out-
                performs existing approaches in data efficiency and interpolated generalization.


1     I NTRODUCTION

Meta reinforcement learning has been widely explored to enable quick adaptation to new tasks by
learning “how to learn” across a set of meta-training tasks. State-of-the-art meta-learning algorithms
have achieved great success in adaptation efficiency and generalization. However, these algorithms
rely heavily on abundant data of a large number of diverse meta-training tasks and dense coverage
on the task distribution, which may not always be available in real-world. With insufficient meta-
training tasks and training data, meta-learner can easily overfit and thus lack of generalization ability.
One major type of Meta RL is context-based method Rakelly et al. (2019), that learn latent represen-
tations of a distribution of tasks and optimizes the policy conditioned on the latent representations.
This type of method allows off-policy learning and usually have rapid adaptation within several
test-time steps. For these methods, the challenge of generalization is twofold. First, the encoder
is required to infer unseen tasks properly, and second, the policy should interpret the unseen task
representations and output optimal behaviors conditioned on latent task context.

    Distribution of                                                                                              Latent Context                  Agent          Decoder
                            Encoder   Latent Context                Decoder                                                                      (policy)   (generative model)    Imaginary rollouts
    environments                                                                                                     Space
                                         Variable               (generative model)
                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                                    ( " # $    "! )1
                                                                                                (Disentangled)


     !!                                            sample                                                                                                                           ( " # $    "! )2
       !!                                                                            "                                            Interpolated                                           %%%
      Environment                                                                     "!
                                                                                       "#                                            sample                                         ( " # $    "! )n
                                                                                                                                                 Initial
                                                                                                                                                  state


                    Task Inference                              Prediction                                             Meta-Imagination                         MDP-Imagination



            (a) Encoder-Generative model structure.                                                                 (b) Two types of imaginations in MetaDreamer

Figure 1: MetaDreamer schematic. We introduce meta-imagination and MDP-imagination in the
context-based Meta RL framework to improve policy generalizability.

In this work we present MetaDreamer (as shown in Figure 1), a context-based MetaRL algorithm
that improves policies’ generalization ability without additional test-time adaptation through imag-
ination. We base our method on three novel contributions. First, we design to learn an encoder
that can represent tasks in a disentangled latent context space (Section 4.1), which enables efficient


                                                                                            1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and reasonable interpolation. Second, we integrate physics knowledge or specific domain informa-
tion to the neural-network(NN)-based world model to better capture variants and common structure
shared among a distribution of tasks (Section 4.2). Third, we introduce latent-context-imagination
(meta-imagination) by sampling on the learned disentangled latent context space, and conditionally
generate imaginary rollouts to augment training data (MDP-imagination) (Section 4.2). The training
process for both the meta-imagination and MDP-imagination is described in Section 4.3.

2    R ELATED W ORK

Meta Reinforcement Learning. Current Meta RL algorithms can be categorized into three types:
1) context-based Meta RL Zhang et al. (2021)Mendonca et al. (2019)Rakelly et al. (2019)Kirsch
et al. (2019)Gupta et al. (2018), as described in Section 1; 2) gradient-based Meta RL Finn et al.
(2017)Nichol et al. (2018), which learns a policy initialization that can quickly adapt to a new task
after few steps of policy gradient. These methods are usually data-consuming during both meta
training and online adaptation ; 3) RNN-based Meta RL Wang et al. (2016)Duan et al. (2016b),
preserving previous experience in a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). This type of meta learner
lacks of mathematical convergence proof and is vulnerable to meta-overfitting Finn et al. (2017).
But recent model-based RNN Meta RL algorithms varibad Zintgraf et al. (2020), off-policy varibad
Dorfman et al. (2020) show improved stability and generalization capability.
Data augmentation and Imagination in Machine Learning. Data augmentation has been widely
used to improve image-based tasks with machine learning Wong et al. (2016)Zhu et al. (2017)Zhang
et al. (2019) and meta-learning Ni et al. (2021)Yao et al. (2021)Khodadadeh et al. (2020), the tech-
niques of which inspire imagination and are then applied in RL Hafner et al. (2019)Hafner et al.
(2020), and Meta RL Kirsch et al. (2019)Lee & Chung (2021)Lin et al. (2020)Mendonca et al.
(2020) to improve generalization. However, imagination in RL simply augments data for one task.
In Meta RL, previous work generates imaginary tasks either with limited diversity Mendonca et al.
(2020), or lack of control and interpretability Kirsch et al. (2019)Lee & Chung (2021)Lin et al.
(2020). The most similar work to ours is LDM byLee & Chung (2021), generating imaginary tasks
from latent dynamics mixture, but it generates imaginary tasks much less efficiently, lacking of
control, focusing only on reward-variant MDPs, and involving more complex training.
Physics-informed Machine Learning. There has been a growing interest to integrate physics
with machine learning. A systematic taxonomy of physics-informed learning includes: 1) knowl-
edge types, e.g. natural scienceWang et al. (2017)Ren et al. (2018), world knowledgeXu et al.
(2018)Ratner et al. (2016), domain expertiseKaplan et al. (2017)Ratner et al. (2016), etc.; 2) knowl-
edge representation and transformation, e.g. differential equationsYang & Perdikaris (2018)Rein-
bold & Grigoriev (2019), rulesDiligenti et al. (2017)Stewart & Ermon (2017), constraintsStewart
& Ermon (2017)Daw et al. (2017), etc.; 3) Knowledge integration, e.g. into the hypothesis
spaceTowell & Shavlik (1994)Constantinou et al. (2016), to the training algorithmReinbold & Grig-
oriev (2019)Yang & Perdikaris (2018)Daw et al. (2017), etc. Especially, physics is shown to in-
crease the capabilities of machine learning models to facilitate transfer learning in Goswami et al.
(2020)Desai et al. (2021)Wang et al. (2021)Chen et al. (2021).

3    P RELIMINARY

Formulation of Meta RL: Following the traditional Meta RL formulations Finn et al. (2017), the
goal of a meta-learner is to learn how to do quick adaptation through learning from meta-training
tasks. We denote each task with Ti = (S, A, Pi , Ri , γ), where S is the state space, A is the action
space, Pi is the transition probability function, and Ri is the reward function. A meta learner M
with parameters θ can be optimized by:
                                           N
                                           X
                          θ∗ := arg max          J (ϕi , Ditr ),   ϕi = fθ (Dits ).                   (1)
                                       θ
                                           i=1

where Dits is the test set of task i, Ditr is the training set of task i, J denotes the objective function
(usually in the expected reward form). The meta learner, parameterized by θ, takes the training set
as input and learns a policy through the optimization process expressed in the above equation. Note


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       ℒ)*+,$-'(.'%/'                                   Decoder
                                                                                                                            Figure 2:        Components
                                                            ℒ$%&'(
                                          ℒ$%&(0                                    (Generative model)                      and training procedure of
    Context tuples $                                                               "!

    ( % & '     %/ )1
                           GRU Encoder                                             #!
                                                                                            "!"        3̂!"#
                                                                                                                ℒ122        MetaDreamer.         We dis-
                                                                                  "!"#
                                                   !                                                           (ℒ$%&'$()+
    ( % & '
         (((
                %/ )2
                                  !!                          #                                                ℒ(*+',-.))   entangle the training of
    ( % & '     %/ )n                              "                               "!       "!#        "̂!"#                encoder-decoder(upper) and
                                                         Latent Context            #!
                                                            Variable
                                                                                                                            meta policy(lower). Black
                                                                                                                            arrows outline the data flow,
                  Latent Context Variable
                    of real environment
                                              #           Decoder                                                           blue and orange arrows
                                                                              1

                                                                          2
                                                                                                                            outline the gradient flow of
                                                                                          %5                   ℒ6789:
                                                       Environment
                                                                                                               ℒ7:;8;7      encoder-decoder and meta
                                                                              3
                        Interpolated Latent                                              Meta Policy
                                                                                                                            policy respectively.
                         Context Variable     #<          Decoder


that the optimization process could include the learning of an adaptation operation fθ . Confronted
with a new task Ti , the meta-learner adapts from θ to ϕi by performing fθ operation, which varies
among different types of Meta RL methods.
Algorithm of Meta RL: We selected PEARL Rakelly et al. (2019), a prominent context-based,
off-policy Meta RL algorithm, capturing features of current task in a latent probabilistic context
variable z and doing adaptation by conditioning policy on the posterior context z. PEARL has
two key components: a probabilistic encoder q(z|c) for task inference, where c refers to context
(at timestep t, context ct = (st , at , rt , st+1 )) , and a task-conditioned policy π(a|s, z). Due to
PEARL’s data efficiency and quick adaptation, we build our MetaDreamer on top of it.


4         M ETA D REAMER

In this work, we build MetaDreamer as an off-policy context-based MetaRL algorithm, preserving
good data efficiency and quick adaptation. The framework consists of an encoder for task inference,
a decoder for data generation, and a meta policy to be trained with different task variants. The
schematic of MetaDreamer is shown in Figure 1, and detailed training procedure in Figure 2.
Similar to PEARL, we extract information from the transition history and use the encoder to infer
the value of latent context, which can be interpreted as latent task embeddings. These latent task
embeddings are provided to task-conditioned policy learned via SAC to enable adapted behaviors.
One major difference between PEARL and our framework is that we decouple the task inference
from the training of meta policy by reconstructing the tasks’ MDPs in an unsupervised setup (similar
to Bing et al. (2021)) with a newly-introduced decoder, which can work as a generative model.
Another difference is that our training of the meta policy involves meta-imagination by sampling in
the latent context space to generate imaginary tasks from the corresponding sampled latent vectors,
and MDP-imagination by using the conditional decoder to generate imaginary rollouts.

4.1          TASK INFERENCE

Encoder structure. To enable adaptation, the encoder is supposed to extract task-related informa-
tion from high dimensional input data, context c, and represents the task with a latent context vector
z. Normally, researchers Rakelly et al. (2019)Wen et al. (2021) uses the permutation invariant prop-
erty of a fully observed MDP and model the representation as a product of independent Gaussian
factors. However, this inference architecture treats every context tuple with the same importance,
which is not efficient in information gathering and can be problematic when informative tuples are
very sparse. To overcome this problem, we employ a GRU to learn which data is important to keep
or forget, and pass relevant information down the chain of sequential data. We recurrently feed in
the context tuples and store our per-time-step posterior inference of the task in the GRU’s hidden
state.
Disentangled Latent Context Space. From the encoder, we can get low-dimensional latent rep-
resentations (latent contexts) for different tasks. These latent representations constitute the latent
context space, on which our following meta-imagination will be sampling from. However, previous
context-based Meta RL methods learn a latent context space that can be convoluted and lacks phys-


                                                                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ical interpretability. Major drawbacks of doing interpolation in such an unorganized latent context
space include no control over the distribution of generated tasks, either too concentrated on a small
range of the task domain or covering interpolated latent context space that doesn’t have a reasonable
mapping to the task space. Besides, the lack of physical interpretability prohibits customized study
in task variants that interest us most.
In our structure, we enforce disentanglement on the latent context to perform efficient and maneu-
verable generation of imaginary tasks by following the beta-VAE techniques Higgins et al. (2016).
As stated in Chen et al.Tokui & Sato (2021), a disentangled representation is not strictly defined,
but can be described as one where a single dimension of the latent context are sensitive to changes
in a single generative factor while being relatively invariant to changes in other factorsBurgess et al.
(2018). A lot of work Higgins et al. (2016)Chen et al. (2018)Chen et al. (2016)Tran et al. (2017)
have explored learning disentangled factors and we choose to leverage the β-VAE method Higgins
et al. (2016) for disentanglement performance, training stability, and implementation complexity.
The key idea of β-VAE is augmenting the original Variational Autoencoder (VAE) objective with a
single hyperparameter β (usually β > 1) that modulates the learning constraints on the capacity of
the latent information bottleneck. It’s suggested in Montero et al. (2020) that stronger constraints on
the capacity of z is necessary to encourage disentanglement.
By employing β-VAE, we can learn a latent context space with following properties: 1) The latent
context are disentangled; 2) The latent context only uses one active dimension for one genera-
tive factor, while leaving other dimensions invariant to any generative factor and close to normal
distributions; 3) The latent context extracts minimal sufficient information, capturing all and only
task-variants-relevant information. To be concise, all generative factors in this paper refer to the
generative factors that are task-variant, excluding those invariant among all tasks.

4.2   I MAGINATION USING GENERATIVE MODELS

In MetaDreamer, we consider two types of imagination, meta-imagination and MDP-imagination,
both for augmenting learning data but with some differences.
Meta-imagination by sampling the latent context space. Meta-imagination refers to the process
of generating new tasks to augment the meta-training tasks, through sampling a set of imaginary (de-
noted with I) latent context zI = {zI(0) , ..., zI(n) }. Taking advantage of our learned disentangled
context space, we can connect different features of tasks with corresponding latent context values
inferred by the encoder. Suppose we have a set of meta-training tasks T = {T (0) , ..., T (N −1) } with
dataset DT collected by interacting with corresponding environments. Performing task inference
                                                                   (0)     (N −1)
with the encoder, we can get a latent variable set ZT = {zT , ..., zT             } = (Z0 × Z1 ..... ×
ZM −1 ), where M is the dimension number of the latent context variable vector. Since not necessar-
ily all components/dimensions of the latent context vector can be disentangled or has an interpretable
generative factor representation, we define a linear injective mapping f between the generative fac-
tor index and the latent context vector index, f : {0, 1, ..., K − 1} → {0, 1, 2, ..., M − 1}, where K
is the number of generative factors and K ≤ M .
Given the latent representation set ZT , MetaDreamer applies the task interpolation separately on the
disentangled latent variable space to get latent representations of some imaginary tasks:
                                                                             j
       ZkI = { λzf (k),i−1 + (1 − λ) zf (k),i :

                                                  i ∈ {1, ..., Ik } ; λ =      + ϵ,   j ∈ {0, ..., Dk }}   (2)
                                                                            Dk
where ϵ is a small noise, Dk is representing interpolation density, and Ik is the number of possible
values for k th generative factor. Here ZkI contains all interpolated elements of k th dimension of Z I .
With the above latent context interpolation, we can generate interpolated tasks by combining sam-
ples on each generative factor, with notation ZI = (Z0I × Z1I ... × ZK−1   I
                                                                              ). From the prospective
of generative factors, we can divide interpolated tasks into three types: 1) all generative factors are
sampled from the latent space of real tasks ZT , which is a special case where λk = 0 or 1, ∀k, but
with different combinations from those in ZT so as to generate new tasks; 2) generative factors are
hybrid combinations of interpolated and existing value of factors, where ∃k s.t. λk = 0, or 1, and
∃j s.t. λj ∈ (0, 1); 3)generative factors are all with interpolated values, where λk ∈ (0, 1), ∀k. This
task interpolation process by manipulating on the disentangled latent context space gives us a very
high level of interpretation and freedom to look into generalization domains that interest us most.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


MDP-imagination with physics-informed generative models. MDP-imagination refers to the pro-
cess of generating trajectories with the conditioned generative model to augment training data, sim-
ilar to the imagination in previous studies like DreamerHafner et al. (2019) and Dreamer-v2Okada
& Taniguchi (2022). The generative model pθ consists of two parts: the reward model pR         θ and the
transition model pTθ . Given a random initial state s0 and policy π, the generative model can sim-
ulate imagined rollouts by recursively applying (ŝt+1 , r̂t+1 ) = pθ,a∼π (ŝt , at , z). Then we get the
imagined dataset D̃ = {D̃T , D̃T I }. It’s worth noting that D̃T (n) is the augmented dataset of a real
task with latent context z(n) by the generative model, in comparison the dataset DT (n) is collected
by interacting with real task environment T (n) .
Even previous work on meta-learning Khodadadeh et al. (2020) or reinforcement learning with
purely image-based tasks Hafner et al. (2019), that involves imagination, have shown great success
in computer vision domains, there are many circumstances where purely data-driven approaches find
their limits. Doing imagination in Meta Reinforcement learning is highly demanding, which requires
the generative model to condition on variant task embeddings and generate alike rollouts that reflect
or preserve nature of the corresponding tasks. In addition to accurate and structured generation,
generalization on unseen task context is also desired for the generative model considering the meta-
imagination. Purely data-driven learning can be arduous, and thus there is a need to introduce extra
knowledge for better learning.
Compared with image-based tasks, Meta RL and RL (not purely image-based) enjoy a good na-
ture of interpretability from MDP’s formulation. In MDP, the transition probability potentially in-
volves some physics, intuition, or domain knowledge that may be known to us. Therefore, we de-
ploy physics-informed machine learning, which incorporates additional knowledge into the machine
learning pipeline, to better capture the real-world model and improve generalization. In this section,
we alternatively use “physics-informed”, “additional information”, which should be more generally
interpreted as knowledge from physics and other scientific disciplines. Physics-informed machine
learning is a highly developed field and we recommend two comprehensive surveys Von Rueden
et al. (2019)Willard et al. (2020) for readers to know about state-of-the-art development and catego-
rization.
In our MetaDreamer, we introduce additional knowledge to transition approximation part in the
generative model. Knowledge we consider introducing to the NN-based model falls into categories
listed in Von Rueden et al. (2019). We then use the highway-merging task as an example to summa-
rize possible ways to integrate knowledge with neural networks as follows:
       • Distinguish different parts of the input vector (Figure 3b.⃝);
                                                                    a
       • Assign physical meanings to nodes in neural network (Figure 3b.⃝);
                                                                         b
       • Design the computation or value ranges of nodes in neural network (Figure 3b.⃝);
                                                                                      c
       • Apply physics knowledge and replace NN-based model (Figure 3b.⃝); d
The implementation of physics information with neural networks in Figure 3b is explained: a) The
state s can be partitioned according to different vehicles every dimension is describing. b) We assign
physical meanings to the output nodes, representing the acceleration of each vehicle. c) With the
knowledge that a vehicle’s acceleration usually falls in range of (-3, 3) m/s, we apply 3×tanh()
as the output activation function for nodes mentioned in b). d) We apply the common physics law
as fphy : pt+1 = pt + vt ∆t, and vt+1 = vt + at ∆t where p is x or y position, v is velocity on x or y.



4.3   T RAINING

Encoder-Generative model training. Our encoder-generative model training follows β-VAE’s for-
mulation and approach. We setup a GRU encoder qθ (z|x) parameterized with θ, and a physics-
informed decoder pϕ (x|z) consisting of a reward model pR                                     T
                                                          θ and a transition function model pθ .
We model the reward model as a pure neural network, while the transition model contains both
physics knowledge and neural networks. The latent context is pre-defined with a redundant number
of dimensions comparing with the number of generative factors.
The training objective is to maximize log pϕ (x), the evidence lower bound objective (ELBO) of
which is usually optimized on in practical training. Augmenting ELBO with a hyperparameter β,

                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we arrive at the objective function of β-VAE:
                 L(θ, ϕ; x, z, β) = − Eqϕ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)] + βDKL (qϕ (z|x)||p(z))                       (3)
where ϕ, θ parameterize the distributions of the encoder and decoder respectively. The input data
x are samples from a task distribution parameterized by generative factors z. The prior p(z) is
typically set to the normal distribution N (0, 1) and posterior qϕ (z|x) distributions are parameterized
as Gaussians with a diagonal covariance matrix.
Since we have a Gaussian prior, the first term in Equation 3, named reconstruction loss or negative
log-likelihood loss (LN LL ), becomes the mean squared errors (MSE) between ground truth and
prediction of states and rewards:
       LN LL (θ, ϕ) = −Eqϕ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)]
                                                                                                             (4)
                      = αT · ||pTϕ (ŝt+1 |st , a, z) − st+1 ||2 + αR · ||pR
                                                                           ϕ (r̂t+1 |st , a, z) − rt+1 ||
                                                                                                         2

where αT , αR are tunable hyper-parameters, weights, on state and reward reconstruction.
In MetaDreamer, task inference requires higher accuracy and the posterior collapse problem is even
worse. We introduce two clustering losses related to (1) intra-cluster similarities and (2) iner-cluster
similarities respectively to improve encoder-generative model’s performance.
                                                                     qP           Both cluster similari-
                                                                          D             2
ties are calculated with Euclidean distance, defined as d2 (x, y) =       i=0 (xi − yi ) , where x, y ∈
  D
R . Considering (1), we encourage smaller intra-clusters distance, meaning that the inferred latent
context with different trajectories of the same task are more similar. This encourages the encoder
to extract task-variant-relevant factors while leaving out other information contained in trajectories,
thus improving the accuracy and same-task-wise consistency of the inference. As for (2), we penal-
ize too small inter-cluster distance. Intuitively, encouraging bigger inter-cluster distance helps with
task-variant discovery and transmitting information from input to the latent context posterior. In this
case, however, the KL divergence term in Equation 3 will also be encouraged to increase, possibly
leading to poor disentanglement. Therefore, we simply penalize it when the inter-cluster distance of
two tasks is below a threshold that these two tasks can be viewed as indistinguishable. The cluster
loss is formulated as:
Lcluster (ϕ) = αc1 Lintra (ϕ) + αc2 Linter (ϕ)
                             (i)
               N −1    K                                     N −1 N  −1
               X  1 X             (i),k (i)
                                                             X      X
Lintra (ϕ) =       (i)
                           d 2 (z      , z̄ ); L inter (ϕ) =              clip(σ − d2 (z̄(i1 ) , z̄(i2 ) ), 0, σ)
             i=0
                 K     k=0                                   i =0 i =i +1
                                                                  1     2   1
                          (i)
                        M
                   1    X
where z̄(i) =               z(i),m ,     ∀i = 0, ..., N − 1
                  M (i) m=0
                                                                                                             (5)
where σ is the pre-defined minimal inter-cluster distance threshold, αc1 , αc2 are tunable hyperpa-
rameters, N represents the number of tasks, and for each task (i), the losses are computed with M (i)
trajectories.
Summarizing all losses, the encoder-generative model is trained with the overall objective function:
   L(θ, ϕ; β, αT , αR , αc1 , αc2 ) = LN LL (θ, ϕ; αT , αR ) + β · LKL (θ) + Lcluster (ϕ; αc1 , αc2 )        (6)

Meta policy training. The policy training is using the soft actor-critic algorithm, an off-policy
method based on the maximum entropy RL objective. Thus our policy training preserves good data
efficiency and stability. During policy training, the gradients are not back-propagated through the
encoder-decoder network. The critic and actor loss are written as:
                         Lcritic = E(s,a,r,s′ )∼B [Qθ (s, a, z̄) − (r + V̄ (s′ , z̄))]2 .                    (7)
                                        z∼qϕ (z|c)

where V̄ is target value network and z̄ means that gradients are not back-propagated through net-
work.

                                                             exp (Qθ (s, a, z̄))
                      Lactor = Es∼B,a∼πθ DKL πθ (a|s, z̄) ||                        .                        (8)
                                z∼qϕ (z|c)                        Zθ (s)


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the partition function Zθ normalizes the distribution.
The data used to infer qϕ (z|c) is c, sampling from the most recently collected data batch, while the
actor and critic are trained with data from the entire data buffer B. As shown in Figure 2, there
are three types of data according to how they’re generated: 1) performing policy πψ conditioned on
latent context z of a real task with its corresponding real environment (hereinafter referred to as R);
2) policy πψ conditioned on z of a real task with its conditioned generative model pθ (IR); 3) policy
πψ conditioned on zI of an imagined task with its conditioned generative model pθ (I).


5     E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS

In this section, we conduct experiments to test and evaluate the performance of MetaDreamer. We
first investigate the properties of MetaDreamer on two versions of highway-merging experiment,
including the encoder’s effectiveness, the decoder’s generation quality, and the meta-policy’s per-
formance. We then validate the generalization of our algorithm by employing on four MuJoCo
continuous control tasks widely used in the meta-RL literature. We show that MetaDreamer has
better generalization capability to unseen tasks, than many state-of-the-art meta-learning methods,
by doing meta-task augmentation for meta-policy training. In the appendix, we include more exper-
imental designs, evaluation metrics and ablation studies.

5.1   AUTONOMOUS D RIVING E XPERIMENT.

We modify a classical self-driving scenario, highway merging Leurent (2018), into a simulator suit-
able for Meta RL testing by considering variants that can reflect complex real driving environments.
As shown in Figure 8, the ego vehicle (in green) is expected to take a mandatory lane change to

                                                                                                          Physics-informed decoder (&/0 )

                                                                                                                         b             d
                                                                                                            3×tanh()
                                                                                                                       $%%!'    Physics function
                                                        !!"#$   "!"#$ #% !"#$ #& !"#$       #!"#$
                                                                                                                       $%& !'
                                                        !!'     "!'    #% '!   #& '!
                                                                                                    FCN


                                                                                        a    "!                                     !!"#           "%!-.
                                                                                                                         …
                                                        …       ...              …
                                                        !!(     "!(    #% !(   #& !(
                                                                                                               c       $%%!)

                                                                                                                       $%& )!
                                                                                             $



                  (a) Environment.                                             (b) Physics-informed decoder.

Figure 3: Highway-merging. The ego vehicle (in green) is expected to learn a merging policy
that can adapt quickly to different driving environments, considering task-variant generative factors:
traffic speed, and longitudinally interactive model’s parameters.

merge into the main lane before the merging area ends. Surrounding vehicles on the main lane fol-
low the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) Treiber et al. (2000) as longitudinal dynamics and ignore
lateral dynamics in this merging area. Before the ego vehicle successfully merges, the vehicle right
behind it (in yellow) follows a longitudinally interactive model. We use similar MDP configura-
tions in Leurent (2018). Specific MDP configurations are described in the appendix. We design two
complexity levels of highway-merging task with different longitudinally interactive models:
Highway-Merging-v0 (simple version): the yellow vehicle uses a proportional interactive model
that follows: ap = p · aego , where aego is ego vehicle’s acceleration. To mimic different interactive
styles, we consider p as a variant with p ∈ [−1, 1]. Generally speaking, vehicles with higher positive
p tend to more opponents while those with smaller negative p behave more cooperatively.
Highway-Merging-v1 (hard version): use the Hidas’ interactive model Hidas (2005), among the
parameters of which we consider two as task variants: 1) Maximum speed decrease Dv ∈ [5, 15]
(mph); 2) Acceptable deceleration rage bf ∈ [1.0, 3.5] (m/s2 )
We first illustrate the encoder’s effectiveness on highway-merging-v0 in Figure 5, plotting out zi -gj
graphs: how the value of the i dimension of inferred latent context zi changes to the change of
generative factor gj (e.g. traffic speed, and proportional values p). For each generative factor, we
pick four different values in the plotting. It is shown that following β-VAE, MetaDreamer learns to
infer disentangled latent context and only activate necessary dimensions.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then we investigate the generation quality of the decoder, including episode generation (MPD imag-
ination) and task interpolation (meta imagination). To give an intuitive illustration of the generation,
we deploy our algorithm on Highway-Merging-v0, whose variant, p value, can be visualized by the
ratio of values on colorful lines (rear vehicle’s acceleration profile) to corresponding values on the
black line (ego vehicle’s acceleration profile).


                     (a) MetaDreamer.                                                (b) w/ β = 1 (VAE).         (c) w/o physics information.

Figure 4: Illustration of interpolated tasks. Each plot shows acceleration profiles of the rear sur-
rounding vehicle. Black lines are the ego vehicle’s accelerations, colorful solid lines are predictions
by the generative model on real tasks (theoretically should be p-proportional to black lines, repre-
senting MDP imagination), and dash lines are imagination with interpolated latent context between
tasks with nearby p value (meta imagination).


     A MetaDreamer                    B    w/ ! = 1 (VAE)
     Traffic speed     Proportion !   Traffic speed   Proportion !



!"
                                                                      Proportion !


!!
                                                                     Traffic speed


!#



!$



Figure 5: Latent context learnt by a                                                  Figure 6: Comparison of meta policy’s training and adap-
MetaDreamer(with β = 5), and VAE                                                      tation to meta-testing performance. Post-adapted pol-
(with β = 1). Each line represents a                                                  icy’s episodic return on meta-testing tasks during the
task with the same value on the gener-                                                meta-training phase are illustrated. Each learning curve
ative factor in that color. We are plot-                                              shows the mean (solid lines) and variance (shades) of
ting this figure in reference of Fig. 7 in                                            three independent runs.
Higgins et al. (2016)

MPD imagination quality can be evaluated by the shape of the acceleration profile (colorful solid
lines): the more consistent with the shape of ego vehicle’s acceleration profile (black line), the better
the MPD imagination quality is. In Figure 4a and 4b, we can observe more consistent ratios of color-
ful solid lines to the black line compared with Figure 4c, indicating better MPD imagination with the
physics-informed generator. On the other hand, the meta-imagination quality can be investigated by
the acceleration profile of generation by using the interpolated context vectors (colorful dash lines).
In Figure 4a and 4c, dash lines are more distinguishable from each other and have denser and more
regularized coverage in between solid lines, while in Figure 4b dash-lines are observed with a lot of
overlapping and disordering. In general, Figure 4 intuitively presents that MetaDreamer has better
MPD generation accuracy and interpolated meta-imagination.
With a well-trained encoder-generative model, we can evaluate the effectiveness of imagination
in improving policy learning. We compare with two state-of-the-art Meta RL baselines: a context-
based off-policy algorithm PEARL Rakelly et al. (2019), and a gradient-based model-agnostic meta-
learning algorithm MAML Finn et al. (2017). Besides, we also compare policies trained with differ-
ent sources and sizes of data, denoted by the letter and number following the algorithm’s name (e.g.
MetaDreamer(R8IR8) denotes using MetaDreamer algorithm to train meta-policy using rollouts of
8 real tasks and 8 imaginary real tasks).


                                                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From the meta-learning curves in Figure 6, we analyze the generalization capability of MetaDreamer
by measuring its performance on meta-testing tasks as a function of the total number of samples
used during meta-training. We use PEARL(R8) and PEARL(R16) as two important baselines to
evaluate what types of imagination and how they contribute. By doing two pairs of comparison,
MetaDreamer(R8I8) vs PEARL(R8), and MetaDreamer(R16I8) vs PEARL(R16), we can observe
the outperformance of MetaDreamer, even though MetaDreamer(R16I8)’s superiority is less obvi-
ous. This is because the benefits of meta-imagination highly depend on the property of a task and
the potential improvements based on available real data. Then if comparing the data efficiency again
on these two pairs, we can observe 100x in R8 pair, and 10x in R16 pair, less data used to reach
the same level of post-adaptation performance. Further on, we observe similar final performance
comparing MetaDreamer(R8IR8) and PEARL(R16), indicating that augmenting data through MDP-
imagination for environments that we have data access to is one approach to improve data efficiency.

5.2   OTHER E XPERIMENTS

In addition to the Highway-Merging task described above, to show the good extensibility of our
algorithm, we present the experimental results of four commonly used meta-RL benchmark tasks
used in existing meta-RL literature Rakelly et al. (2019)Finn et al. (2017)Yu et al. (2020). The
details of each environment are described in the appendix.
In Figure 7, we can observe that MetaDreamer obviously outperforms PEARL on the Walker-2D
experiment with regard to the post-update performance, and shows similar adaptive capability on
the other three environments while using 10-100x less real data to (for a simple and fair comparison,
we use the number of real data required when the post-update average return curve of MetaDreamer
reaches the final performance line of PEARL as the comparison metric). These robotics experiments
show that MetaDreamer significantly improves data efficiency in all environments compared to both
on-policy and off-policy methods, and could improve the capability to do fast adaptation under
certain environment distributions.


 Figure 7: Comparison of meta policy’s adaptation to meta-testing tasks of robotics environments.


6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented MetaDreamer, a novel off-policy context-based Meta RL algo-
rithm that improves data efficiency and generalization capability by two types of imagination: meta-
imagination can improve policy’s generalization by augmenting training tasks with imaginary tasks
through efficient sampling on the learned disentangled latent context space, and MDP-imagination
can improve data efficiency by augmenting training data for real tasks. With a real generalization
problem in autonomous driving and four common benchmark tasks, we evaluate and illustrate the
encoder’s task inference and a physics-informed generative model’s generation performance, and
validate the meta policy’s better generalization and data efficiency.
In future work, we aim to further improve policy’s generalization by generating extrapolated imagi-
nary tasks, which exerts more challenges on the generative model’s extrapolation capability. There
are many interesting work that could provide theoretical and technical foundations Besserve et al.
(2021)Takeishi & Kalousis (2021). On the other hand, considering non-parametric variants can
greatly extend meta-learner’s capabilities. This is still an open question Bing et al. (2021)Bing
et al. (2022)Atkeson (1997)Goo & Niekum (2020) and how to take advantage of imagination in
non-parametric meta-learning is barely explored.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Christopher Atkeson. Nonparametric model-based reinforcement learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 10, 1997.
Michel Besserve, Rémy Sun, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. A theory of independent
 mechanisms for extrapolation in generative models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 6741–6749, 2021.
Zhenshan Bing, Lukas Knak, Fabrice Oliver Robin, Kai Huang, and Alois Knoll. Meta-
  reinforcement learning in broad and non-parametric environments.    arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.03718, 2021.
Zhenshan Bing, David Lerch, Kai Huang, and Alois Knoll. Meta-reinforcement learning in non-
  stationary and dynamic environments. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
  telligence, 2022.
Christopher P Burgess, Irina Higgins, Arka Pal, Loic Matthey, Nick Watters, Guillaume Des-
  jardins, and Alexander Lerchner. Understanding disentangling in beta-vae. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1804.03599, 2018.
Ricky TQ Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger Grosse, and David Duvenaud. Isolating sources of disentan-
  glement in vaes. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 2615, pp. 2625.
Ricky TQ Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger B Grosse, and David K Duvenaud. Isolating sources of disen-
  tanglement in variational autoencoders. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
  2018.
Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Info-
  gan: Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Xinhai Chen, Chunye Gong, Qian Wan, Liang Deng, Yunbo Wan, Yang Liu, Bo Chen, and Jie Liu.
  Transfer learning for deep neural network-based partial differential equations solving. Advances
  in Aerodynamics, 3(1):1–14, 2021.
Anthony Costa Constantinou, Norman Fenton, and Martin Neil. Integrating expert knowledge with
  data in bayesian networks: Preserving data-driven expectations when the expert variables remain
  unobserved. Expert systems with applications, 56:197–208, 2016.
Arka Daw, Anuj Karpatne, William D Watkins, Jordan S Read, and Vipin Kumar. Physics-guided
  neural networks (pgnn): An application in lake temperature modeling. In Knowledge-Guided
  Machine Learning, pp. 353–372. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2017.
Shaan Desai, Marios Mattheakis, Hayden Joy, Pavlos Protopapas, and Stephen Roberts. One-shot
  transfer learning of physics-informed neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11286, 2021.
Michelangelo Diligenti, Marco Gori, and Claudio Sacca. Semantic-based regularization for learning
 and inference. Artificial Intelligence, 244:143–165, 2017.
Ron Dorfman, Idan Shenfeld, and Aviv Tamar. Offline meta learning of exploration. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2008.02598, 2020.
Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1329–1338. PMLR, 2016a.
Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rl ˆ2:
  Fast reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779,
  2016b.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Razvan V. Florian. Correct equations for the dynamics of the cart-pole system. 2005.
Wonjoon Goo and Scott Niekum.            Local nonparametric meta-learning.        arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2002.03272, 2020.
Somdatta Goswami, Cosmin Anitescu, Souvik Chakraborty, and Timon Rabczuk. Transfer learning
  enhanced physics informed neural network for phase-field modeling of fracture. Theoretical and
  Applied Fracture Mechanics, 106:102447, 2020.
Abhishek Gupta, Russell Mendonca, YuXuan Liu, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Meta-
  reinforcement learning of structured exploration strategies. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 31, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with dis-
  crete world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193, 2020.
Peter Hidas. Modelling vehicle interactions in microscopic simulation of merging and weaving.
  Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 13(1):37–62, 2005.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. 2016.
Russell Kaplan, Christopher Sauer, and Alexander Sosa. Beating atari with natural language guided
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.05539, 2017.
Siavash Khodadadeh, Sharare Zehtabian, Saeed Vahidian, Weijia Wang, Bill Lin, and Ladislau
  Bölöni. Unsupervised meta-learning through latent-space interpolation in generative models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10236, 2020.
Louis Kirsch, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Improving generalization in meta
  reinforcement learning using learned objectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04098, 2019.
Suyoung Lee and Sae-Young Chung. Improving generalization in meta-rl with imaginary tasks from
  latent dynamics mixture. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27222–27235,
  2021.
Edouard Leurent. An environment for autonomous driving decision-making. https://github.
  com/eleurent/highway-env, 2018.
Zichuan Lin, Garrett Thomas, Guangwen Yang, and Tengyu Ma. Model-based adversarial meta-
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:10161–10173,
  2020.
Russell Mendonca, Abhishek Gupta, Rosen Kralev, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
  Guided meta-policy search. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Russell Mendonca, Xinyang Geng, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-reinforcement learning
  robust to distributional shift via model identification and experience relabeling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.07178, 2020.
Milton Llera Montero, Casimir JH Ludwig, Rui Ponte Costa, Gaurav Malhotra, and Jeffrey Bow-
 ers. The role of disentanglement in generalisation. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2020.
Renkun Ni, Micah Goldblum, Amr Sharaf, Kezhi Kong, and Tom Goldstein. Data augmentation for
  meta-learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8152–8161. PMLR, 2021.
Alex Nichol, Joshua Achiam, and John Schulman. On first-order meta-learning algorithms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1803.02999, 2018.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Masashi Okada and Tadahiro Taniguchi. Dreamingv2: Reinforcement learning with discrete world
 models without reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.00494, 2022.
Kate Rakelly, Aurick Zhou, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Deirdre Quillen. Efficient off-policy
  meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 5331–5340. PMLR, 2019.
Alexander J Ratner, Christopher M De Sa, Sen Wu, Daniel Selsam, and Christopher Ré. Data
  programming: Creating large training sets, quickly. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 29, 2016.
Patrick AK Reinbold and Roman O Grigoriev. Data-driven discovery of partial differential equation
  models with latent variables. Physical Review E, 100(2):022219, 2019.
Hongyu Ren, Russell Stewart, Jiaming Song, Volodymyr Kuleshov, and Stefano Ermon. Adversarial
  constraint learning for structured prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.10561, 2018.
Russell Stewart and Stefano Ermon. Label-free supervision of neural networks with physics and
  domain knowledge. In Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Naoya Takeishi and Alexandros Kalousis. Physics-integrated variational autoencoders for robust
  and interpretable generative modeling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  14809–14821, 2021.
Seiya Tokui and Issei Sato. Disentanglement analysis with partial information decomposition. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2108.13753, 2021.
Geoffrey G Towell and Jude W Shavlik. Knowledge-based artificial neural networks. Artificial
  intelligence, 70(1-2):119–165, 1994.
Luan Tran, Xi Yin, and Xiaoming Liu. Disentangled representation learning gan for pose-invariant
  face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
  nition, pp. 1415–1424, 2017.
Martin Treiber, Ansgar Hennecke, and Dirk Helbing. Congested traffic states in empirical observa-
 tions and microscopic simulations. Physical review E, 62(2):1805, 2000.
Laura Von Rueden, Sebastian Mayer, Jochen Garcke, Christian Bauckhage, and Jannis Schuecker.
  Informed machine learning–towards a taxonomy of explicit integration of knowledge into ma-
  chine learning. Learning, 18:19–20, 2019.
Hengjie Wang, Robert Planas, Aparna Chandramowlishwaran, and Ramin Bostanabad. Train once
  and use forever: Solving boundary value problems in unseen domains with pre-trained deep learn-
  ing models. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2104, 2021.
Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos,
  Charles Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05763, 2016.
Jian-Xun Wang, Jin-Long Wu, and Heng Xiao. Physics-informed machine learning approach for
   reconstructing reynolds stress modeling discrepancies based on dns data. Physical Review Fluids,
   2(3):034603, 2017.
Lu Wen, Songan Zhang, H Eric Tseng, Baljeet Singh, Dimitar Filev, and Huei Peng. Prior is all you
  need to improve the robustness and safety for the first time deployment of meta rl. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.08448, 2021.
Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar. Integrating
   physics-based modeling with machine learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04919,
   1(1):1–34, 2020.
Sebastien C Wong, Adam Gatt, Victor Stamatescu, and Mark D McDonnell. Understanding data
  augmentation for classification: when to warp? In 2016 international conference on digital image
  computing: techniques and applications (DICTA), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2016.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jingyi Xu, Zilu Zhang, Tal Friedman, Yitao Liang, and Guy Broeck. A semantic loss function for
   deep learning with symbolic knowledge. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
   5502–5511. PMLR, 2018.
Yibo Yang and Paris Perdikaris.        Physics-informed deep generative models.         arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.03511, 2018.
Huaxiu Yao, Long-Kai Huang, Linjun Zhang, Ying Wei, Li Tian, James Zou, Junzhou Huang, et al.
  Improving generalization in meta-learning via task augmentation. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 11887–11897. PMLR, 2021.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
Han Zhang, Ian Goodfellow, Dimitris Metaxas, and Augustus Odena. Self-attention generative
  adversarial networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 7354–7363. PMLR,
  2019.
Songan Zhang, Lu Wen, Huei Peng, and H Eric Tseng. Quick learner automated vehicle adapt-
  ing its roadmanship to varying traffic cultures with meta reinforcement learning. In 2021 IEEE
  International Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), pp. 1745–1752. IEEE, 2021.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
  using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 2223–2232, 2017.
L Zintgraf, K Shiarlis, M Igl, S Schulze, Y Gal, K Hofmann, and S Whiteson. Varibad: a very good
  method for bayes-adaptive deep rl via meta-learning. Proceedings of ICLR 2020, 2020.


7     A PPENDIX
7.1     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

7.1.1    Highway-merging
This Highway-merging experiment is modified from an OpenAI-Gym-based simulator Leurent
(2018). For both easy version (v1) and hard version (v2), we use similar MDP configurations in
Leurent (2018). The MDP configuration is described as follows:


                             Figure 8: Highway-merging Environment.


The reward function R(s, a) consists of four terms: velocity-related reward Rv (encouraging keep-
ing at a speed similar to the environmental average speed), merging-related reward Rm (encouraging
a safer merging gap to the front vehicle and to the rear vehicle, as well as higher merging efficiency),


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dim.     Continuous Observation Space
0-3      x lateral position, y position to the end of merging, and vx , vy velocity of ego vehicle
4-7      ∆x, ∆y relative position and ∆vx , ∆vy relative velocity of first front vehicle
8-11     ∆x, ∆y relative position and ∆vx , ∆vy relative velocity of second second front vehicle
12-15    ∆x, ∆y relative position and ∆vx , ∆vy relative velocity of first rear vehicle
16-19    ∆x, ∆y relative position and ∆vx , ∆vy relative velocity of second rear vehicle


                                                              Index    Discrete Action Space
        Dim.     Range         Dim.     Range
                                                              0        idel
        x        [0,12]        ∆x       [-10,10]
                                                              1        change to the left lane
        y        [0,150]       ∆y       [-150,150]
                                                              2        change to the right lane
        vx       [0,50]        ∆vx      [-20,20]
                                                              3        accelerate at 1.5m/s2
        vy       [0,10]        ∆vy      [-10,10]
                                                              4        decelerate at -1.5m/s2

Table 1: Observation space of Highway-merge.
The observation will be normalized on each di-              Table 2: Action space of Highway-
mension before being fed into neural networks.              merge


crash-related reward Rc (punishing on a crash or a nearly crash) and action-related reward Ra (pun-
ishing on acceleration/deceleration and lane-changing cost):
              |v − venv |
    Rv = clip(              , 0, 1)
                  10
                ∗
          relu(s (vego , ∆vego ) − sego ) relu(s∗ (vrear , ∆vrear ) − srear )
    Rm =                                 +                                    + 20 × (ȧrear < 0)
                 s∗ (vego , ∆vego )             s∗ (vrear , ∆vrear )                                   (9)
                                         
                                         −1,      if a = 1 or 2
           −50 , if crashed
    Rc =                          , Ra = −0.2, if a = 3 or 4
           0      , otherwise            
                                           0,      otherwise
with s∗ (vi , ∆vi ), vi , si is defined the same in the Intelligent Driving Model Treiber et al. (2000).

7.1.2   Navigation-2D
This experiment is used in Finn et al. (2017), where a point agent is desired to move to the goal
positions in 2D space. The MDP configurations are defined as:

                       Dimension       Continuous Observation Space        Range
                       0               agent position x                    [-4,4]
                       1               agent position y                    [-4,4]


                            Table 3: Observation space of Navigation-2D.


                           Dimension     Continuous Action Space        Range
                           0             agent velocity ∆x              [-1,1]
                           1             agent velocity ∆y              [-1,1]


                               Table 4: Action space of Navigation-2D.

                                     q
The reward is defined as: R = − (x − x2goal + (y − ygoal )2 ) (the agent gets a higher reward
if getting closer to the goal position). Episodes terminate at the horizon of H = 100. In this
experiment, we consider the variants to be the goal position: xgoal ∈ [−2, 2], ygoal ∈ [0, 2] to


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


consist of a set of tasks (illustrated in Fig.9, and the physics-informed decoder structure is shown in
Figure 11a.

                          Goal

 Variant Goal position
                                     Agent


                           Figure 9: Navigation-2D experiment’s variants.


7.1.3    CartPole
This is a classical OpenAI Gym-based control problem, which is with the goal to keep the cart pole
balanced by applying appropriate forces to a pivot point. The dynamics of this system are fully
described in Florian (2005). The MDP configurations are defined as:

                    Dimension      Continuous Observation Space       Range
                    0              cart position x                    [-4.8,4.8]
                    1              cart velocity ẋ                   [-inf, inf]
                    2              pole flip angle θ                  [-0.418, 0.418]
                    3              pole flip angle rate θ̇            [-inf, inf]


                                 Table 5: Observation space of CartPole.


                                     Index   Discrete Action Space
                                     0       push to the left
                                     1       push to the right


                                   Table 6: Action space of CartPole

The reward function is designed to discourage deviation from the balanced position (small pole flip
angle and angle rate, and slow movement of the cart):
 R = 2 − 0.3 × tanh(||x||) − 0.2 × tanh(||ẋ||) − 0.3 × tanh(||θ − θthrd ||) − 0.2 × tanh(||θ̇||) (10)

Episodes terminate if the pole angle exceeds the threshold θthrd or at the horizon of H = 100. We
consider the variants: gravity g ∈ [0.1, 2] × 9.8 N/kg, force |f | ∈ [5, 15]N to consist of a set of tasks
(as illustrated in Fig. 10), and the physics-informed decoder structure is shown in Figure 11b.

7.1.4    Walker-2D
We also study on high-dimensional locomotion task with the MuJoCo 2D walker, which is a two-
legged figure and learns to make coordinate both sets of feet, legs, and thighs to move by applying
torques on the six hinges connecting the six body parts. The MDP configuration is the same to Duan
et al. (2016a), but we design a more challenging meta-learning version by considering two variants:
gravity g ∈ [0.1, 2] × 9.8 N/kg, and desired moving velocity vgoal ∈ [−3, 3] m/s (positive means
forward and negative means backward).
The reward function consists of three parts: health-related reward Rhealth (receives a fixed reward of
value every timestep that the walker is alive), velocity-related reward Rv , and control-related reward
Rc (encouraging less torque usage to perform the movement):
                                          Rv = (v − vgoal )2
                                                                                                     (11)
                                          Rc = Ft2 + Fl2 + Ff2

                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Gravity
                                                                 Variant Gravity


                         left right
                                                                 Variant Force
                           Force
                                                                                                 left   right



                                             Figure 10: CartPole experiment’s variants

                         Physics-informed decoder ('./ )                                                        Physics-informed decoder (*$% )
                                             Physics function
   d$!                     0.1×tanh()                                                                                         Physics function
   d(!   )0                                                                                      ,&
                                                         4 ! Δ& + !&                                                $̇&!       '!"# = '̇ ! Δ% + '!    $̇&! '(̇!
                                                 !"&'( = 25
                                                                                    $̇ ! , '̇!
                                        $!
                                        "#


                                                                                                          FCN
                                                                                                 "!                                                               ")!"#
                   FCN


    $!   "!                                                              "&!,-
                                        $!
                                        "%               4 ! Δ& + (&
                                                 #"&'( = 23                                                         '(̇
                                                                                                                      !         "!"# = "̇! Δ% + "!   '!"# (!"#
    (!                                                                              $! , '!
                                                                                                 #
          %


                    (a) Navigation-2D.                                                                               (b) CartPole.

   Figure 11: Physics-informed generative model’s structures for Navigation-2D and CartPole.


                                    Gravity
                                                                Variant Gravity


               Target Moving Velocity                      Variant Target
                                                           Moving Velocity


                                             Figure 12: Walker-2D experiment’s variants


7.1.5    Pick-Place

This experiment is chosen from the benchmark Meta-World Yu et al. (2020), which is with the goal
to pick and place a puck to a goal position in the 3D space. We use the same MDP configuration
in Yu et al. (2020) and constitute a set of different tasks by considering different goal positions
(x ∈ [−0.3, 0.3]). Note that unlike MT1 setting in Yu et al. (2020), the goal positions are not
provided in the observation, as to test the ability of algorithms on generalization.
The reward function consists of two parts: grip-related reward Rg (gets a high reward if the gripper
holds the puck), and placement-related reward Rp (gets a high reward if the puck is placed within a
nearby area to the goal position)
The transition probability functions in Walker-2D and Pick-Place neither include objective motiva-
tion (like the acceleration in Highway-merge), nor have physics parts that can be easily seperated
from the whole model. Therefore, we don’t use the physics-informed decoder in these two experi-
ments but focus on the effectiveness of two types of imagination.


                                                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Dimension      Continuous Observation Space                     Range
                0              height of hopper z                               [-inf,inf]
                1              angle of the top y                               [-inf,inf]
                2/5            angle of the thigh joint (left/right)            [-inf,inf]
                3/6            angle of the leg joint (left/right)              [-inf,inf]
                4/7            angle of the foot joint (left/right)             [-inf,inf]
                8              speed of the top vx                              [-inf,inf]
                9              speed of the top vz                              [-inf,inf]
                10             angular velocity of the top ω                    [-inf,inf]
                11/14          angular velocity of the thigh (left/right) ωt    [-inf,inf]
                12/15          angular velocity of the leg (left/right) ωl      [-inf,inf]
                13/16          angular velocity of the foot (left/right) ωf     [-inf,inf]


                              Table 7: Observation space of Walker-2D.

               Dimension      Continuous Action Space                               Range
               0/3            Torque applied on the thigh rotor (left/right) Ft     [-1,1]
               1/4            Torque applied on the leg rotor (left/right) Fl       [-1,1]
               2/5            Torque applied on the foot rotor (left/right) Ff      [-1,1]


                                 Table 8: Action space of Walker-2D.


7.2     E NCODER -G ENERATIVE MODEL E VALUATION

7.2.1    E VALUATION M ETRIC
The encoder-generative model is the key part in MetaDreamer, which grounds our understanding of
tasks, and augments meta-learning tasks through imagination as well. To evaluate the performance
of our encoder-generative model, we design five metrics to systematically evaluate the performance
of learned encoder-generative model, which are defined as follows:
Disentanglement score. We compute the disentanglement metric score in a way similar to Higgins
et al. (2016), with some modification and described in the appendix. The higher in percentage, the
more disentangled the learned latent representations are.
Intra-cluster variance. This metric is the intra-cluster loss in Equation 5 and evaluates the same-
task-wise consistency of task inference.
Reconstruction error. This metric is the LN LL in Equation 4, indicating likeness of the generative
model to the real world from the simulated time-step level.
Speculated Factor values of Imaginary trajectories (SFI) error. We infer the speculated values
ĝ of generative factors for each time-step tuple (s, a, s′ , r) in an imaginary trajectory p(τ̃ |q(z|τ )),
where τ is a collected trajectory in real environment, and τ̃ is a imaginary trajectory. SFI error is
represented in form (mean({|ĝk − gk |}k ) ± var({|ĝk − gk |}k )), indicating the absolute bias and
variance of MDP-imagination from the trajectory level.
Speculated latent Context of Imaginary tasks (SCI) error. The computation of SCI error is
following: mean({|ẑ − z|}) ± var({ẑ}), by doing task inference on imaginary trajectories of an
interpolated latent context, denoted as q(ẑ|p(τ̃ |z)), where z is a randomly sampled, interpolated
latent context. The SCI error indicates the level of alignment of MDP generation and task inference
considering meta-imagination.

7.2.2    E VALUATION R ESULTS
We evaluate the learned encoder-generative model with our proposed evaluation metrics in Table
11. All experiments show satisfying disentanglement property (with a nearly 100% disentangle-
ment score), task-consistent inference (small intra-cluster variance), accurate reconstruction (nearly


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Dimension        Continuous Observation Space              Range
                        0                robot arm position x                      [-0.2,0.2]
                        1                robot arm position y                      [0.5,0.8]
                        2                robot arm position z                      [0.05,0.3]
                        3                gripper paddle open angle d               [0,1]
                        4                puck position xp                          [-0.2,0.2]
                        5                puck position yp                          [0.5,0.8]
                        6                puck position zp                          [0,0.3]
                        7-10             puck quaternion                           [-1,1]


                                  Table 9: Observation space of Pick-Place.


                         Dimension         Continuous Action Space                      Range
                         0                 robot arm movement ∆x                        [-1,1]
                         1                 robot arm movement ∆y                        [-1,1]
                         2                 robot arm movement ∆z                        [-1,1]
                         3                 gripper paddle distance apart∆d              [-1,1]


                                     Table 10: Action space of Pick-Place.


0 reconstruction error for experiments with physics information, and small enough for those with-
out physics information), authentic imagination and good alignment of MDP-imagination and task
inference (small SFI and SCI error)

Experiment        Disentanglement score      Intra-cluster variance   Reconstruction error       SFI error     SCI error
Navigation-2D          98.4 ± 0.5%               0.27 ± 0.15              0.11 ± 0.06         0.13 ± 0.05    0.36 ± 0.14
CartPole               96.3 ± 0.7%               0.31 ± 0.23              0.13 ± 0.14             − [1]      0.53 ± 0.21
Walker-2D              90.7 ± 4.7%               0.41 ± 0.17              1.22 ± 0.17        0.25 ± 0.14 [2] 0.44 ± 0.18
Pick-Place             93.4 ± 5.3%               0.38 ± 0.22              1.09 ± 0.08        0.31 ± 0.20 0.72 ± 0.25


                                   Table 11: Evaluation of encoder-generative model.
  1
    The variant generative factors are too complex to speculate from state transitions, so we don’t evaluate the SFI error
    for this experiment.
  2
    The generative factor, gravity, is too complex to speculate, so we only computate the SFI error on the generative
    factor, desired moving velocity.


7.2.3    I NTERPOLATION V ISUALIZATION

The interpolation performance is hard to be directly evaluated, but we manage to visualize the inter-
polation results of the following two experiments.
Navigation-2D. The considered variant, goal positions, can be visualized by plotting out the reward
heatmap (Figure 14). Because the reward function is proportional to the l2 distance to the goal
position, each figure’s brightest area represents the goal position of that corresponding task. It can
be observed that z0 and z1 represent the goal position changing on two diagonal lines respectively,
while z2 and z3 are inactive in this experiment.
Walker-2D. Though the reward consists of several components, velocity reward is predominant.
Therefore, the considered variant, desired moving velocities, can be approximately visualized by
plotting out the reward heatmap (Figure 15). The brightest area corresponds to the approximate
desired moving velocity. We can observe that a more positive z0 controls a larger target forward
velocity, and a more negative z0 controls a larger target backward velocity. The generated target
velocity is insensitive to z1 ∼ z3 .


                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Variant
 Goal Position


                             Figure 13: Pick-Place experiment’s variants

                                        low                     high
                                   2
                                                                         goal
                              !" y                                     position
                                   -2
                                        -2    x   2
                                                                         goal
                              !!                                       position


                              !#                                           0



                                                                           -2.5
                              !$
                                                                           -5



Figure 14: Interpolation on Navigation-2D’s latent context variables. Each row plots the generated
tasks’ reward heatmaps by assigning from low to high values on the corresponding dimension of
latent variable z from left to right figures.


7.3    A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we present some ablation studies on 1) whether to enforce the disentanglement
property of latent context, and 2) whether to introduce physics knowledge to the generative model,
3) the encoder architecture used to do task inference and 4) the components of training loss for
encoder-generative model training.
Ablation study on the encoder structure. We compare three different architectures:

        • A GRU architecture, which is used in our MetaDreamer algorithm.
        • A shared multilayer perceptron (MLP) architecture, similar to PEARL Rakelly et al. (2019),
          which outputs a posterior Gaussian distribution for each transition tuple of the context in
          parallel and then combines the Gaussians using the standard Gaussian multiplication;
        • A multi-head-attention-based architecture, which creates a multi-head key-value embed-
          ding for each transition in the context and combines all derived Gaussians for each timestep
          using standard Gaussian multiplication.

The comparison results on our evaluation metrics are listed in Table 12. MLP-based encoder shows
obvious disadvantages in SFI and SCI errors, representing poorer alignment of task inference and
generation. The attention-based encoder doesn’t obviously underperform our GRU-based encoder,
however, requires a good choice of the number of time steps to do Gaussian multiplication. In
addition, during meta-testing adaptation, a GRU-based encoder can update the posterior per time-
step with the memory of the hidden states in the GRU, while the attention-based encoder needs to
keep the memory of all time-step data tuples.
Ablation study on the components of training loss. In the paper, we propose to add two cluster
losses to help with encoder-generative model learning, intra-cluster loss for encouraging extract-
ing only task-variant-relevant information and inter-cluster loss for task identification and avoiding
posterior collapse. We conduct the ablation study to compare training: w/o inter-cluster, w/o intra-
cluster, w/o inter- and intra-cluster loss.


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      low                      high
                                                 3
                                                                                       Target
                                           !" vel                                     velocity

                                                 -3



                                           !!


                                           !#                                             0



                                                                                          -2
                                           !$
                                                                                         -4



Figure 15: Interpolation on Walker-2D’s latent context variables. Each row plots the generated
tasks’ reward heatmaps by assigning from low to high values on the corresponding dimension of
latent variable z from left to right figures.

                            Setting             Disentanglement     Intra-cluster     Reconstruction       SFI error       SCI error
                                                     score            variance            error
MetaDreamer      w/ β > 1 (β-VAE),               98.3 ± 0.5%       0.36 ± 0.21          0.08 ± 0.01      0.41 ± 0.23     0.47 ± 0.15
   (ours)            w/ physics
                     knowledge,
                       GRU,
                w/ both cluster losses
Disentanglement   w/ β = 1 (VAE)                 43.1 ± 5.3%        1.91 ± 1.13       0.053 ± 0.01       0.27 ± 0.09      1.68 ± 0.43
Physics                   w/o physics            92.2 ± 4.1%        0.72 ± 0.18        1.024 ± 0.02      0.73 ± 0.12      0.95 ± 0.26
                          knowledge
Encoder                     MLP                  94.3 ± 2.8%        0.38 ± 0.15         0.10 ± 0.03      0.62 ± 0.27      0.73 ± 0.22
Structure              Attention Model           93.7 ± 3.5%        0.40 ± 0.17         0.09 ± 0.02      0.42 ± 0.18      0.43 ± 0.16
                    w/o intra-cluster loss        92.7 ± 2.4%       0.73 ± 0.44         0.08 ± 0.02      0.48 ± 0.15      0.71 ± 0.23
Training
                    w/o inter-cluster loss       72.4 ± 19.6%       0.41 ± 0.16         0.24 ± 0.18      0.42 ± 0.17      0.45 ± 0.18
Loss
                    w/o both cluster             68.0 ± 20.7%       0.84 ± 0.36         0.21 ± 0.13      0.51 ± 0.20      0.76 ± 0.27
                    losses


                                                        Table 12: Ablation study results.
    *
      This table includes all four ablation studies, each of which is compared with our MetaDreamer, to inspect the settings that we’re
      interested in. Note that the results of the first two ablation studies are from Table 1 in the main paper.
    *
      Bold means dominant advantages; Underline means dominant disadvantages.



The lower part of Table 12 shows that the intra-cluster loss directly reduces the intra-cluster variance,
and the inter-cluster loss benefits disentanglement in learned latent context space by encouraging the
discovery of all variants among tasks, and thus further benefits the reconstruction.

8       D ISENTANGLEMENT S CORE C OMPUTATION
We modify the disentanglement metric proposed in Higgins et al. (2016) and illustrate the computa-
tion process in Figure 16, and the way to compute the disentanglement score is as follows:

         1. Choose a generative factor g ∼ U nif [1 . . . K]
         2. Randomly choose a reasonable set of generative factors and then enforce different values
            for the selected generative factor, to consist of a pair of tasks (T1 , T2 ).
         3. Simulate each task and collect corresponding trajectory, τ1l and τ2l .
         4. Infer zl1 with the encoder q(z|τ1l ), and do the same process to get zl2 .
         5. Compute the difference zldiff =|zl1 -zl2 |, the absolute linear difference between the inferred
            latent representations.
         6. Repeat step 2)-5) for L times, and store all inferred latent representation differences.


                                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                           PL
      7. Compute the average difference vector zbdiff = L1 l=1 zldiff , which is then fed as inputs to a
         low-capacity linear classifier. The accuracy of this predictor is so-called disentanglement
         metric score

As stated in Higgins et al. (2016), the disentangling metric defined in this way can measure both
the independence and interpretability (due to the use of a simple classifier) of the inferred latent
variables, while other variety of approaches (such as PCA or ICA) only achieve independence.
Rather than fixing only one generative factor and varying all the others (designed in Higgins et al.
(2016)), we, at step 2), propose to fix all generative factors but the selected one. This is because
we always set the latent context space with more dimensions than the number of generative factors,
thus inactive dimensions may confuse the linear classifier and fail to give the real disentanglement
metric score.


                                                                      Traffic speed !!"
                                                                                          Proportional "
                               !!!          %!!


                                                                                                           Inactive
                                                                                                                      Inactive
                              &((                           !
                                     !!!                   %#$%%
                      "=1                           -                                                                            '
                              &)(    !!"                                                                  &
                                                                                                     '()|+#$%% )
                               !"!          %"!
                                                                                                                       Linear
                               …


                                                           …
                                                                                                                      Classifier


                               !!&          %!&
                                                           &                                                   &
                              &((    !!#                  %#$%%     $                            1    %
                                                                   !!"## =                         % !!"##
                     "=&                            -                                            $
                                                                                                           %'(
                              &(&    ! #"

                               !"&          %"&


Figure 16: Schematic of the disentanglement metric: over a batch of L samples, each pair of tra-
jectories has only one variant generative factor (here g = Proportional p). We use a pre-train linear
classifier to identify the variant generative factor with the average pairwise difference zbdiff . The
probability of identifying the variant generative factor is the derived disentanglement score.



9    P SEUDOCODE
The pseudocode of the meta-training phase is described in Algorithm 1. The meta-testing phase is
the same as Rakelly et al. (2019), so will not be included here.

10    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
We give an overview of important hyperparameters and experimental settings we used (Table 13 and
14)


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 MetaDreamer Meta-training
Require: Encoder qθ , decoder pϕ , policy πψ , critic Qψ ;
    Meta-training tasks {T (i) }i=0,...N from task distribution p(T ); Replay buffer B for real data, B̃
    for imaginary data;
    Hyperparameter:Encoder-decoder learning rates αED , policy learning rates αP R and αP I
 1: while not done do
 2:    Sampling rollouts for each task T (i) ∼ p(T ) and store in B (i)
 3:    for each encoder-decoder training step do
 4:       Sample context c(i) ∼ B (i) (for each task index i)
 5:       Perform task inference z ∼ qϕ (z|c)
 6:       Calculate loss L according to Equation 6.
 7:       Update encoder-decoder: (θ, ϕ) ← (θ, ϕ) + αED ∇L
 8:    end for
 9:    Do interpolations on the latent context space following Equation 2 to get a set of imaginary
       latent context zI , corresponding to imaginary tasks T I .
10:    Generating imaginary rollouts for each imaginary task T I and store in B I
11:    for each policy training step do
12:       Sample context c ∼ B and perform task inference z ∼ qϕ (z|c)
13:       Sample interpolated latent context zI and generate corresponding context pϕ (cI |zI )
14:       Update policy:
          ψ ← ψ +αP R (∇Lcritic (Qψ (z), B)+∇Lactor (πψ (z), B))+αP I (∇Lcritic (Qψ (zI ), B̃)+
          ∇Lactor (πψ (zI ), B̃))
15:    end for
16: end while


                                                  22
                                                       Hyperparameter                                      Value
                                                       Optimizer                                       ADAM
                                                       Discount factor                                  0.99
                                                       Encoder type                               Recurrent network
                                                       Policy type                               Tanh Gaussian policy
                                                       VAE learning rate                                3e-4
                                                       Policy learning rate                             3e-4
                                                       Non-linearity (all networks)                     Relu
                                                       Meta batch size                                    10
                                                       Embedding batch size                      Max episodic length
                                                       Number of updating steps per iteration            500


                                                                  Table 13: Hyperparameters overview.
     Experiment                         Highway-merge          Navigation-2D         CartPole                             Walker-2D                    Pick-Place
     Meta training tasks                        16                    20                    30                                30                            16
     Meta testing tasks                          4                    5                     5                                 5                             4
     Maximal episodic length                   300                   100                   100                               300                           200
     Number of considered varia-          1 (v0) / 2 (v1)              2                     2                                 2                             3
     tions
                                                                                                                                                                        Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


23
     Types of considered varia-       Transition Probability   Reward Function    Transition Probability     Transition ProbabilityReward Function   Reward Function
     tions
     Dimension of latent context                4                     4                     4                                 4                             6
     pace
     VAE encoder network size[1]           (128,64,32)            (64,64,32)           (64,64,32)                       (258,128,64,32)              (258,128,128,64)
     Dynamics decoder size[2]              (128,64,32)            (64,32,16)           (64,32,16)                      (256,128,128,64)              (256,128,128,64)
     Reward decoder architecture           (128,64,32)            (64,32,16)           (64,32,16)                       (256,128,64,32)               (256,128,64,32)
     Posterior sample size (per               4500                  1000                 1000                                6000                          4000
     meta task)
     Loss weights:
     - αR reward reconstruction                 1                     10                    1                                 5                            20
     weight
     - αT transition reconstruction            100                    1                    100                                50                            1
     weight
     - αc1 intra-clustering weight              3                     1                     1                                 1                             1
     - αc2 inter-clustering weight              10                    1                     2                                 1                             1
     - β KL divergence weight                   5                     2                     2                                 5                             5


                                                                     Table 14: Experimental setting overview.
       [1]
           For all experiments, we use a GRU-based encoder, and the size refers to the
       [2]
           This refers to the architecture of the Fully Connected Network (FCN) in the dynamic decoder. Since no physics knowledge is utilized in Walker-2D and Pick-
          Place, it is exactly the architecture of the whole dynamics decoder.
