Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NIFIED L ANGUAGE -V ISION P RETRAINING IN LLM
WITH DYNAMIC D ISCRETE V ISUAL T OKENIZATION
                          ∗
               Yang Jin1 , Kun Xu2 , Kun Xu2 , Liwei Chen2 , Chao Liao2 , Jianchao Tan2 ,
                   Quzhe Huang1 , Bin Chen2 , Chenyi Lei2 , An Liu2 , Chengru Song2 ,
                                                                                     †
                   Xiaoqiang Lei2 , Di Zhang2 , Wenwu Ou2 , Kun Gai2 , Yadong Mu1
                             1
                               Peking University 2 Kuaishou Technology
          jiny@stu.pku.edu.cn, {xukunxkxk,syxu828}@gmail.com, myd@pku.edu.cn



                                                A BSTRACT

             Recently, the remarkable advance of the Large Language Model (LLM) has in-
             spired researchers to transfer its extraordinary reasoning capability to both vision
             and language data. However, the prevailing approaches primarily regard the visual
             input as a prompt and focus exclusively on optimizing the text generation process
             conditioned upon vision content by a frozen LLM. Such an inequitable treatment
             of vision and language heavily constrains the model’s potential. In this paper, we
             break through this limitation by representing both vision and language in a unified
             form. Specifically, we introduce a well-designed visual tokenizer to translate the
             non-linguistic image into a sequence of discrete tokens like a foreign language
             that LLM can read. The resulting visual tokens encompass high-level semantics
             worthy of a word and also support dynamic sequence length varying from the im-
             age. Coped with this tokenizer, the presented foundation model called LaVIT can
             handle both image and text indiscriminately under the same generative learning
             paradigm. This unification empowers LaVIT to serve as an impressive generalist
             interface to understand and generate multi-modal content simultaneously. Exten-
             sive experiments further showcase that it outperforms the existing models by a
             large margin on massive vision-language tasks. Our code and models are avail-
             able at https://github.com/jy0205/LaVIT.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023) nowadays have
demonstrated impressive advances in various linguistic applications. Profiting from the knowl-
edge in the massive text corpus, they possess exceptional understanding capabilities and serve as
a general-purpose interface to complete a wide range of real-world tasks. Such success has moti-
vated researchers to investigate the Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs), which aim at
extending the powerful pure-text LLMs to process multi-modality inputs. As shown in Figure 1-(a),
the prevalent approaches mostly leverage an adapter architecture (e.g., the Resampler (Alayrac et al.,
2022), linear projection (Liu et al., 2023), or Q-Former (Li et al., 2023)) to map the visual features
encoded by a pre-trained vision backbone (Radford et al., 2021) to the semantic space of LLM.
Despite achieving preliminary results in zero-shot multi-modal understanding, they still suffer from
inherent design deficiencies. The training objective of prior methodologies (Li et al., 2023; Huang
et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023) is centered on predicting textual descriptions dependent on visual con-
tent, where the visual parts are merely regarded as prompts without any supervision. The inequitable
treatment of different modal inputs severely constrains the model’s potential, limiting them to only
performing comprehension tasks like generating text based on images. Moreover, most of these
methods completely delegate the responsibility of vision-language alignment to the newly added
adapter with limited trainable parameters, which fails to leverage the remarkable reasoning capabili-
ties of LLM to learn the interaction across different modalities. Although the recent concurrent work
    ∗
        Work done during an internship at Kuaishou Technology.
    †
        Corresponding Author.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                 Quantization

       IMAGE                                              IMAGE                                                   IMAGE
                                     Classification                         Regression    Classification                         Classification   Classification

    Visual Encoder             MLLM                   Visual Encoder                MLLM                      Visual Encoder              MLLM


    Modal Adapter                                        Qformer                                              Visual Tokenizer

                                         TEXT                                               TEXT                                                    TEXT
                                                      Img token        Text token        Discrete Img token

                     (a) Adapter-Style                                       (b) Emu                                              (c) Ours

Figure 1: The comparisons between different MLLMs. (a) The adapter-style methods rely on an adapter
network to project visual features into the semantic space of LLM. During training, visual tokens are merely
treated as the prompt to guide text generation. (b) The concurrent work Emu adopts the regression loss for
visual features and jointly trains with textual tokens. (c) We craft a visual tokenizer to represent images in the
same discrete format as text so as to indiscriminately optimize them under a unified generative objective.

Emu (Sun et al., 2023) proposes to unlock the text-pretrained LLM by regressing the next visual em-
bedding during pre-training (Figure 1-(b)), the inconsistent optimization objectives for image and
text are not conducive to unified multi-modal modeling.
In this work, we introduce LaVIT (Language-VIsion Transformer), a novel general-purpose multi-
modal foundation model that inherits the successful learning paradigm of LLM: predicting the next
image/text token in an auto-regressive manner. Our insight is that by employing a unified objective
to indiscriminately treat tokens from different modalities, the model can seamlessly achieve “any-to-
any” multi-modal comprehension and generation. However, the original LLM is specifically crafted
to process discrete textual tokens. When dealing with physical signal inputs, such as images, it
becomes imperative to embrace a representation seamlessly compatible with text tokens. There-
fore, we propose to translate the image into a sequence of tokens like a foreign language that LLM
can comprehend, so that both images and texts can be handled simultaneously under the unified
generative objective without any specific architectural modification, as shown in Figure 1-(c).
To achieve this goal, a crucial element lies in the development of an efficient visual tokenizer for
encoding images, which we contend should adhere to the following principles: (i) discrete visual
token: While language models rely on text tokens defined by a dictionary, prior visual tokens, like
those derived from ViT, consist of continuous feature vectors encoding a patch. In approaches such
as masked image modeling (He et al., 2022) or masked feature prediction (Wei et al., 2022), re-
gressive objectives on continuous features or raw visual pixels are employed for self-supervised
pretraining. Here, we advocate for quantizing the visual tokens into a discrete form, aligning them
with the next-token prediction objective in language models. This form is particularly advantageous
when the target distribution for the next token is multi-mode. (ii) dynamic token allocation. Given
the varying semantic complexity of different images, employing a fixed length of tokens to encode
all images is compute-uneconomical. Moreover, as a key difference from textual tokens, visual
patches exhibit a notable interdependence, making it considerably more straightforward to deduce
one token from others. This renders the next-token paradigm less effective in learning visual knowl-
edge through self-supervision. Thus we argue for the token-merging to ensure the least redundancy
among visual patches, thereby rendering a dynamic token number for different images.
Following the aforementioned two crucial fundamentals, LaVIT introduces a novel dynamic visual
tokenization mechanism consisting of a selector and a merger to process images. The token selector
first decides which visual patches carry informative semantics and are necessary to be selected to
encode the whole image. In order to maximally preserve the image details, the token merger further
compresses the unselected patches onto the retained ones according to their feature similarity. Such
a design enables each retained visual token to contain high-level semantics from multiple similar
patches and thus reduce the redundancy among tokens. This selecting and merging strategy will
produce a dynamic sequence length varying from the image content itself. The retained visual to-
kens are further quantized into discrete codes by a learnable codebook (Esser et al., 2021), which
will serve as the supervision signals for visual tokens during pre-training. Empowered by this vi-
sual tokenizer, our LaVIT can be trained with a simple yet unified objective: predicting the next
image/text token in the multi-modal sequence. After pre-training, LaVIT can serve as a multi-modal
generalist to perform both multi-modal comprehension and generation without further fine-tuning
(See Figure 2). The key contributions of this work are summarized as:


                                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Next Image/Text Token Prediction
                        ...          ...    [/IMG]          [IMG]       ...         [/IMG]           [IMG] ...
                                                                                                                                                  Textual Tokens
                                                                                                                 Understanding                                        decode     flip his
                                                                                                                                                         ...   [/S]
                                                                                                                                                                               skateboard

                                                                                                                                                 LaVIT
                          Multimodal Language Model (LaVIT)
                                                                                                                                           ...
       Visual                                                                                                     What is the
                                                                                                                  boy doing?      Multi-modal Tokens
      Tokenizer         ... [IMG]          ...   [/IMG]         [IMG]         ...       [/IMG]            ...

                                     𝑇" 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠                           𝑇! 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠
                                                                                                                                                   Visual Tokens
                                                                                                                 Generation                                        decode
                                                                                                                                                      ...   [/IMG]


                                                               Text Tokenizer                                                                    LaVIT
        Visual Token                                                                                                                      ...    [IMG]
                                                      The antelopes                 A man is playing             It is swimming
        Textual Token                                are eating grass                  tennis ball                 in the river    Multi-modal Tokens


                                       (a) Pre-training                                                                               (b) Inference

Figure 2: Given an image-text pair, the image is tokenized into discrete tokens and concatenated with
text tokens to form a multi-modal sequence. Then, LaVIT is optimized under a unified generative
objective. After training, it can achieve both zero-shot multi-modal comprehension and generation.

• We introduce LaVIT, a new effective, general-purpose multi-modal foundation model that goes
  beyond the traditional adapter-based architectures. By transforming images into a sequence of
  discrete tokens like a foreign language that LLM can comprehend and generate, both modalities
  can be associated indiscriminately under a unified generative training paradigm.
• The developed visual tokenizer can produce discrete visual tokens with dynamic length to reduce
  the interdependence among visual patches, which enhances the representation compatibility of
  image and text in LLM and improves computational efficiency.
• Our LaVIT showcases the extraordinary multi-modal understanding and generation potential. It
  can take any modality combinations as input and perform impressive in-context generation of
  both images and text. As demonstrated by extensive experiments, LaVIT achieves state-of-the-art
  zero-shot performance on a wide range of vision-language tasks.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Vision-Language Pre-training. Researchers have extensively investigated vision-language pre-
training (VLP). The pioneer works (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021) primarily employ dual-
encoder with contrastive objectives to learn the generic cross-modal aligned representations. Re-
cently, the rapid progress of large language models (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023)
has motivated researchers to delve into the exploration of augmenting LLM towards vision language
tasks. The majority of these works adopt an adapter-style network (Zhang et al., 2023) that serves
as an intermediate bridge connecting the pre-trained vision encoder and frozen language model. For
instance, Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) develops a Perceiver Resampler to generate text-aligned
visual representations. Follow-up methods (Li et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023) mainly adopt the Q-
Former to project the visual semantics to the LLM’s input space. However, visual inputs in these
methods (Huang et al., 2023; Alayrac et al., 2022) are only considered as the prompt and not in-
volved in the optimization, which heavily restricts the model potential.
Vector Quantization in Computer Vision. Vector quantization (Gray, 1984; Nasrabadi & King,
1988) is widely used in image-generative models. The VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017) and
DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) proposed to convert an image into a set of discrete codes in a learn-
able discrete latent space by learning to reconstruct the original image pixels. Models like VQ-
GAN (Esser et al., 2021) and ViT-VQGAN (Yu et al., 2021) leverage adversarial and perceptual
objectives to further enhance the image generation quality. The BEIT series of works also adopts
the quantized visual codes as the supervision in mask image modeling (Peng et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2023). However, most of these methods tokenize the image into a token sequence with a fixed
length (e.g., 512 or 1024). Such a long sequence will invariably result in an excessive computa-
tional burden. On the contrary, our proposed visual tokenizer reduces the redundancy among image
patches and supports dynamic token length, thus enabling efficient multi-modal inference.


                                                                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  ...                  Codebook                                                              "
                                                                      Embeddings
                                                                                        𝑐" %
                                                                                           "#$
                                                                                                  Visual Part Features        ...            𝑋!
                                      𝑐! 𝑐" 𝑐# 𝑐$ 𝑐%&" 𝑐%&! 𝑐%


                                          Nearest Neighbor                                                      𝐿 blocks
                                              Lookup                                                                        Feed
                                                                                            &
              𝑥## &#$%          ...                                 ...               𝑐'&
                                                                                            #$%
                                                                                                                           Forward
                                               Quantize
             Visual Part Features                                         Quantized Embeddings
                                                                                                                             Cross
                           Token Selector                        Reconstruct
                                                                                    Unused in         𝑋"                   Attention
                                                                                   Pre-Training
                             & Merger                             Decoder
                                                                                                                 Value        Key           Query
                                                                          Reconstruct                  ...
                                                                                                                            Causal
                                                                                                                           Attention
                               Visual
                              Encoder                                                             Unselected
                                                                                                   Patches
                                                                                                                                    ...       𝑋!
      Input Image                                       Visual Semantic Features {𝑥}(
                                                                                    #$%
                                                                                                                         Selected Patches

                          (a) Dynamic Visual Tokenizer                                                       (b) The Token Merger

Figure 3: (a) The pipeline of the proposed dynamic visual tokenizer. It employs a token selector
to select the most informative patches and a token merger to compress the information of discarded
patches onto the retained ones. The whole tokenizer is trained by maximally reconstructing the
semantics of the input image. (b) The detailed architecture of token merger.

3     M ETHOD
This work proposes to leverage the extraordinary reasoning potential of the large language model
to facilitate the modeling of both vision and language modalities. In pursuit of this goal, the key
component is to represent these two modalities in a uniform form, so as to exploit LLM’s successful
learning recipe (i.e., next-token prediction). As shown in Figure 2, we develop a visual tokenizer
(Section 3.1) to convert the non-linguistic image to the input that LLMs can comprehend. It receives
the vision features from a pre-trained vision encoder and outputs a sequence of discrete visual tokens
possessing word-like high-level semantics. Coped with the crafted tokenizer, the visual input can be
integrated with textual tokens to compose a multi-modal sequence, which is subsequently fed into
large language models under a unified auto-regressive training objective (Section 3.2).

3.1   S TAGE -1: DYNAMIC V ISUAL T OKENIZER

Given an image x ∈ RH×W ×C , it is first partitioned into N = HW/P 2 non-overlapping patches,
where P is the patch size. These patches are fed into a pre-trained ViT encoder (Fang et al., 2023)
to produce a sequence of the patch features X = {x1 , ..., xN }. Then, a straightforward way to
encode images is to directly quantize the N patch-level embeddings into discrete tokens as the input
to LLMs. This will result in a long visual sequence and bring superfluous computational burden
since many visual patches may contain repetitive and trivial background semantics. These redun-
dant patches demonstrate a discernible interdependence, thereby diminishing the efficacy of the
next-token paradigm in learning visual knowledge via self-supervision. Consequently, the proposed
tokenizer aims to produce visual tokens with a dynamic length according to the complexity of the
image content itself. As illustrated in Figure 3, it comprises a token selector and a token merger.

Token Selector The token selector takes the N patch-level features X as input. It aims to estimate
the importance of each image patch and selects the most informative ones that are competent enough
to represent the semantics of the whole image. Inspired by (Rao et al., 2021), it is implemented as
a lightweight module consisting of several MLP layers to predict a distribution π ∈ RN ×2 , where
πi = MLP(xi ). By sampling from the distribution π, a binary decision mask M ∈ {0, 1}N can be
generated, which indicates whether to remain the corresponding image patch. To relax the sampling
to be differentiable, the Gumbel-Softmax trick (Maddison et al., 2016) is applied to π:
                                                      exp((log πi,j + Gi,j )/τ )
                                            πˆi,j = P2                              .                                                               (1)
                                                     r=1 exp((log πi,r + Gi,r )/τ )


                                                                               4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Gi,j is the noise sampled from a Gumbel distribution, τ is the temperature to control smooth-
ness. Then, the binary decision mask M can be sampled from π̂ for end-to-end training.

Token Merger According to the generated decision mask, total N image patches can be par-
titioned into retained and dropped groups, with T and N − T patches respectively, denoted as
                                   −T
Xr = {xi }Ti=1 and Xd = {xj }N   j=1 . Instead of directly discarding Xd , we develop a token merger
to deal with it to maximally preserve the detailed semantics of the input image. As shown in the right
of Figure 3, the token merger will progressively compress the information of discarded Xd onto the
retained Xr according to their semantic similarity. Concretely, it consists of L stacked blocks, each
of which has a causal self-attention layer, a cross-attention layer, and a feed-forward layer. In the
causal self-attention layer, each token in Xr attends to its previous tokens with a causal mask. This
helps to convert 2D raster-ordered features from the ViT encoder into a sequence with causal de-
pendency, thus ensuring consistency with textual tokens in LLMs. We found this strategy can result
in better performance than bi-directional self-attention. The cross-attention layer treats the retained
tokens Xr as the query and merges tokens in Xd based on their similarity in the embedding space.
Formally, this layer calculates an update of Xr by:
                                                             √
                                   ∆Xr = softmax QK ⊤ / D V,                                         (2)
where D denotes the dimension of hidden state, Q = WQ Xr ∈ RT ×D , K = WK Xd ∈ R(N −T )×D
and V = WV Xd ∈ R(N −T )×D . To parallelize the computation, we adopt the predicted decision
mask M to control the cross-attention scope between tokens without directly partitioning them into
two groups. After L successive token merger blocks, we can obtain the final merged visual tokens
X̂r = {x̂i }Ti=1 . Each token implicitly encodes high-level semantics from several image patches
possessing similar visual patterns, which we refer to as visual part features X̂r . The token selector
and merger work together to dynamically adjust the visual token sequence length to accommodate
images with different content complexity.
Vector Quantization and Training The generated visual part features X̂r are then passed into
a quantizer. It tokenizes X̂r to a sequence of discrete visual codes V = {vi }Ti=1 by looking up a
learnable codebook C = {ck }K   k=1 , where K is codebook size. To be specific, the ith visual code is
calculated by assigning x̂i in X̂r to its closest neighbourhood code in C:
                        vi = arg min ∥l2 (x̂i ) − l2 (cj )∥2 , vi ∈ [0, K − 1],                   (3)
                                    j
where l2 indicates the L2 norm. Based on the indexing visual codes, we can obtain the quantized
embeddings {cvi }Ti=1 , which is fed into a decoder to reconstruct the original visual semantic fea-
tures X = {xi }N i=1 . The insight behind this design is that the reconstruction quality of the image
semantics depends on selecting the most informative patches (token selector), along with maximally
preserving the visual details only through the remained tokens (token merger). Thus, both token
selector and merger can be effectively updated by encouraging a higher semantic reconstruction
quality. The final training objective of the visual tokenizer is defined as:
                                     N                                     N
                                  1 X                                  1 X
                     Ltokenizer =        (1 − cos(xi , xrec
                                                        i   )) + λ(ρ −       Mi )2 ,               (4)
                                  N i=1                                N i=1
where cos(xi , xrec
                 i ) calculates the cosine similarity between the reconstructed and real visual embed-
dings, ρ is a pre-defined rate that controls the target mean percentage of the retained visual tokens
and λ is set to be 2. Finally, the tokenized discrete codes {vi }Ti=1 will serve as the supervision
signals for visual tokens in the following pre-training.
Decoding to Pixels The proposed visual tokenizer is capable of reconstructing visual features of
input images that contain high-level semantics to represent the image content but lose the pixel-level
details. To recover the original pixel space, we employ a conditional de-noising U-Net ϵθ (Rombach
et al., 2022) to infill the visual details after training the visual tokenizer. Specifically, it takes the
reconstructed xrec as the condition to progressively recover image x from a Gaussian noise. Follow-
ing Rombach et al. (2022), the parameters θ of this U-Net are optimized by ϵ prediction:
                               Lθ = Ez,ϵ∼N (0,1),t [||ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, xrec )||] ,                      (5)
where zt is the latent state of image x in the diffusion process. We present some pixel decoding
results by the trained denoising U-Net in Figure 7 of the appendix. During inference, the generated
visual tokens from LaVIT can be decoded into realistic images by this U-Net.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   S TAGE -2: U NIFIED G ENERATIVE M ODELING

Given an image-text pair, the 2D image can be tokenized into a 1D sequence with causal dependency
and then concatenated with text tokens to form a multi-modal sequence y = (y1 , y2 , .., yS ). For
differentiating between two modalities, two special tokens [IMG] and [/IMG] are inserted into the
beginning and end of the image token sequence respectively, indicating the start and end of image
content. To empower LaVIT with the capability to generate both text and images, we employ two
different concatenation forms, i.e., [image, text] and [text; image]. When the image is used as a
condition (on the left) to generate text, we use the continuous visual features X̂r from the token
merger instead of quantized visual embeddings as the input to LLMs. Such a design mitigates the
loss of detailed information caused by vector quantization, which is crucial for fine-grained multi-
modal understanding tasks like visual question answering. Our LaVIT adopts the general Language
Modeling (LM) objective to directly maximize the likelihood of each multi-modal sequence in an
auto-regressive manner:
                                           XX   S
                                  p(y) =           log Pθ (yi |y<i ).                           (6)
                                          y∈D i=1
Since both image and text are already represented as discrete token IDs, we can use the cross-entropy
to supervise the token prediction at each location for both two modalities with a shared prediction
head. The complete unification in representation spaces and the training paradigms can help LLMs
better learn multi-modal interaction and alignment. When LaVIT is pre-trained, it possesses the
capacity to perceive images akin to a foreign language, comprehending and producing them like text.
Nevertheless, most of the existing works merely regard images as prompts to guide the generation
of text with no supervision, restricting them to solely performing image-to-text tasks.

3.3   M ODEL P RE - TRAINING

The LaVIT undergoes a two-stage pre-training procedure on web-scale multi-modal corpora.
Stage-1: Tokenizer Training. Following the existing MLLMs, the ViT-G/14 of EVA-CLIP (Fang
et al., 2023) is employed as the visual encoder. The visual codebook size is empirically set to
K = 16384. We adopt L = 12 transformer blocks for both token merger and decoder in our
tokenizer. During training, this encoder is kept frozen and only the parameters of the selector,
merger, and codebook are updated. It is trained for 50K steps on about 100M images from LAION-
400M (Schuhmann et al., 2021) with the batch size of 2048 and ρ = 1/3. After training the tok-
enizer, the conditional U-Net for pixel decoding is initialized from the Stable Diffusion v1.5 (Rom-
bach et al., 2022) and finetuned 20k steps on the same dataset. The whole stage-1 training only
requires pure image data without corresponding captions.
Stage-2: Unified Vision-Language Pre-training. Based on the trained visual tokenizer, all the im-
ages can be tokenized into discrete codes that are amenable to the next token prediction. We utilize
the raw 7B version of LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) as the default LLM. For image-to-text com-
prehension (i.e., [image, text]), we employ about 93M samples from Conceptual Caption (Sharma
et al., 2018; Changpinyo et al., 2021), SBU (Ordonez et al., 2011), and BLIP-Capfilt (Li et al.,
2022). For the text-to-image synthesis (i.e., [text, image]), an additional 100M image-text pairs from
the LAION-Aesthetics (A high-aesthetics image subset of LAION-5B (Schuhmann et al., 2022)) are
used following Stable Diffusion. Moreover, to reduce catastrophic forgetting of the reasoning capac-
ity in training LLM, we employ the English text corpus from Redpajama (Computer, 2023) dataset
and mix it with the above image-text pairs to form the multi-modal input sequence.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, comprehensive experiments are conducted to systematically validate the effectiveness
of LaVIT on a wide range of vision-language tasks. Specifically, we mainly evaluate the model’s
zero-shot multi-modal understanding and generation capacity.

4.1   Z ERO -S HOT M ULTIMODAL U NDERSTANDING

We first quantitatively evaluate the zero-shot multi-modal understanding capacity of LaVIT on
Image Captioning (NoCaps (Agrawal et al., 2019), Flickr30k (Plummer et al., 2015))and Visual


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                Image Captioning         Visual Question Answering
      Method
                                                Nocaps      Flickr   VQAv2   OKVQA      GQA     VizWiz
      Flamingo-3B (Alayrac et al., 2022)          -         60.6      49.2     41.2       -      28.9
      Flamingo-9B (Alayrac et al., 2022)          -         61.5      51.8     44.7       -      28.8
      OpenFlamingo-9B (Awadalla et al., 2023)     -         59.5      52.7     37.8       -      27.5
      MetaLM (Hao et al., 2022)                   -         43.4      41.1     11.4       -       -
      Kosmos-1 (Huang et al., 2023)               -         67.1      51.0      -         -      29.2
      Kosmos-2 (Peng et al., 2023)                -         80.5      51.1      -         -       -
      BLIP-2 (Vicuna-7B) (Li et al., 2023)      107.5       74.9       -        -        41.3    25.3
      BLIP-2 (Vicuna-13B) (Li et al., 2023)     103.9       71.6       -        -        32.3    19.6
      CM3Leon-7B (Yu et al., 2023)                -          -        47.6      -         -      37.6
      Emu (LLaMA-13B) (Sun et al., 2023)          -          -        52.0     38.2       -      34.2
      Ours (LLaMA-7B)                           114.2       83.0      66.0     54.6      46.8    38.5

Table 1: Overview of zero-shot evaluation on multi-modal understanding tasks. Compared with
previous methods, our LaVIT achieved the best performance on both benchmarks.

Question Answering (VQAv2 (Goyal et al., 2017), OKVQA (Marino et al., 2019), GQA (Hud-
son & Manning, 2019), VizWiz (Gurari et al., 2018)). For visual question answering tasks, we
use a simple prompt: “Question: {} Answer: {}”. The widely-used CIDEr score and VQA
accuracy are employed as metrics to evaluate captioning and question answering, respectively.
The detailed performance compar-
isons are shown in Table 1. As              Method                                Model Type      FID(↓)
observed, LaVIT surpasses all the           Text2Image Specialist:
existing MLLMs by a large mar-              DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021)         Autoregressive    28.0
gin on these understanding tasks.           CogView (Ding et al., 2021)          Autoregressive    27.1
For example, it achieves a CIDEr            SD (Rombach et al., 2022)              Diffusion       12.6
                                            GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021)            Diffusion       12.2
score of 83.0 on the Flickr30k test         DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al., 2022)          Diffusion       10.4
dataset, compared to 61.5 and 74.9          Make-A-Scene (Gafni et al., 2022)    Autoregressive    11.8
for the Flamingo-9B and BLIP-2              MUSE-7.6B (Chang et al., 2023)     Non-Autoregressive   7.9
                                            Imagen-3.4B (Saharia et al., 2022)     Diffusion        7.3
(Vicuna-7B) under the same scale of         Parti-20B (Yu et al., 2022)          Autoregressive     7.2
model size, respectively. The per-          Multimodal Large Langauge Model:
formance superiority on OKVQA               GILL (OPT-6.7B) (Koh et al., 2023)       LLM           12.2
(54.6% v.s. 44.7% of Flamingo-              Emu (LLaMA-13B) (Sun et al., 2023)       LLM           11.7
                                            CM3Leon-7B (Yu et al., 2023)             LLM           10.8
9B) further showcases the excel-            Ours (LLaMA-7B)                          LLM            7.4
lent multi-modal understanding ca-
pacity of LaVIT, since this bench- Table 2: The zero-shot text-to-image generation performance of
mark contains questions requiring different models on MS-COCO-30K evaluation benchmark.
commonsense knowledge and rea-
soning about the content of images. It is worth noting that, although the concurrent method
Emu (Sun et al., 2023) also leverages the LLM to jointly model the vision and language, the di-
rect feature regression objective for visual inputs makes it incompatible with text input. Therefore,
despite using more training data (2.6B image-text pairs and 3.8B web-crawled data) and larger LLM
(LLaMA 13B), it still achieves inferior performance to ours on all evaluation benchmarks.


4.2    Z ERO -S HOT M ULTIMODAL G ENERATION

Since the proposed visual tokenizer can represent images as discrete tokens, LaVIT possesses the
capability to synthesize images by auto-regressively generating visual tokens like text. We first
quantitatively evaluate the model’s zero-shot text-conditional image synthesis performance on the
validation set of the MS-COCO benchmark (Lin et al., 2014). The detailed image generation proce-
dure is presented in Appendix A. Following the standard setting like previous text-to-image synthesis
works, we randomly sample 30k text prompts and calculate the zero-shot FID metric between real
images and generated ones. The detailed comparative results are shown in Table 2. It can be seen
that LaVIT outperforms all the other multi-modal language models. Compared with the concurrent
work Emu, it makes a 4.3 FID improvement with a smaller LLM model, demonstrating excellent
vision-language alignment capability. In addition, LaVIT achieves comparable performance with
state-of-the-art text2image specialists Parti (Yu et al., 2022), while only using much fewer training
data (e.g., 0.2B v.s. 2B training image-text pairs compared to Parti).


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Ours                                                       Stable Diffusion v2.1


                   A photo of a light bulb in outer space traveling the galaxy with a sailing boat inside the light bulb


                                A television made of water that displays an image of a cityscape at night.
                             (a) Text-to-Image Generation compared with Stable Diffusion


                            On the beach       On top of a wooden floor                         On the beach On top of a wooden floor


          Image+ Text                                                         Image+ Text



                          In a police outfit    Wearing pink glasses                          In a police outfit   Wearing pink glasses


                 Image + Image                                                       Image + Image
                             (b) The Image Generation with multi-modal prompts of LaVIT

                 Figure 4: The qualitative examples of multi-modal image synthesis.

Generation via Multi-modal Prompt LaVIT can seamlessly accept several modality combina-
tions (e.g., text, image+text, image+image) as prompts to generate corresponding images with-
out any fine-tuning. Figure 4 showcases some examples of the multi-modal image generation re-
sults. Our LaVIT can produce high-quality images that precisely reflect the style and semantics of
the given multi-modal prompts, which demonstrates the strong multi-modal modeling potential of
LaVIT. More interestingly, it can modify the original input image by the input multi-modal prompt
(e.g., in the last example two prompt images with a dog or cat generate a dog’s portrait with the cat’s
whisker). This capability cannot be attained by conventional image generation models like Stable
Diffusion in the absence of additional fine-tuned downstream data (Ruiz et al., 2023).


4.3   A BLATION S TUDY

In this study, we investigate the impact of various component designs in LaVIT on downstream
performance. All the ablations were conducted on part of pre-training data by using the clip ViT-
L/14 (Jia et al., 2021) as the visual encoder due to the costly training resources.
Token Classification or Feature Regression? When jointly training vision and language via gener-
ative training in text-oriented LLM, it is crucial to select the appropriate optimization objectives for
the 2D raster-ordered visual input. When quantizing the continuous visual tokens into the discrete
form, it is convenient to use the cross-entropy loss for supervising the next visual token prediction
akin to textual tokens. We conjecture that such a uniform objective for both vision and language
contributes to aligning them together in the LLM. To validate the superiority of the proposed visual
quantization, we change the optimization objective of visual tokens to regressing the next visual
embeddings by employing a regression head like Emu (Sun et al., 2023). Table 3a summarizes the
results of different training objectives. As observed, adopting the regression loss for the next visual
token prediction will severely degrade the model performance.


                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Token Num: 95                    Token Num: 108            Code: 8892       Code: 4107


                     Token Num: 79                    Token Num: 97              Code: 9146      Code: 15116


Figure 5: The visualization for the dynamic visual tokenizer (left) and learned codebook (right). Our tokenizer
can dynamically select the most informative patches based on the image content and the learned codebook can
produce visual codes with high-level semantics.
Dynamic or Fixed Token Length. Given the extracted visual features, a straightforward way is
to tokenize all the patch embeddings into the visual tokens, which results in a fixed token length
(i.e., 256). We compare the impact of fixed and dynamic tokenization strategies in terms of training
time, computation overhead, and zero-shot performance on multi-modal understanding. As shown in
Table 3b, the dynamic visual tokenizer achieves superior performance while only requiring 94 tokens
on average for the input images, about 36% of the fixed one. Given that the attention computation
in LLM exhibits a quadratic relationship with respect to the token length, this sparsification can
accelerate the training time by 40% and reduce the computational cost in inference.

       Setting       Flickr     VQAv2       OKVQA         Setting      Num   Time    Flickr   VQAv2       OKVQA
     Regression       60.4           53.6    41.9        Fixed         256   30h      71.1     56.5            46.4
    Classification    73.2           57.1    47.0       Dynamic         94   18h      74.0     57.7            47.6

(a) Ablations of different training objectives.     (b) Ablations for the effect of different tokenization strategies.

Table 3: The ablations of different optimization objectives for visual tokens and tokenization strate-
gies. The num and time in Table 3b indicate the mean visual token number and pre-training time.

4.4      Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

We visualize some examples processed by the proposed dynamic tokenizer. As shown in Figure 5,
the token selector is capable of dynamically selecting the most informative image patches that are
competent enough to represent the semantics of the whole image. Visual patches that contain repet-
itive or trivial background semantics are filtered during this procedure, thereby reducing redundant
information and improving computing efficiency. We also visualize the image patches that belong
to the same visual code in Figure 5. As observed, the learned discrete codes can convey explicit vi-
sual semantics and group the image patches with similar patterns together. For instance, code 4107
represents a part of a skateboard, and code 9146 indicates the texture of a giraffe, which strongly
demonstrates the interpretability of the learned codebook.

5      C ONCLUSION
This paper presents the LaVIT, a new general-purpose foundation model that is capable of simulta-
neously performing multi-modal understanding and generation. Beyond the previous adapter-based
methods, it inherits the successful auto-regressive generative learning paradigm of LLMs by rep-
resenting both vision and language in a unified discrete token representation via a dynamic visual
tokenizer. Through optimization under the unified generative objective, LaVIT can treat images as
a foreign language, comprehending and generating them like text. Extensive experimental results
further demonstrate the LaVIT’s superior capability to serve as a multi-modal generalist.
Acknowledgement: This research work is supported by National Key R&D Program of China
(2022ZD0160305).


                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Harsh Agrawal, Karan Desai, Yufei Wang, Xinlei Chen, Rishabh Jain, Mark Johnson, Dhruv Batra,
  Devi Parikh, Stefan Lee, and Peter Anderson. Nocaps: Novel object captioning at scale. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 8948–8957, 2019.

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.

Anas Awadalla, Irena Gao, Josh Gardner, Jack Hessel, Yusuf Hanafy, Wanrong Zhu, Kalyani
  Marathe, Yonatan Bitton, Samir Gadre, Shiori Sagawa, et al. Openflamingo: An open-
  source framework for training large autoregressive vision-language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.01390, 2023.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, AJ Maschinot, Jose Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan
  Yang, Kevin Murphy, William T Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, et al. Muse: Text-to-image gen-
  eration via masked generative transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00704, 2023.

Soravit Changpinyo, Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual 12m: Pushing
  web-scale image-text pre-training to recognize long-tail visual concepts. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3558–3568, 2021.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.

Together Computer. Redpajama: An open source recipe to reproduce llama training dataset, 2023.
  URL https://github.com/togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data.

Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, et al. Cogview: Mastering text-to-image generation via transformers.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:19822–19835, 2021.

Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
  tion, pp. 12873–12883, 2021.

Yuxin Fang, Wen Wang, Binhui Xie, Quan Sun, Ledell Wu, Xinggang Wang, Tiejun Huang, Xinlong
  Wang, and Yue Cao. Eva: Exploring the limits of masked visual representation learning at scale.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  19358–19369, 2023.

Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-
  a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 89–106. Springer, 2022.

Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Making the v in vqa
  matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in visual question answering. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6904–6913, 2017.

Robert Gray. Vector quantization. IEEE Assp Magazine, 1(2):4–29, 1984.

Danna Gurari, Qing Li, Abigale J Stangl, Anhong Guo, Chi Lin, Kristen Grauman, Jiebo Luo, and
  Jeffrey P Bigham. Vizwiz grand challenge: Answering visual questions from blind people. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3608–3617,
  2018.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yaru Hao, Haoyu Song, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Zewen Chi, Wenhui Wang, Shuming Ma, and
  Furu Wei. Language models are general-purpose interfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06336,
  2022.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross B. Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 15979–15988, 2022.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.           Classifier-free diffusion guidance.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, Wenhui Wang, Yaru Hao, Saksham Singhal, Shuming Ma, Tengchao Lv,
  Lei Cui, Owais Khan Mohammed, Qiang Liu, et al. Language is not all you need: Aligning
  perception with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.14045, 2023.
Drew A Hudson and Christopher D Manning. Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
  and compositional question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6700–6709, 2019.
Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
  with noisy text supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4904–4916.
  PMLR, 2021.
Jing Yu Koh, Daniel Fried, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Generating images with multimodal language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17216, 2023.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.12597, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023.
Chris J Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous
  relaxation of discrete random variables. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.00712, 2016.
Kenneth Marino, Mohammad Rastegari, Ali Farhadi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Ok-vqa: A visual
  question answering benchmark requiring external knowledge. In Proceedings of the IEEE/cvf
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3195–3204, 2019.
Nasser M Nasrabadi and Robert A King. Image coding using vector quantization: A review. IEEE
  Transactions on communications, 36(8):957–971, 1988.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Vicente Ordonez, Girish Kulkarni, and Tamara Berg. Im2text: Describing images using 1 million
  captioned photographs. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhiliang Peng, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Qixiang Ye, and Furu Wei. Beit v2: Masked image modeling
  with vector-quantized visual tokenizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06366, 2022.
Zhiliang Peng, Wenhui Wang, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shaohan Huang, Shuming Ma, and Furu
  Wei. Kosmos-2: Grounding multimodal large language models to the world. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14824, 2023.
Bryan A Plummer, Liwei Wang, Chris M Cervantes, Juan C Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier, and Svet-
  lana Lazebnik. Flickr30k entities: Collecting region-to-phrase correspondences for richer image-
  to-sentence models. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  2641–2649, 2015.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Yongming Rao, Wenliang Zhao, Benlin Liu, Jiwen Lu, Jie Zhou, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Dynamicvit:
  Efficient vision transformers with dynamic token sparsification. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 34:13937–13949, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022.
Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual captions: A cleaned,
  hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In Proceedings of the 56th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  2556–2565, 2018.
Quan Sun, Qiying Yu, Yufeng Cui, Fan Zhang, Xiaosong Zhang, Yueze Wang, Hongcheng Gao,
  Jingjing Liu, Tiejun Huang, and Xinlong Wang. Generative pretraining in multimodality. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.05222, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Wenhui Wang, Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Johan Bjorck, Zhiliang Peng, Qiang Liu, Kriti Aggarwal,
 Owais Khan Mohammed, Saksham Singhal, Subhojit Som, et al. Image as a foreign language:
 Beit pretraining for vision and vision-language tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
 ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19175–19186, 2023.
Chen Wei, Haoqi Fan, Saining Xie, Chao-Yuan Wu, Alan L. Yuille, and Christoph Feichtenhofer.
  Masked feature prediction for self-supervised visual pre-training. In IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14648–14658, 2022.
Jiahui Yu, Xin Li, Jing Yu Koh, Han Zhang, Ruoming Pang, James Qin, Alexander Ku, Yuanzhong
   Xu, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Vector-quantized image modeling with improved vqgan.
   In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2(3):5, 2022.
Lili Yu, Bowen Shi, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Benjamin Muller, Olga Golovneva, Tianlu Wang, Arun
  Babu, Binh Tang, Brian Karrer, Shelly Sheynin, et al. Scaling autoregressive multi-modal models:
  Pretraining and instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02591, 2023.
Renrui Zhang, Jiaming Han, Aojun Zhou, Xiangfei Hu, Shilin Yan, Pan Lu, Hongsheng Li, Peng
  Gao, and Yu Qiao. Llama-adapter: Efficient fine-tuning of language models with zero-init atten-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16199, 2023.
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: En-
  hancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     T HE D ETAILS OF I MAGE S YNTHESIS
Given a multi-modal prompt (image, text, or their combinations), LaVIT first tokenizes it as a se-
quence of discrete tokens. By appending the special [IMG] (image start token) to the end of the
prompt and feeding into the LLM, it can auto-regressively generate a sequence of visual tokens
until reaches the special [/IMG] (image end). These yielded discrete visual tokens are further re-
constructed into a feature map by the decoder of the proposed visual tokenizer, which reflects the
high-level semantics of the synthetic image. Finally, the conditional denoising U-Net will take this
feature map as the condition to progressively recover image pixels from a Gaussian noise. Taking
the text prompt as an example, we illustrate the entire image synthesis procedure in Figure 6.
                                   Visual Tokens
                                          ...   [/IMG]
                                                                         Reconstruct
                                                                       Visual Features

                                                           Tokenizer
                     LaVIT                                  Decoder
                                                                               Conditioning
              ...        [IMG]   Textual Tokens
                                                                                                Up
                                                                       Denoising U-Net
              Text Tokenizer                                                                  Sample
                                                         Gaussian                                      Generated
                                                          Noise                                         Image
           A man is playing tennis ball
                                                                        Recover to Pixel Space

Figure 6: The detailed image synthesis process for the textual prompt by LaVIT. Generation for
prompts in other modalities is similar.

During the text-to-image evaluation on MS-COCO, we use the top-k sampling to generate image
tokens and set the maximum sampled tokens to k = 300, and softmax temperature to 1.0. Besides,
the Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2022) strategy is also employed to enable the
model to yield more prompt-aligned image tokens. Specifically, we replace the input multi-modal
prompt with the [IMG] token to conduct unconditional sampling. Both conditional and prompt-
conditioned visual token streams are generated in LaVIT. Hence, the real sampling logits for tth
image token yt in the generation is a blend of both unconditional and conditional logits:
                       l(yt ) = l(yt |[IMG]) + αcfg · (l(yt |prompt) − l(yt |[IMG]))                               (7)
The larger αcfg will encourage the model to generate samples highly related to the input prompt while
sacrificing some diversity. We set αcfg to 1.5 when evaluating the zero-shot text-to-image synthesis
on MS-COCO. LaVIT generates 4 samples for each prompt and uses a CLIP-VIT/L model to select
the best one according to the image-prompt matching score.

B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS
B.1   T HE IMPACT OF VISION - LANGUAGE PRE - TRAINING ON LLM

During pre-training, the weights of LLM are unlocked to jointly optimize the visual and textual
tokens. Since a new modality is included in text-oriented LLM, without setting appropriate hyper-
parameters, its original language capability may be impaired. In this section, we discuss how to
mitigate the forgetting of knowledge in LLM when undergoing the vision-language pre-training.
We chose the massive multitask language understanding benchmark (MMLU) (Hendrycks et al.,
2020) to quantitatively measure the model’s common knowledge and reasoning ability. MMLU is
a knowledge-intensive dataset covering various domains, including humanities, STEM, and social
sciences. It is a commonly used benchmark in evaluating the Large Language Model. Following
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), we evaluate the model in the 5-shot setting. The detailed experimen-
tal results are reported in Table 4.
Through exploration, we conclude some useful strategies for conducting unified vision-language
pre-training in LLM: 1) The Learning rate of the LLM part is the most important hyper-parameter.


                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Setting     LRV      LRL         Text     Multi-modal    Humanities    STEM     Social Sciences   Other    Average
 LLaMA-7B         -      3e-4      100%          0%            34.0         30.5        38.3         38.1       35.1
  LaVIT-7B     1.5e-4   1.5e-4     66%          33%            26.7         26.1        25.7         29.8    27.1(−8.0)
  LaVIT-7B     1.5e-4    5e-5      50%          50%            31.4         27.2        31.8         34.5    30.9(−4.2)
  LaVIT-7B     1.5e-4    5e-5      66%          33%            33.5         30.3        35.2         36.7    33.6(−1.5)

Table 4: The influence of learning rate and data proportion on the MMLU benchmark. Here, LRV
and LRL indicate the learning rate for the visual and LLM parts in LaVIT. LaVIT learns excellent
multi-modal modeling capability with only a slight drop of its original common knowledge.

                                                 Dataset         Sampling prop
                                                  C4                  80%
                                                 Github               4%
                                               Wikipedia              4%
                                                 Books                4%
                                                 ArXiv                4%
                                             StackExchange            4%

         Table 5: The used English text corpus proportion of different subsets in Redpajama.

Although using a large learning rate (e−4 level) for tuning the LLM part will speed up its conver-
gence on solving the vision-language task, it also speeds up the forgetting of its original learned
common knowledge (8.0 performance drop compared to original LLaMA). To balance these, we
suggest of learning rate of e−5 level of LLM and e−4 level of visual. 2) Text corpus data is also
important. Lack of text data will also degrade the LLM’s ability. Therefore, we suggest a proportion
of 2:1 (L:VL) to maintain its original learned knowledge. In our experiments, the used English text
corpus is from the Redpajama (Computer, 2023) dataset. The detailed proportion for each subset of
Redpajama is presented in Table 5. Finally, we set the learning rate of LLM to 5e−5 and 1.5e−4
for other parts in LaVIT, which only slightly affected LLM’s language ability (-1.5 on MMLU), but
achieved the best results on both multimodal understanding and generation tasks.

B.2     M ORE A BLATION S TUDY

Like ablations in the main text, the following experiments are conducted on part of pre-training data
by using clip ViT-L/14 (Jia et al., 2021) as the visual encoder.
Bi-directional or Causal Attention? The token merger in the proposed dynamic visual tokenizer
includes the self-attention layer to model the interaction among the visual tokens. To convert 2D
raster-ordered visual features from the ViT encoder into a sequence with causal dependency like
text, causal self-attention is utilized to enforce the restriction that each visual token can solely attend
to its preceding ones. To validate the effectiveness, we replace causal attention with bi-directional
attention in the token merger. As shown in Table 6, causal attention outperforms bi-directional self-
attention across all multi-modal understanding tasks. We conjecture the inferior performance can be
attributed to partial information leakage, as the preceding token has visibility of the subsequent one,
thereby impairing the optimization of next-token prediction in LLM.

                                           Setting           Flickr      VQAv2     OKVQA
                                 Bi-directional Attention     69.9        55.6      44.1
                                    Causal Attention          73.2        57.3      46.4

      Table 6: The effect of different attention manners in the token merger on downstream tasks.
Type of Visual Input Embeddings. For multi-modal understanding where the image is treated as
a condition on the left (i.e., [image, text]), the visual representations input to LLM can be quantized
vectors from the codebook or the continuous features yielded by token merger. We investigate the
impact of these two different visual input forms in Table 7a. As observed, the continuous visual
features achieve better multi-modal understanding performance. This phenomenon is reasonable as
quantized embeddings represent the centroid of continuous visual features, potentially leading to the
loss of detailed visual content. Therefore, for input sequences with order [image, text], we utilize the


                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Original     Reconstruction             Original         Reconstruction        Original       Reconstruction

    Figure 7: The image reconstruction results from discrete visual tokens by the denoising U-Net.
outputs from the token merger as input to LLM, whilst regarding the corresponding discrete visual
codes as the supervision signal for predicting the next visual tokens.

        Setting    Flickr   VQAv2      OKVQA                             Setting      Flickr     VQAv2   OKVQA
      Quantized    70.3      53.0        44.8                         Frozen LLM          63.0    52.7      44.3
      Continuous   72.7      56.4        46.2                         Unlock LLM          72.1    57.1      47.9

 (a) The effect of visual input embeddings forms.                    (b) The effect of unlocking LLM in training.

Table 7: The ablation studies of visual input embeddings format and the unlock of LLM during
pre-training. The performance is evaluated on the zero-shot setting.

                                     Setting              Flickr    VQAv2        OKVQA
                            w/o Token Merger              70.8       51.9          42.1
                            w/ Token Merger               72.7       56.4          46.2

Table 8: The effect of the proposed token merger on downstream multi-modal understanding tasks.
The role of Token Merger. The token merger aims to compress the semantics of unselected visual
patches onto the retained ones according to their feature similarity. Compared to directly discarding
these unselected patches, this merge mechanism not only reduces the redundancy among patches
but also maximally preserves the visual details. The ablation study to explore the role of our token
merger is shown in Table 8. From the presented results, it can be observed a distinct performance
drop in multi-modal understanding tasks when eliminating the token merger module.
The Effect of Unlock LLM. In order to ascertain the efficacy of utilizing LLM for learning the
interaction between vision and language, we devise an ablation experiment wherein the entirety of
LLM remains frozen while solely optimizing the parameters of the token merger during training.
The detailed comparison results are shown in Table 7b. One can observe that freezing the language
model will restrict its powerful multi-modal modeling potential and thus result in a noticeable per-
formance degradation. Hence, unlocking the LLM under a unified training objective will contribute
to adequately bridging the semantics between vision and language.

C     M ORE V ISUALIZATIONS
The quality of pixel decoding In Figure 7, we visualize some pixel decoding examples by the
trained denoising U-Net. It can be seen that, given the tokenized discrete visual tokens, the original
input images can be successfully recovered. The reconstructed examples exhibit a high degree of


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Code 15090: Donut                   Code 13014: Human Arm               Code 2223: Railway


            Code 7260: Car                      Code 12908: Toilet                   Code 15235: Bus

                   Figure 8: The visualization for the leaned discrete visual codes.
      Configuration                              VL Pre-training                Tokenizer training
      Visual Encoder                          EVA-CLIP ViT-G/14               EVA-CLIP ViT-G/14
      LLM init                                    LLaMA-1-7B                             -
      Optimizer                                      AdamW                           AdamW
      Optimizer Hyperparameters           β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.95, ϵ = 1e−6   β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.99, ϵ = 1e−6
      Global batch size                                2048                            2048
      Peak learning rate of LLM                        5e-5                              -
      Peak learning rate of Visual Part               1.5e-4                           2e-4
      Learning rate schedule                          Cosine                          Cosine
      Training Steps                                   20K                             50K
      Warm-up steps                                      2k                             4K
      Weight decay                                      0.1                            0.01
      Gradient clipping                                 1.0                             1.0
      Input image resolution                        224 * 224                       224 * 224
      Input sequence to LLM                            2048                              -
      Numerical precision                            bfloat16                        bfloat16
      GPU Usage                                256 NVIDIA A100                  64 NVIDIA A100
      Training Time                                     30h                             12h

                       Table 9: The detailed training hyperparameters of LaVIT

semantic and general structure to the original images. This consistency validates that our dynamic
tokenizer can efficiently encode visual information using generated discrete tokens.

The Learned Codebook We also provide more visualization examples for the learned codebook
in Figure 8, where the image patches belonging to the same discrete visual code are arranged to-
gether. One can observe that the learned visual code can encode explicit high-level visual semantics.
For example, code 13014 represents the human arm, code 7260 shows the part of the car, code
15235 represents the bus, and code 15090 indicates the donuts. The high distinctiveness of the
learned codebook facilitates the unified vision-language pre-training in LLM.

Multi-Modal Image Synthesis We illustrate more image synthesis results in Figure 9, 10, 11 and
12. As presented, LaVIT produces high-quality, content-rich, and appearance-diverse image sam-
ples that precisely reflect the prompt’s semantics. Importantly, LaVIT can produce images well
aligned with long and more complex text descriptions, while the samples generated by stable dif-
fusion do not reflect the subtle details in some complicated prompts. Besides, LaVIT also supports
the multi-modal in-context image generation. As illustrated in Figure 9, the synthetic samples can


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      This is an                                                An oil painting
     oil painting                    This is a dog
                                                                  of this dog


                                                                The animal in
      This is the                     This is the              the first image is
      first image                    second image                sitting in the
                                                                place of second
                                                                     image


                                                                This dog wears
     This is a dog                    This is hat
                                                                   this hat


                              Input Multi-modal Prompt                              Generation

                     Figure 9: The examples of multi-modal in-context image synthesis.
fully reflect the semantics of input multi-modal context, which contributes to the diversified editing
of the input image through the multi-modal control.

Multi-modal Understanding We also visualize some multi-modal understanding examples in
Figure 13. As observed, LaVIT is capable of understanding the visual content, generating concise
textual captions to depict the image, and answering diverse questions about detailed visual clues.

D    P RE - TRAINING D ETAILS
The detailed training hyper-parameter settings are reported in Table 9.

E    L IMITATIONS
Since LaVIT is based on the Large Language Model, it inherits LLM’s original language halluci-
nation limitations, e.g., generating some nonexistent knowledge and making some factual errors.
Besides, LaVIT is trained only on web-scale image-text pairs, wherein the text descriptions are
noisy and short, thereby rendering LaVIT insufficient for effectively modeling extensive text-image
correspondences. We believe this limitation can be alleviated when leveraging more high-quality
and long image-text interleaved documents.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                A small cactus wearing a straw hat and neon sunglasses in the Sahara desert.


           A high contrast photo of panda dressed as an astronaut sits at a table in a photorealistic style


            A lovely dog is reading a thick book            Downtown Shanghai at sunrise. Detailed ink wash.


     A transparent sculpture of a duck made out of glass. The sculpture is in front of a painting of a landscape.


                        A high contrast photo of an astronaut riding a horse in the forest.


                             a super math wizard cat, richly textured oil painting


                          Figure 10: The examples of text-to-image synthesis.

                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        A heavy metal tiger standing on a rooftop while         a bird wearing headphones and speaking into a
        singing on an electric guitar under a spotlight.          high-end microphone in a recording studio.


             A section of the Great Wall in the                    Taj Mahal with its reflection. detailed
            mountains. detailed charcoal sketch                              charcoal sketch.


          A blue jay standing on a large basket of          a cat drinking a pint of beer, DSLR photo, art station,
                    rainbow macarons.                                         octane rendering


         A richly textured oil painting of a young badger delicately sniffing a yellow rose next to a tree trunk.
                                    A small waterfall can be seen in the background.


              a light bulb with a ballerina in it          Cute adorable little goat, unreal engine, cozy interior
                                                               lighting, art station, detailed digital painting


       A painting of two rabbits in the style of American Gothic, wearing the same clothes as in the original


                          Figure 11: The examples of text-to-image synthesis.


                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              In the snow          On top of a purple rug                                   In a chief outfit    Wearing a yellow shirt


                          Wearing a red hat With a city in the background                              Wearing a black hat         Wearing a santa hat


                              In the snow          On top of a purple rug                                   In a chief outfit           In the snow


                            On the beach       With a city in the background                                On the beach           Holding a santa hat


                        On top of a wooden floor On top of a purple rug                                     In a chief outfit         In a ploice outfit


                          Wearing a red hat        With a city in the background                       Wearing a black hat         Wearing a santa hat


                      Figure 12: The examples of image synthesis with multi-modal prompt.
      Image caption


                        a siamese cat is playing       two boys are playing        a woman sitting on the        a dog is carrying a purple
                           with a banana peel           baseball on a field      back of a boat in the water        frisbee in its mouth
        Visual QA


                       Q: How many zebras in         Q: What are they doing      Q: Where is the car?           Q: What is in the middle
                       this image?                   in this image?              A: On the side of a road       of the image?
                       A: Three                      A: Skiing and competing.    next to a sign.                A: Toilet



Figure 13: The qualitative evaluation examples on model’s multi-modal understanding performance.


                                                                            21
