Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H ARMONIC P RIOR F LOW M ATCHING FOR JOINT
M ULTI -L IGAND D OCKING AND B INDING S ITE D ESIGN
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         A significant amount of protein function requires binding small molecules, includ-
         ing enzymatic catalysis. As such, designing binding pockets for small molecules
         has several impactful applications ranging from drug synthesis to energy storage.
         Towards this goal, we first develop H ARMONIC F LOW, an improved generative
         process over 3D protein-ligand binding structures based on our self-conditioned
         flow matching objective. F LOW S ITE extends this flow model to jointly generate
         a protein pocket’s discrete residue types and the molecule’s binding 3D struc-
         ture. We show that H ARMONIC F LOW improves upon the state-of-the-art genera-
         tive processes for docking in simplicity, generality, and performance. Enabled by
         this structure modeling, F LOW S ITE designs binding sites substantially better than
         baseline approaches and provides the first general solution for binding site design.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Designing proteins that can bind small molecules has many applications, ranging from drug syn-
thesis to energy storage or gene editing. Indeed, a key part of any protein’s function derives from
its ability to bind and interact with other molecular species. For example, we may design proteins
that act as antidotes that sequester toxins or design enzymes that enable chemical reactions through
catalysis, which plays a major role in most biological processes. We develop F LOW S ITE to address
this design challenge by building on recent advances in deep learning (DL) based protein design
[Dauparas et al., 2022] and protein-molecule docking [Corso et al., 2023].
Specifically, we aim to design protein pockets to bind a
certain small molecule (called ligand). We assume that
we are given a protein pocket via the 3D backbone atom
locations of its residues as well as the 2D chemical graph
of the ligand. We do not assume any knowledge of the
3D structure or the binding pose of the ligand. Based
on this information, our goal is to predict the amino acid
identities for the given backbone locations (see Figure 1).
We also consider the more challenging task of design-
ing pockets that simultaneously bind multiple molecules
and ions (which we call multi-ligand). Such multi-ligand
binding proteins are important, for example, in enzyme
design, where the ligands correspond to reactants.
This task has not been addressed by deep learning yet. Figure 1: Binding site design. Given
While deep learning has been successful in designing pro- the backbone (green) and multi-ligand
teins that can bind to other proteins [Watson et al., 2023], without structure, F LOW S ITE generates
designing (multi-)ligand binders is different and arguably residue types and structure (orange) to
harder in various aspects. For example, no evolution- bind the multi-ligand and its jointly gen-
ary information is directly available, unlike when mod- erated structure (blue). The majority of
eling interactions between amino acids only. The exist- the pocket is omitted for visibility.
ing approaches, such as designing 6 drug binding proteins
Polizzi & DeGrado [2020] or a single enzyme Yeh et al. [2023], build on expert knowledge and re-
quire manual steps. Therefore, we develop F LOW S ITE as a more general and automated approach
and the first deep learning solution for designing pockets that bind small molecules.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Overview of FlowSite. The generative process starts from a protein pocket’s backbone
atoms, initial residue types ã0 , and initial ligand positions x0 . Our joint discrete-continuous self-
conditioned flow updates them to at , xt by following its vector field defined by the model outputs
ãt1 , x̃t1 . This integration is repeated until reaching time = 1 with the produced sample a1 , x1 .

F LOW S ITE is a flow-based generative model over discrete (residue identities) and continuous (ligand
pose) variables. Our flow matching training criterion guides the model to learn a self-conditioned
flow that jointly generates the contact residues and the (multi-)ligand 3D binding pose structures.
To achieve this, we first develop H ARMONIC F LOW as a suitable generative process for 3D poses of
(multi-)ligands. F LOW S ITE extends this process to residue types. Starting from initial residue types
and ligand atom locations sampled from a harmonic prior F LOW S ITE updates them by iteratively
following the learned vector field, as illustrated in Figure 2.
The H ARMONIC F LOW component of F LOW S ITE performs the task known as docking, i.e., it real-
izes the 3D binding pose of the multi-ligand. As a method, it is remarkably simple in comparison to
existing generative processes for docking, including the state-of-the-art diffusion process of D IFF -
D OCK [Corso et al., 2023] that operates on ligand’s center of mass, orientation, and torsion angles.
H ARMONIC F LOW simply updates the cartesian coordinates of the atoms, yet manages to produce
chemically plausible molecular structures without restricting ligand flexibility to torsions. More-
over, H ARMONIC F LOW outperforms D IFF D OCK’s diffusion in multiple new pocket-level docking
tasks on PDBBind. For instance, H ARMONIC F LOW achieves 24.4% of its predictions to be within
root-mean-square-distance (RMSD) below 2Å as opposed to 16.3% for D IFF D OCK’s diffusion.
Having established H ARMONIC F LOW as an improved generative process over ligand positions, we
extend it to include discrete residue types to obtain F LOW S ITE. We also adopt an additional ”fake-
ligand” data augmentation step where side chains are treated as ligands in order to realize additional
training cases. Altogether, F LOW S ITE is able to recover 47.0% of binding site amino acids compared
to 39.4% of a baseline approach. This nearly closes the gap to an oracle method (51.4% recovery)
with access to the ground truth 3D structure/pose of the ligand. Next to technical innovations such
as self-conditioned flow matching or equivariant refinement TFN layers, our main contributions are:

      1. F LOW S ITE as the first deep learning solution to design binding sites for small molecules
         and a novel elegant framework to jointly generate discrete and continuous data.
      2. H ARMONIC F LOW which improves upon the state-of-the-art generative process for gener-
         ating 3D ligand binding structures in performance, simplicity, and applicability/generality.
      3. The first application and investigation of flow matching for real-world biomolecular tasks
         and comparisons with diffusion model approaches.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Deep learning for Docking. Designing binding sites with high affinity for a ligand requires rea-
soning about the binding free energy, which is deeply interlinked with modeling ligand binding 3D
structures. This task of molecular docking has recently been tackled with deep-learning approaches
[Stärk et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023a] including generative models [Corso et al.,
2023; Qiao et al., 2023]. These generative methods are based on diffusion models, building on D IFF -
D OCK [Corso et al., 2023], which combines diffusion processes over the ligand’s torsion angles and
position with respect to the protein. For the task of multi-ligand docking, no deep learning solutions
exist yet, and we provide the first with H ARMONIC F LOW. We refer to Appendix D for additional
important related work on this and the following topics.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Protein Design. A significant technical challenge for protein design is jointly modeling structure
and sequence. Inverse folding approaches [Dauparas et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023a; Yi et al., 2023;
Hsu et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023b] attempt this by designing new sequences given a protein structure.
This is akin to our task where the protein pocket’s backbone structure is given, and we aim to
design its residue types to bind a (multi-)ligand. However, the only inverse folding method that
models small molecules is Carbonara [Krapp et al., 2023], which is restricted to the 31 most common
ligands of PDB and requires their 3D structure and position relative to the protein to be known. The
same is the case for the concurrently developed FAIR [Zhang et al., 2023b], which uses these
ground truth ligand positions as input in their sequence-structure co-design framework for choosing
residue types of a binding pocket. Similarly, the classical energy function and search algorithm
based P OCKET O PTIMIZER [Noske et al., 2023] requires a bound complex as input.
Flow Matching. This recent generative modeling paradigm [Lipman et al., 2022; Albergo &
Vanden-Eijnden, 2022; Albergo et al., 2023] generalizes diffusion models [Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2021] in a simpler framework. Flow matching admits more design flexibility and multiple
works [Tong et al., 2023b; Pooladian et al., 2023] showed how it enables learning flows between
arbitrary start and end distributions in a simulation-free manner. It is easily extended to data on
manifolds [Chen & Lipman, 2023] and comes with straighter paths that enable faster integration.
We provide the first applications of flow matching to real-world biomolecular tasks (multi-ligand
docking and binding site design). While Klein et al. [2023] explored flow matching for 3D
point clouds, their application was limited to overfitting on the Boltzmann distribution of a single
molecule. We explain flow matching in Section 3.1.


3     M ETHOD

Our goal is to design binding pockets for a ligand where we assume the inputs to be the ligand’s
2D chemical graph and the backbone coordinates of the pocket’s residues. In this section, we lay
out how F LOW S ITE achieves this by first explaining our H ARMONIC F LOW generative process for
docking in 3.1 before covering how F LOW S ITE extends it to include discrete residue types in 3.2
and concluding with our model architecture in 3.3.
Overview and definitions. As visualized in Figure 2, F LOW S ITE is a flow-based generative model
that jointly updates discrete residue types and continuous ligand positions. The inputs are a protein
pocket’s backbone atoms y ∈ RL×4×3 for L residues with 4 atoms each and the chemical graph
of a (multi-)ligand. Based on the ligand connectivity, its initial coordinates x ∈ Rn×3 are sampled
from a harmonic prior, and we initialize residue types a ∈ {1, . . . , 20}L with an initial token (we
drop the chemical information of the ligands in our notation for brevity).
Given this at time t = 0, the flow model vθ with learned parameters θ iteratively updates residue
types and ligand coordinates by integrating the ODE it defines. These integration steps are repeated
from time t = 0 to time t = 1 to obtain the final generated binding pocket designs.

3.1   H ARMONIC F LOW S TRUCTURE G ENERATION

We first lay out H ARMONIC F LOW for pure structure generation without residue type estimation.
Our notation drops vθ ’s conditioning on the pocket y and residue estimates a in this subsection (see
the Architecture Section 3.3 for how y is included). Simply put, H ARMONIC F LOW is flow matching
with a harmonic prior, self-conditioning, and x1 prediction (our refinement TFN layers in Section
3.3 are also important for performance). In more detail:
Conditional Flow Matching. Given the data distribution p1 of bound ligand structures and any
easy-to-sample prior p0 over Rn×3 , we wish to learn an ODE that pushes the prior forward to the
data distribution when integrating it from time 0 to time 1. The ODE will be defined by a time-
dependent vector field vθ (·, ·) : Rn×3 × [0, 1] 7→ Rn×3 . Starting with a sample x0 ∼ p0 (x0 ) and
following/integrating v through time will produce a sample from the data distribution p1 .
To see how to train vθ , let us first assume access to a time-dependent vector field ut (·) that would
lead to an ODE that pushes from the prior p0 to the data p1 (it is not straightforward how to construct
this ut ). This gives rise to a probability path pt by integrating ut until time t. If we could sample


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


x ∼ pt (x) we could train vθ with the unconditional flow matching objective [Lipman et al., 2022]
                            LF M = Et∼U [0,1],x∼pt (x) ∥vθ (x, t) − u(x, t)∥2 .                           (1)

Among others, Tong et al. [2023b] show that to construct such a ut (that transports from prior p0 to
p1 ), we can use samples from the data x1 ∼ p1 (x1 ) and prior x0 ∼ p0 (x0 ) and define ut via

                                                             ut (x|x0 , x1 )pt (x|x0 , x1 )
                       ut (x) = Ex1 ∼p1 (x1 ),x0 ∼p0 (x0 )                                                (2)
                                                                        pt (x)

where we can choose easy-to-sample conditional flows pt (·|·, ·) that give rise to simple conditional
vector fields ut (·|·, ·). We still cannot efficiently compute this ut (x) and use it in LF M because
we do not know pt (x), but there is no need to: it is equivalent to instead train with the following
conditional flow matching loss since ∇θ LF M = ∇θ LCF M .

         LCF M = Et∼U [0,1],x1 ∼p1 (x1 ),x0 ∼p0 (x0 ),x∼pt (x|x0 ,x1 ) ∥vθ (x, t) − ut (x|x0 , x1 )∥2 .   (3)

Our simple choice of conditional probability path is pt (x|x0 , x1 ) = N (x|tx1 + (1 − t)x0 , σ 2 ),
which gives rise to the conditional vector field ut (x|x0 , x1 ) = x1 − x0 . Notably, we find it helpful
to parameterize vθ to predict x1 instead of (x1 − x0 ).
Training with the conditional flow matching loss then boils down to 1) Sample data x1 ∼ p1 (x1 )
and prior x0 ∼ p0 (x0 ). 2) Interpolate between between the points. 3) Add noise to the interpolation
to obtain x. 4) Evaluate and minimize LCF M = ∥vθ (x, t) − x1 ∥2 with it. Inference is just as
straightforward. We sample from the prior x0 ∼ p0 (x0 ) and integrate from t = 0 to t = 1 with
an arbitrary ODE solver. We use an Euler solver, i.e., we iteratively predict x1 as x̃1 = vθ (xt , t),
and then calculate the step size scaled velocity estimate from it and add it to the current point
xt+∆t = xt + ∆t(x̃1 − x0 ). Training and inference algorithms are in Appendix A.3.
Harmonic Prior. Any prior can be used
for p0 in the flow matching framework.
We choose a harmonic prior as in Eigen-
Fold [Jing et al., 2023] that samples atoms
to be close to each other if they are con-
nected by a bond. We identify this as
an especially valuable inductive bias when
dealing with multiple molecules and ions
since atoms of different molecules are al-
ready spatially separated at t = 0 as visu-
alized in Figure 3.
                                            Figure 3: Harmonic Prior. Initial positions for the
This prior is constructed based on covalent
                                            same single multi-ligand from an isotropic Gaussian
bonds that define a graph with adjacency
                                            (left) and from a harmonic prior (right). (Bound struc-
matrix A from which we can construct the
                                            ture for this multi-ligand is in Figure 1).
graph Laplacian L = D − A where D is
the degree matrix. The harmonic prior is then p0 (x0 ) ∝ exp(− 21 xT0 Lx0 ) which can be sampled as
a transformed gaussian.
Structure Self-conditioning. With this, we aim to bring AlphaFold2’s [Jumper et al., 2021] suc-
cessful recycling strategy to flow models for structure generation. Recycling enables training a
deeper structure predictor without additional memory cost by performing multiple forward passes
while only computing gradients for the last. For flow matching, we achieve the same by adapting
the discrete diffusion model self-conditioning approach of Chen et al. [2023] as follows:
Instead of defining the vector field vθ (xt , t) as a function of xt and t alone, we additionally condition
it on the prediction x̃t1 of the previous integration step and use vθ (xt , x̃t1 , t). At the beginning
of inference the self-conditioning input is a sample from the harmonic prior x̃01 ∼ p0 (x̃01 ). In
all following steps, it is the flow model’s output (its prediction of x1 ) of the previous step x̃t1 =
vθ (xt−∆t , x̃1t−∆t , t − ∆t). To train this, in a random 50% of the training steps, the self-conditioning
input is a sample from the prior x̃01 . In the other 50%, we first generate a self-conditioning input


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


x̃1t+∆t = vθ (xt , x̃01 , t), detach it from the gradient computation graph, and then use vθ (xt , x̃t+∆t
                                                                                                     1    , t)
for the loss computation. Algorithms 3 and 4 show these training and inference procedures.

3.2    F LOW S ITE B INDING S ITE D ESIGN

In the F LOW S ITE binding site design framework, H ARMONIC F LOW x̃t+∆t     1   = vθ (xt , x̃t1 , t) is aug-
mented with an additional self-conditioned flow over the residue types to obtain (x̃t+∆t  1     , ãt+∆t
                                                                                                    1     )=
           t          t                                      t+∆t
vθ (xt , x̃1 , at , ã1 , t). The flow no longer produces x̃1      as an estimate of x1 and then inter-
polates to xt+∆t but instead produces (x̃t+∆t    1   , ãt+∆t
                                                         1    ) from which we obtain the interpolation
(xt+∆t , at+∆t ) and use it for the next integration step (see Figure 4). The start a0 , ã01 are initialized
as a mask token while the structures x0 , x̃01 are drawn from a harmonic prior.
This joint discrete-continuous data flow is
trained with the same self-conditioning strategy
as in structure self-conditioning, but with the
additional discrete self-conditioning input ã11
that is either a model output or a mask token. To
the training loss we add the cross-entropy Ltype
between a and ãt1 . In practice, we find that the
a1 prediction ãt1 already carries most informa-
tion that is useful for predicting a1 and we omit
the interpolation at as model input to obtain the
simpler (x̃t+∆t   , ãt+∆t ) = vθ (xt , x̃t1 , ãt1 , t).   Figure 4: FlowSite self-conditioned updates.
             1        1
This formulation admits a direct interpretation             Residue type predictions ãt1 from invariant GAT
as recycling Jumper et al. [2021] and a clean               layers and position predictions x̃t1 from equivari-
joint discrete-continuous process without defin-            ant TFN layers are used as self-conditioning in-
ing a discrete data interpolation.                          puts and to interpolate to the updates at , xt .

Fake Ligand Data Augmentation. This strategy is based on the evidence of Polizzi & DeGrado
[2020] that a protein’s sidechain-sidechain interactions are similar to sidechain-ligand interactions
for tight binding. In our optional data augmentation, we train with 20% of the samples having a
”fake ligand”. Given a protein, we construct a fake ligand as the atoms of a randomly selected
residue that has at least 4 other residues within 4Å heavy atom distance. Additionally, we modify
the protein by removing the residue that was chosen as the fake ligand and the residues that are
within 7 positions next to that residue in the protein chain, as visualized in Figure 5.

3.3    A RCHITECTURE

Here, we provide an overview of the F LOW S ITE architecture (visualized in Appendix Figure 6)
that outputs ligand positions x̃1 and uses them for a residue type prediction ã1 . The structure
prediction is produced by a stack of our SE(3)-equivariant refinement TFN layers that are crucial for
the performance of H ARMONIC F LOW’s structure generation. This is followed by invariant layers
to predict the invariant residue types, which we found to perform better than the more expressive
equivariant layers that seem well suited for structure prediction but not for recovering residue types.
The precise architecture definition is in Appendix A.5 and an architecture visualization in Figure 6.
Radius Graph Representation. We represent the (multi-)ligand and the protein as graphs where
nodes are connected based on their distances. Each protein residue and each ligand atom is a node.
These are connected by protein-to-protein edges, ligand-to-ligand edges, and edges between ligand
and protein. While only a single node is assigned to each residue, they contain information about all
backbone atom positions (N, Ca, C, O).
Equivariant refinement Tensor Field Network (TFN) layers. Based on TFN [Geiger et al.,
2020], these layers capture the important inductive bias of SE(3)-equivariance (translating and rotat-
ing the input will equally translate and rotate the output). They are a remarkably simple yet effective
tweak from previous message passing TFNs [Jing et al., 2022; Corso et al., 2023], where we instead
update and refine ligand coordinates with each layer akin to EGNNs [Hoogeboom et al., 2022].
The k-th refinement TFN layer takes as input the protein positions y, current ligand positions xt ,
and features hk−1 (with h0 being zeros for the ligand and vectors between N, Ca, C, O for the pro-


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tein). We construct equivariant messages for each edge via a tensor-product of neighboring nodes’
invariant and equivariant features. The messages include the structure self-conditioning informa-
tion by using the interatomic distances of the self-conditioning input xt1 to parameterize the tensor
products. We sum the messages to obtain new node features hk+1 and use them as input to an
O(3) equivariant linear layer to predict intermediate refined ligand coordinates x̂k1 . Before passing
x̂k1 to the next refinement TFN layer, we detach them from the gradient computation graph for the
non-differentiable radius graph building of the next layer.
                                                                                                t+∆t
After a stack of K TFN refinement layers, the positions x̂K    1 are used as final prediction x̃1    .
        t+∆t                                                                        t+∆t         2
While x̃1     is supervised with the conditional flow matching loss LCF M = ∥x̃1         − x1 ∥ the
                                                                                  PK−1
intermediate positions x̂k1 contribute to an additional refinement loss Lref ine = k=1 ∥x̂k1 − x1 ∥2 .
Invariant Network. The inputs to this part of F LOW S ITE are the TFN’s ligand structure prediction
x̃1 , the protein structure y, the invariant scalar features of the refinement TFN layers, and the self-
conditioning input at1 . From the protein structure, we construct on PiFold’s [Gao et al., 2023a]
distance-based invariant edge features and node features that encode the geometry of the backbone.
For the edges between protein and ligand, we construct features that encode the distances from a
ligand atom to all 4 backbone atoms of a connected residue.
These are processed by a stack of graph attention layers that update ligand and protein node features
as well as edge features for each type of edge (ligand-to-ligand, protein-to-protein, and between
the molecules). For each edge, the convolutional layers first predict attention weights from the
edge features and the features of the nodes they connect. We then update a node’s features by
summing messages from each incoming edge weighted by the attention weights. Then, we update an
edge’s features based on its nodes’ new features. A precise definition is in Appendix A.5. From the
residue features after a stack of these convolutions, we predict new residue types at+∆t together with
side chain torsion angles α. We use those in an auxiliary loss Ltorsion defined as in AlphaFold2’s
Appendix 1.9.1 [Jumper et al., 2021]. Thus, the complete loss for F LOW S ITE is a weighted sum of
LCF M , Lref ine , Ltype , and Ltorsion , while H ARMONIC F LOW only uses LCF M and Lref ine .


4     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate F LOW S ITE with multiple datasets, splits, and settings. Every reported number is aver-
aged over 10 generated samples for each ligand. Precise experimental details are in Appendix E and
code to reproduce each experiment is at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/wolf.
The main questions we seek to answer with the experiments are:

       • 1. Structure Generation: How does H ARMONIC F LOW compare with SOTA binding
         structure generative models? Does it work for multi-ligands?
       • 2. Binding Site recovery: What is the improvement in recovering residue types of known
         binding sites with F LOW S ITE compared with baseline approaches?
       • 3. Ablations and Flow Matching Investigations: How does flow matching behave for
         structure generation, and how much does each component help? (self-conditioning, ...)

4.1   DATASETS

We use PDBBind version 2020 with 19k complexes to evaluate the structure generation capability
of flow matching and the ability of F LOW S ITE to design binders for a single connected ligand.
We employ two dataset splits. The first is based on time, which has been heavily used in the DL
community [Stärk et al., 2022; Corso et al., 2023]. The second is sequence-based with a maximum
of 30% chain-wise similarity between train, validation, and test data. Buttenschoen et al. [2023]
found DL docking methods to be significantly more challenged by sequence similarity splits.
For many binding pocket design tasks, it is required to bind multi-ligands. For example, when
designing enzymes for multiple reactants. Such multi-ligands are present in Binding MOAD. We
use its 41k complexes with a 30% sequence similarity split carried out as described above. We
construct our multi-ligands as all molecules and ions that have atoms within 4Å of each other. An
example of an enzyme with all substrates in the pocket as multi-ligand is in Figure 1.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   Q UESTION 1: H ARMONIC F LOW S TRUCTURE G ENERATION C APABILITY

Table 1: H ARMONIC F LOW vs. D IFF D OCK D IFFUSION. Comparison on PDBBind splits for
docking into Distance-Pockets (residues close to ligand) and Radius-Pockets (residues within a ra-
dius of the pocket center). The columns ”%<2” show the fraction of predictions with an RMSD to
the ground truth that is less than 2Å (higher is better). ”Med.” is the median RMSD (lower is better).
                                 Sequence Similarity Split                    Time Split
                             Distance-Pocket Radius-Pocket         Distance-Pocket Radius-Pocket
  Method                     %<2      Med.    %<2 Med.             %<2      Med.    %<2 Med.
 D IFF D OCK D IFFUSION       27.2      3.2       16.1     4.0      20.8      3.8       15.2      4.3
 H ARMONIC F LOW              30.1      3.1       20.5     3.4      42.8      2.5       28.3      3.2

Here, we consider the H ARMONIC F LOW component of F LOW S ITE and investigate its binding struc-
ture generation capability. This is to find out whether H ARMONIC F LOW is fit for binder design
where good structure generation is necessary to takethe bound ligand structure into account.
Task Setup. The architecture only contains refinement TFN layers, and there is no sequence pre-
diction. The inputs are the (multi-)ligand’s chemical graph and the protein pocket’s backbone atoms
and residue types (see Appendix Table 7 for experiments without residue type inputs). From this, the
binding structure of the (multi-)ligand has to be inferred. There is also no fake ligand augmentation.
We test docking on the pocket level since that is the structure modeling capability required for the
binding site design task (in Appendix C, we show preliminary results for docking to the whole
protein). We define the binding pocket in two ways. In the Distance-Pocket definition, we calculate
the distances of all ligand heavy atoms to the protein’s alpha carbons, add Gaussian noise with
σ = 0.5 to them, and include a residue in the pocket if it has any noisy distance smaller than 14
Å. The center of the pocket (where the prior p0 is centered) is the center of mass of all residues
within 8 Å of noisy ligand distance. We additionally add Gaussian noise with σ = 0.2 to the pocket
center. The motivation for the noisy distance cutoffs and pocket center is to alleviate distribution
shifts during inference time and to prevent the models from inferring the ligand positions from the
cutoff with which the pocket was constructed.
In Radius-Pockets, we first obtain the center of mass of residues within 8 Å of any ligand heavy
atom. The pocket includes all residues with a noisy distance to the center of mass that is less than
a specific radius. This radius is 7Å plus the minimum of 5Å and half of the ligand’s diameter. The
pocket center is obtained in the same way as for Distance-Pockets.
Baseline. We compare with the state-of-the-art diffusion process of D IFF D OCK [Corso et al., 2023]
which has recently also been proven successful for pocket level docking [Anonymous, 2023]. Note
that this is not the full D IFF D OCK docking pipeline: Both H ARMONIC F LOW and D IFF D OCK’s
diffusion can generate multiple samples and, for the task of docking, a further discriminator (called
confidence model in D IFF D OCK) could be used to select the most likely poses. We only compare
the 3D structure generative models and neither use language model residue embeddings. We train
D IFF D OCK’s diffusion process with our pocket definitions using 5 of its default TFN layers followed
by its pseudotorque and center-convolution (the TFN layers are identical to ours apart from our
position updates). This uses their training parameters and the same 32 scalar and 8 vector features
of our model. We use this deep learning method for comparison since (like H ARMONIC F LOW) it
is able to dock to protein structures without an all-atom representation (unlike traditional docking
methods, e.g., Autodock VINA [Trott & Olson, 2010]). This is required for the pocket design task
where the sidechain atom locations are unknown.
PDBBind docking results. In Table 1, we find that our flow matching based H ARMONIC F LOW out-
performs D IFF D OCK’s diffusion in average sample quality. The sampled conformations in Figure
12 and videos of the generation process show that H ARMONIC F LOW produces chemically plausible
structures and well captures the physical constraints of interatomic interactions without the need
to restrict conformational flexibility to torsion angles. No separate losses, rotation updates, or ex-
pensive torsion angle updates are required - H ARMONIC F LOW is arguably a cleaner and simpler
solution. Thus, it is a promising future direction to further explore H ARMONIC F LOW for docking
and other biomolecular structure generation tasks.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Binding MOAD multi-ligand docking re- Table 2: Multi-Ligand Docking. Structure genera-
sults. For binding site design, it is often nec- tion performance on Binding MOAD’s multi-ligands.
essary to model multiple ligands and ions ”%<2” means the fraction of predictions with an
(e.g., reactants for an enzyme). We test RMSD to the ground truth less than 2Å (higher bet-
this with Binding MOAD, which contains ter). ”Med.” is the median RMSD (lower better).
such multi-ligands. Since no deep learn-
ing solutions for multi-ligands exist yet and      Method                     %<2 %<5 Med.
traditional docking methods would require          E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION 39.7     73.5     2.4
side-chain atom locations, we compare with         H ARMONIC F LOW            44.4  75.0     2.2
E IGEN F OLD’s [Jing et al., 2023] Diffusion
and provide qualitative evaluation in Ap-
pendix Figure 12. For E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION, we use the same model as H ARMONIC F LOW
and predict x0 (in what corresponds to x0 prediction in diffusion models), which we found to work
better. Table 2 shows H ARMONIC F LOW as viable for docking multi-ligands - thus, the first ML
method for this task with important applications besides binding site design.

4.3   Q UESTION 2: F LOW S ITE B INDING S ITE R ECOVERY

Table 3: Binding Site Recovery. Comparison on PDBBind and Binding MOAD sequence similarity
splits for recovering residues of binding sites. Recovery is the percentage of correctly predicted
residues, and BLOSUM score takes residue similarity into account. 2D ligand refers to a simple
GNN encoding of the ligand’s chemical graph as additional input. The G ROUND T RUTH P OS row
has access to the, in practice, unknown ground truth 3D crystal structure of the ligand and protein.

                                        Binding MOAD                       PDBBind
       Method                       BLOSUM score Recovery            BLOSUM score Recovery
      P I F OLD (no ligand)               35.2            39.4             40.7            43.5
      P I F OLD (2D ligand)               35.7            40.4             42.2            44.5
      R ANDOM L IGAND P OS                38.2            41.8             41.5            43.7
      D IFF D OCK -P OCKET P OS            –               –               42.6            45.0
      F LOW S ITE                         44.3            47.0             47.6            49.5
      G ROUND T RUTH P OS                 48.4            51.4             51.3            51.2

Setup. The input to F LOW S ITE is the binding pocket/site specified by its backbone and the chemical
identity of the ligand (without its 3D structure). With the pocket, in practice, chosen by the user and
well known, we use the Distance-Pocket definition here.
Metrics. We use two metrics, sequence recovery and our new BLOSUM score. Sequence recovery
is the percentage of generated residue types of the contact residues (those with a heavy atom within
4Å of the ligand) that are the same as in the original binding site. For designing new sequences via
inverse folding, this metric has been shown to correlate well with more expensive computational
metrics and experimental performance [Dauparas et al., 2022]. However, this metric only rewards
exact matches, it cannot account for multiple correct solutions, and there is no notion of amino acid
similarity encoded in it. Having lower penalties for mismatches of very similar amino acids would
be more meaningful. To address this, we propose BLOSUM score, which takes evolutionary and
physicochemical similarity into account. A precise definition is in Appendix A.1.
Metrics that correlate with binding affinity, such as MM-PBSA or docking scores of traditional
docking software, usually require the atomic structure of the side chains as input, which is not
available. Furthermore, they were only validated for discriminating different ligands, while in our
design task, we desire to discriminate different binding sites.
Baselines. P I F OLD (no ligand) is the architecture of Gao et al. [2023a] and does not use any ligand
information. In P I F OLD (2D ligand), we first process the ligand with PNA [Corso et al., 2020]
message passing and pass its features as additional input to the P I F OLD architecture. G ROUND
T RUTH P OS and R ANDOM L IGAND P OS use the architecture of F LOW S ITE without the ligand
structure prediction layers. Instead, the ligand positions are either the ground truth bound structure or
sampled from a standard Normal at the pocket’s alpha carbon center of mass. Similarly, D IFF D OCK -


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P OCKET P OS uses fixed positions and the same architecture, but the positions are given by the state-
of-the-art pocket-level docking tool DiffDock-Pocket [Anonymous, 2023] (we only have results for
single ligands since it is not implemented for multi-ligands). The oracle G ROUND T RUTH P OS
method also uses fake ligand data augmentation.
Pocket Recovery Results. Table 3 shows that F LOW S ITE consistently is able to recover the original
pocket better than simpler treatments of the (multi-)ligand, closing the gap to the oracle method that
has access to the ground truth ligand structure. The joint structure generation helps in determining
the original residue types (keeping in mind that these are not necessarily the only or best). R ANDOM
L IGAND P OS further confirms that inferring approximate ligand coordinates, like H ARMONIC F LOW
in F LOW S ITE, is crucial for recovering the binding pocket.



4.4   Q UESTION 3: A BLATIONS AND F LOW-M ATCHING I NVESTIGATION

Here, we attempt to understand better Table 4: Flow matching investigation. Ablations of
the behavior of flow-matching generative H ARMONIC F LOW. Column %<2* indicates perfor-
models for biomolecular structure gener- mance when selecting the best of 5 generated samples.
ation via experiments with H ARMONIC
F LOW. We use Radius-Pockets on the se-         Method                       %<2 %<2* Med.
quence similarity split of PDBBind.
                                               G AUSSIAN P RIOR               17.0     29.2     3.8
Investigations. G AUSSIAN P RIOR uses          V ELOCITY P REDICTION          11.9     28.8     3.8
an isotropic Gaussian as prior instead of      S TANDARD TFN L AYERS          13.7     25.4     3.6
our harmonic prior. In V ELOCITY P RE -        N O R EFINEMENT L OSS           9.8     22.1     3.7
DICTION , the TFN model predicts (x1 −         NO SELF - CONDITIONING         14.3     29.8     3.7
x0 ) instead of x1 meaning that LCF M =        H ARMONIC F LOW σ = 0          18.3     31.3     3.5
∥vθ − (x1 − x0 )∥2 . In S TANDARD TFN          H ARMONIC F LOW σ = 0.5 20.5            34.5     3.4
LAYERS , our refinement TFN layers are
replaced, meaning that there are no inter-
mediate position updates - only the last layer produces an update. In N O R EFINEMENT L OSS, the
loss Lref ine is dropped from the final weighted sum of losses. NO SELF - CONDITIONING does not
use our structure self-conditioning. S IGMA =0 uses σ = 0 for the conditional flow, corresponding to
a deterministic interpolant for training.
Results. Table 4 shows the importance of our self-conditioned flow matching objective, which
enables refinement of the binding structure prediction x̃t1 next to updates of xt at little additional
training time - a 12.8% increase in this experiment. Furthermore, the refinement TFN layers improve
structure prediction substantially. Lastly, parameterizing the vector field to predict x1 instead of
(x1 − x0 ) appears more suitable for flow matching applications in molecular structure generation.



5     C ONCLUSION

We proposed the H ARMONIC F LOW generative process for binding structure generation and
F LOW S ITE for binding site design. Our H ARMONIC F LOW improves upon the state-of-the-art gen-
erative process for docking in simplicity, applicability, and performance in various docking settings.
We investigated how flow matching contributes to this, together with our technical innovations such
as self-conditioned flow matching, harmonic prior ligands, or equivariant refinement TFN layers.
With F LOW S ITE, we leverage our superior binding structure generative process and extend it to
discrete residue types, resulting in a joint discrete-continuous flow model for designing ligand bind-
ing pockets. This is an important task for which no general and no deep learning solutions exist
yet. F LOW S ITE improves upon various baselines for incorporating ligand information in recovering
native binding sites. F LOW S ITE is a step toward binding site design, but recovery results cannot
replace biological validation - this is future work we pursue. Additionally, we will address enzyme
design by incorporating more prerequisites for catalytic activity besides binding the reactants.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

R EFERENCES
Michael S Albergo, Nicholas M Boffi, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Stochastic interpolants: A unifying
 framework for flows and diffusions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08797, 2023.
Michael Samuel Albergo and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Building normalizing flows with stochastic
 interpolants. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Anonymous. Diffdock-pocket: Diffusion for pocket-level docking with sidechain flexibility. In
  Submitted to The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1IaoWBqB6K. under review.
H. Berman, K. Henrick, and H. Nakamura. Announcing the worldwide Protein Data Bank. Nat
  Struct Biol, 10(12):980, Dec 2003.
Valentin De Bortoli, James Thornton, Jeremy Heng, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion schrödinger
  bridge with applications to score-based generative modeling, 2023.
Martin Buttenschoen, Garrett M. Morris, and Charlotte M. Deane. Posebusters: Ai-based docking
 methods fail to generate physically valid poses or generalise to novel sequences, 2023.
Andrew Campbell, William Harvey, Christian Weilbach, Valentin De Bortoli, Tom Rainforth, and
  Arnaud Doucet. Trans-dimensional generative modeling via jump diffusion models, 2023.
Ricky TQ Chen and Yaron Lipman. Riemannian flow matching on general geometries. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.03660, 2023.
Tianrong Chen, Guan-Horng Liu, and Evangelos Theodorou. Likelihood training of schrödinger
  bridge using forward-backward SDEs theory. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nioAdKCEdXB.
Ting Chen, Ruixiang Zhang, and Geoffrey Hinton. Analog bits: Generating discrete data using
  diffusion models with self-conditioning, 2023.
Yaoxi Chen, Quan Chen, and Haiyan Liu. Depact and pacmatch: A workflow of designing de
  novo protein pockets to bind small molecules. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling,
  62(4):971–985, Feb 2022b. ISSN 1549-9596. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c01398. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.1c01398.
Gabriele Corso, Luca Cavalleri, Dominique Beaini, Pietro Liò, and Petar Veličković. Principal
  neighbourhood aggregation for graph nets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:13260–13271, 2020.
Gabriele Corso, Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Diffdock: Dif-
  fusion steps, twists, and turns for molecular docking, 2023.
J. Dauparas, I. Anishchenko, N. Bennett, H. Bai, R. J. Ragotte, L. F. Milles, B. I. M. Wicky,
   A. Courbet, R. J. de Haas, N. Bethel, P. J. Y. Leung, T. F. Huddy, S. Pellock, D. Tischer, F. Chan,
   B. Koepnick, H. Nguyen, A. Kang, B. Sankaran, A. K. Bera, N. P. King, and D. Baker. Robust
   deep learning–based protein sequence design using proteinmpnn. Science, 378(6615):49–56,
   2022. doi: 10.1126/science.add2187.
Jiayi Dou, Lindsey Doyle, Per Greisen, Jr, Alberto Schena, Hahnbeom Park, Kai Johnsson, Barry L
   Stoddard, and David Baker. Sampling and energy evaluation challenges in ligand binding protein
   design. Protein Sci., 26(12):2426–2437, December 2017.
Zhangyang Gao, Cheng Tan, Pablo Chacón, and Stan Z. Li. Pifold: Toward effective and efficient
  protein inverse folding, 2023a.
Zhangyang Gao, Cheng Tan, and Stan Z. Li. Knowledge-design: Pushing the limit of protein design
  via knowledge refinement, 2023b.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mario Geiger, Tess Smidt, Alby M., Benjamin Kurt Miller, Wouter Boomsma, Bradley Dice, Kos-
 tiantyn Lapchevskyi, Maurice Weiler, Michał Tyszkiewicz, Simon Batzner, Martin Uhrin, Jes
 Frellsen, Nuri Jung, Sophia Sanborn, Josh Rackers, and Michael Bailey. Euclidean neural net-
 works: e3nn, 2020.
Thomas A Halgren, Robert B Murphy, Richard A Friesner, Hege S Beard, Leah L Frye, W Thomas
  Pollard, and Jay L Banks. Glide: a new approach for rapid, accurate docking and scoring. 2.
  enrichment factors in database screening. Journal of medicinal chemistry, 2004.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Emiel Hoogeboom, Victor Garcia Satorras, Clément Vignac, and Max Welling. Equivariant diffu-
  sion for molecule generation in 3d, 2022.
Chloe Hsu, Robert Verkuil, Jason Liu, Zeming Lin, Brian Hie, Tom Sercu, Adam Lerer, and
  Alexander Rives. Learning inverse folding from millions of predicted structures. bioRxiv, 2022.
  doi: 10.1101/2022.04.10.487779. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
  2022/09/06/2022.04.10.487779.
Wengong Jin, Jeremy Wohlwend, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Iterative refinement graph
 neural network for antibody sequence-structure co-design, 2022.
Bowen Jing, Gabriele Corso, Jeffrey Chang, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Torsional diffu-
  sion for molecular conformer generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01729, 2022.
Bowen Jing, Ezra Erives, Peter Pao-Huang, Gabriele Corso, Bonnie Berger, and Tommi S Jaakkola.
  Eigenfold: Generative protein structure prediction with diffusion models. In ICLR 2023-Machine
  Learning for Drug Discovery workshop, 2023.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žı́dek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Leon Klein, Andreas Krämer, and Frank Noé. Equivariant flow matching, 2023.
Lucien F. Krapp, Fernando A. Meireles, Luciano A. Abriata, and Matteo Dal Peraro. Context-aware
  geometric deep learning for protein sequence design. bioRxiv, 2023. doi: 10.1101/2023.06.19.
  545381. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2023/06/19/2023.
  06.19.545381.
Haitao Lin, Yufei Huang, Meng Liu, Xuanjing Li, Shuiwang Ji, and Stan Z. Li. Diffbp: Generative
  diffusion of 3d molecules for target protein binding, 2022.
Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow match-
  ing for generative modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2022.
Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and
  transfer data with rectified flow, 2022.
Zhihai Liu, Minyi Su, Li Han, Jie Liu, Qifan Yang, Yan Li, and Renxiao Wang. Forging the basis
  for developing protein–ligand interaction scoring functions. Accounts of Chemical Research, 50
  (2):302–309, 2017.
Wei Lu, Qifeng Wu, Jixian Zhang, Jiahua Rao, Chengtao Li, and Shuangjia Zheng. Tankbind:
 Trigonometry-aware neural networks for drug-protein binding structure prediction. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 2022.
Christoph Malisi, Marcel Schumann, Nora C Toussaint, Jorge Kageyama, Oliver Kohlbacher, and
  Birte Höcker. Binding pocket optimization by computational protein design. PLoS One, 7(12):
  e52505, December 2012.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Karolis Martinkus, Jan Ludwiczak, Kyunghyun Cho, Wei-Ching Liang, Julien Lafrance-Vanasse,
  Isidro Hotzel, Arvind Rajpal, Yan Wu, Richard Bonneau, Vladimir Gligorijevic, and Andreas
  Loukas. Abdiffuser: Full-atom generation of in-vitro functioning antibodies, 2023.
Andrew T McNutt, Paul Francoeur, Rishal Aggarwal, Tomohide Masuda, Rocco Meli, Matthew
  Ragoza, Jocelyn Sunseri, and David Ryan Koes. Gnina 1.0: molecular docking with deep learn-
  ing. Journal of cheminformatics, 13(1):1–20, 2021.
Oscar Méndez-Lucio, Mazen Ahmad, Ehecatl Antonio del Rio-Chanona, and Jörg Kurt Wegner.
  A geometric deep learning approach to predict binding conformations of bioactive molecules.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(12):1033–1039, 2021.
Kirill Neklyudov, Rob Brekelmans, Daniel Severo, and Alireza Makhzani. Action matching: Learn-
  ing stochastic dynamics from samples, 2023.
David L Nelson and Michael M Cox. Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry, Fourth Edition. Cold
  Spring Harbor Laboratory, fourth edition edition, 2004.
Jakob Noske, Josef Paul Kynast, Dominik Lemm, Steffen Schmidt, and Birte Höcker. PocketOpti-
  mizer 2.0: A modular framework for computer-aided ligand-binding design. Protein Sci., 32(1):
  e4516, January 2023.
Nicholas F. Polizzi and William F. DeGrado. A defined structural unit enables de novo design
  of small-molecule–binding proteins. Science, 369(6508):1227–1233, 2020. doi: 10.1126/
  science.abb8330. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.
  abb8330.
Aram-Alexandre Pooladian, Heli Ben-Hamu, Carles Domingo-Enrich, Brandon Amos, Yaron Lip-
  man, and Ricky T. Q. Chen. Multisample flow matching: Straightening flows with minibatch
  couplings, 2023.
Zhuoran Qiao, Weili Nie, Arash Vahdat, Thomas F. Miller III au2, and Anima Anandkumar. State-
  specific protein-ligand complex structure prediction with a multi-scale deep generative model,
  2023.
Arne Schneuing, Yuanqi Du, Charles Harris, Arian Jamasb, Ilia Igashov, Weitao Du, Tom Blundell,
  Pietro Lió, Carla Gomes, Max Welling, Michael Bronstein, and Bruno Correia. Structure-based
  drug design with equivariant diffusion models, 2023.
Yuyang Shi, Valentin De Bortoli, Andrew Campbell, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion schrödinger
  bridge matching, 2023.
Vignesh Ram Somnath, Matteo Pariset, Ya-Ping Hsieh, Maria Rodriguez Martinez, Andreas Krause,
  and Charlotte Bunne. Aligned diffusion schrödinger bridges, 2023.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Andre C Stiel, Mehdi Nellen, and Birte Höcker. PocketOptimizer and the design of ligand binding
  sites. Methods Mol. Biol., 1414:63–75, 2016.
Hannes Stärk, Octavian-Eugen Ganea, Lagnajit Pattanaik, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola.
  Equibind: Geometric deep learning for drug binding structure prediction, 2022.
Nathaniel Thomas, Tess Smidt, Steven Kearnes, Lusann Yang, Li Li, Kai Kohlhoff, and Patrick
  Riley. Tensor field networks: Rotation-and translation-equivariant neural networks for 3d point
  clouds. arXiv preprint, 2018.
René Thomsen and Mikael H Christensen. Moldock: a new technique for high-accuracy molecular
  docking. Journal of medicinal chemistry, 49(11):3315–3321, 2006.
Alexander Tong, Nikolay Malkin, Kilian Fatras, Lazar Atanackovic, Yanlei Zhang, Guillaume
  Huguet, Guy Wolf, and Yoshua Bengio. Simulation-free schrödinger bridges via score and flow
  matching, 2023a.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexander Tong, Nikolay Malkin, Guillaume Huguet, Yanlei Zhang, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Kilian
  Fatras, Guy Wolf, and Yoshua Bengio. Improving and generalizing flow-based generative models
  with minibatch optimal transport, 2023b.
Oleg Trott and Arthur J Olson. Autodock vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with
  a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. Journal of computational
  chemistry, 31(2):455–461, 2010.
Yogesh Verma, Markus Heinonen, and Vikas Garg. Abode: Ab initio antibody design using con-
  joined odes, 2023.
Clement Vignac, Igor Krawczuk, Antoine Siraudin, Bohan Wang, Volkan Cevher, and Pascal
  Frossard. Digress: Discrete denoising diffusion for graph generation, 2023a.
Clement Vignac, Nagham Osman, Laura Toni, and Pascal Frossard. Midi: Mixed graph and 3d
  denoising diffusion for molecule generation, 2023b.
Joseph L. Watson, David Juergens, Nathaniel R. Bennett, Brian L. Trippe, Jason Yim, Helen E.
  Eisenach, Woody Ahern, Andrew J. Borst, Robert J. Ragotte, Lukas F. Milles, Basile I. M.
  Wicky, Nikita Hanikel, Samuel J. Pellock, Alexis Courbet, William Sheffler, Jue Wang, Preetham
  Venkatesh, Isaac Sappington, Susana Vázquez Torres, Anna Lauko, Valentin De Bortoli, Emile
  Mathieu, Sergey Ovchinnikov, Regina Barzilay, Tommi S. Jaakkola, Frank DiMaio, Minkyung
  Baek, and David Baker. De novo design of protein structure and function with rfdiffusion. Na-
  ture, 620(7976):1089–1100, Aug 2023.
Andy Hsien-Wei Yeh, Christoffer Norn, Yakov Kipnis, Doug Tischer, Samuel J. Pellock, Declan
  Evans, Pengchen Ma, Gyu Rie Lee, Jason Z. Zhang, Ivan Anishchenko, Brian Coventry, Longxing
  Cao, Justas Dauparas, Samer Halabiya, Michelle DeWitt, Lauren Carter, K. N. Houk, and David
  Baker. De novo design of luciferases using deep learning. Nature, 614(7949):774–780, Feb 2023.
  ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-05696-3. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
  s41586-023-05696-3.
Kai Yi, Bingxin Zhou, Yiqing Shen, Pietro Liò, and Yu Guang Wang. Graph denoising diffusion for
  inverse protein folding, 2023.
Yangtian Zhang, Huiyu Cai, Chence Shi, Bozitao Zhong, and Jian Tang. E3bind: An end-to-end
  equivariant network for protein-ligand docking, 2023a.
Zaixi Zhang, Zepu Lu, Zhongkai Hao, Marinka Zitnik, and Qi Liu. Full-atom protein pocket design
  via iterative refinement, 2023b.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Visualization of Fake Ligand creation. Depicted is a fake ligand created for the Ubiquitin
protein. Out of all residues that have at least 4 contacts with other residues (apart from those that are
within 7 locations in the chain) a residue is randomly selected as the fake ligand. Then we remove
the residue itself from the protein and all residues that are within 7 locations in the chain.


A     M ETHOD D ETAILS AND E XPLANATIONS
A.1   BLOSUM S CORE

Next to sequence recovery, we also evaluate with our BLOSUM Score in an attempt to penalize
amino acid predictions less if the predicted residue type is similar yet different from the original
residue. With A ∈ R20×20 being the BLOSUM62 matrix, X ∈ Rn×20 the one hot encoded ground
truth residues types and X̂ ∈ Rn×20 the predicted residues types the BLOSUM Score is:

                                                    1T diag(XAX̂ T )
                                Score(X, X̂) =                                                       (4)
                                                    1T diag(XAX T )

A.2   FAKE L IGAND DATA AUGMENTATION V ISUALIZATION

In Figure 5, we visualize the construction of our fake ligands as described in Section 3.2. When
constructing the fake ligand from a residue, we drop the backbone oxygen and nitrogen of the amino
acid and keep the carbon, alpha carbon, and the side chain as the ligand’s atoms.

A.3   F LOW M ATCHING T RAINING AND I NFERENCE

In Section 3.1, we lay out the conditional flow matching objective as introduced by Lipman et al.
[2022] and extended to arbitrary start and end distributions by multiple works concurrently [Albergo
& Vanden-Eijnden, 2022; Albergo et al., 2023; Pooladian et al., 2023; Tong et al., 2023b]. We
presented conditional flow matching in this more general scenario where the prior p0 and the data
p1 can be arbitrary distributions, as long as we can sample from the prior.
Many choices of conditional flows and conditional vector fields are possible. For different applica-
tions and scenarios, some choices perform better than others. We find it to already work well to use a
very simple choice of conditional probability path pt (x|x0 , x1 ) = N (x|tx1 +(1−t)x0 , σ 2 ), which
gives rise to the conditional vector field ut (x|x0 , x1 ) = x1 − x0 . With this conditional flow and
with parameterizing vθ to predict x1 , the optimization and inference is remarkably straightforward
as algorithms 1 and 2 show.

A.4   S ELF - CONDITIONED F LOW M ATCHING T RAINING AND I NFERENCE

In Section 3.1, we also explain the self-conditioning training and inference procedure. When addi-
tionally using self-conditioning, the training and inference algorithms are only slightly modified and
still very simple as presented in algorithms 3 and 4.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: Conditional Flow Matching training with x1 prediction and simple constant width
gaussian conditional path.
Input: Training data distribution p1 , prior p0 , σ, and initialized vector field vθ
while Training do
    x0 ∼ p0 (x0 ); x1 ∼ p1 (x1 ); t ∼ U(0, 1);
    µt ← tx1 + (1 − t)x0 ;
    x ∼ N (µt , σ 2 I);
    LCF M ← ∥vθ (x, t) − x1 ∥2 ;
    θ ← Update(θ, ∇θ LCF M ) ;
return vθ


Algorithm 2: Conditional Flow Matching inference with x1 prediction and simple constant
width gaussian conditional path.
Input: Prior p0 , number of integration steps T, and trained vector field vθ
steps ← 1;
∆t ← 1/T ;
t ← 0;
x0 ∼ p0 (x0 );
xt ← x0 ;
while steps ≤ T − 1 do
    x̃1 ← vθ (xt , t) ;
    xt ← xt + ∆t(x̃1 − x0 ) ;
    t ← t + ∆t ;
return xt



A.5   F LOW S ITE A RCHITECTURE


Figure 6: F LOW S ITE architecture. The refinement TFN layers (also in H ARMONIC F LOW) first
update the ligand coordinates xt−∆t multiple times to produce the structure prediction x̃t1 (from
which x̃t is computed during inference). The TFN’s invariant features and x̃t1 are fed to invariant
layers to produce side chain angles α̃ and the new residue estimate ãt1 .


Here, we detail the F LOW S ITE architecture as visualized in Figure 6 in more detail. The first half of
the architecture is an equivariant Tensor Field Network [Thomas et al., 2018] while the second part
is an invariant architecture with graph attention layers similar to the architecture of P I F OLD [Gao
et al., 2023a] where edge features are also initialized and updated.
Radius Graph. The protein and (multi-)ligand are represented as graphs: each residue corresponds
to a node, and each ligand atom is a node. Edges are drawn between residue nodes if they are within
50 Å, between ligand nodes if they are within 50 Å, and between the two molecules’ nodes if they
are within 30 Å. The locations of the residue nodes are given by their alpha carbons, while the atom
locations provide the node positions for the ligand nodes.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3: Conditional Flow Matching training with x1 prediction and simple constant width
gaussian conditional path.
Input: Training data distribution p1 , prior p0 , σ, and initialized vector field vθ
while Training do
   x0 ∼ p0 (x0 ); x1 ∼ p(x1 ); t ∼ U(0, 1); s ∼ U(0, 1);
   µt ← tx1 + (1 − t)x0 ;
   x ∼ N (µt , σ 2 I);
   x̃1 ∼ p0 (x̃1 );
   if s > 0.5 then
       x̃1 ← vθ (x, x̃1 , t));
    LCF M ← ∥vθ (x, x̃1 , t) − x1 ∥2 ;
    θ ← Update(θ, ∇θ LCF M ) ;
return vθ



Algorithm 4: Conditional Flow Matching inference with x1 prediction and simple constant
width gaussian conditional path.
Input: Prior p0 , number of integration steps T, and trained vector field vθ
steps ← 1;
∆t ← 1/T ;
t ← 0;
x̃1 ∼ p(x0 );
x0 ∼ p(x0 );
xt ← x0 ;
while steps ≤ T − 1 do
    x̃1 ← vθ (x, x̃1 , t) ;
    xt ← xt + ∆t(x̃1 − x0 ) ;
    t ← t + ∆t ;
return xt



Node Features. The ligand features as input to the TNF and to the invariant part of the architecture
are atomic number; chirality; degree; formal charge; implicit valence; the number of connected
hydrogens; hybridization type; whether or not it is in an aromatic ring; in how many rings it is; and
finally, 6 features for whether or not it is in a ring of size 5 or 6.
The initial receptor features for the TFN are scalar feature encodings of the invariant residue types
together with vector features, which are three vectors from the alpha carbon to N, C, and O.
For the invariant graph attention layer stack, the residue inputs are the invariant geometric encodings
of P I F OLD [Gao et al., 2023a]. Additionally, they contain the residue type self-conditioning infor-
mation via embeddings of the previously predicted features ãt1 and the invariant scalar node features
of the last refinement TFN layer.
Additionally, radial basis encodings of the sampling time t of the conditional flow are added to all
initial node features.
Edge Features. For the Tensor Field Network, the edge features are a radial basis embedding
of the alpha carbon distances for the protein-to-protein edges, atom distances for the ligand-to-
ligand edges, and alpha carbon to ligand atom distances for the edges between the protein and
the ligand. Additionally, the ligand-to-ligand edges features obtain information of the structure
self-conditioning by also adding the radial basis interatomic distance embeddings of the previously
predicted ligand coordinates x̃t1 to them.
Meanwhile, for the invariant graph attention part of the architecture, the ligand-to-ligand edge fea-
tures are only radial basis embeddings of the interatomic distances. The protein-to-protein edge
features are given by radial basis encodings of all pairwise distances between the backbone atoms
N, C, Ca, O, and an additional virtual atom (as introduced by P I F OLD) associated with each residue.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The edges between the protein and ligand are featurized as the embeddings of the four possible
distances between a single ligand atom and the four backbone atoms of a residue.
Tensor Field Network. The equivariant part of F LOW S ITE uses our equivariant refinement TFN
layers based on tensorfield networks [Thomas et al., 2018] and implemented using the e3nn library
[Geiger et al., 2020]. These rely on tensor products between invariant and equivariant features. We
denote the tensor products as ⊗w where w are the path weights. Further, we write the i-th node
features after the k-th layer as hki for the equivariant Tensorfield network layers. h0i is initialized as
described above in the Node Features paragraph. Lastly, Ni denotes the neighbors of the i-th node
in the radius graph.
Equivariant TFN Refinement Layer. Each layer has a different set of weights for all four types of
edges: ligand-to-ligand, protein-to-protein, ligand-to-protein, and protein-to-protein. The layers first
update node features before updating ligand coordinates based on them. For every edge in the graph,
a message is constructed based on the invariant and equivariant features of the nodes it connects.
This is done in an equivariant fashion via tensor products. The tensor product is parameterized by
the edge embeddings and the invariant scalar features of nodes that are connected by the edge. To
obtain a new node embedding, the messages are summed:
                                                                            !
                           k+1      k            1 X                      k
                         hi ← hi + BN                    Y (r̂ij ) ⊗ψij hj
                                                |Ni |                                               (5)
                                                      j∈Ni

                                      with ψij = Ψ(eij , hki , hkj )
Here, BN is the (equivariant) batch normalization of the e3nn library. The orders of all features are
always restricted to a maximum of 1. The neural networks Ψ have separate sets of weights for all
4 kinds of edges. Using these new node features and the previous layer’s ligand position update x̂k
(or the input positions x̂0 = xt for the first layer), the next ligand position update x̂k+1 is produced
via an O(3) equivariant linear layer Φ of the e3nn library:

                                      x̂k+1 ← x̂k+1 + Φ(hk+1 )                                        (6)

Invariant Graph Attention Layers. These layers are based on P I F OLD and update both node and
edge features. The initial features are described in the paragraphs above. We denote these as hli and
elji for the l-th graph attention layer to disambiguate with the features hki of the equivariant refine-
ment TFN layers. When aggregating the features for the i-th node, attention weights are first created
and then used to weight messages from each neighboring node. With || denoting concatenation and
Ω, Ξ, and Π being feed-forward neural networks, the update is defined as:

                                        wji ← Π(hlj ||elji ||hli )
                                                 exp wji
                                        aji ← P
                                                a∈Ni exp wai
                                                                                                      (7)
                                           vj = Ξ(elji ||hlj )
                                                 X
                                          hl+1
                                           i   =       aji vj .
                                                   j∈Ni

We drop the global context attention used in P I F OLD as we did not find them to be helpful for
sequence recovery in any of our experiments. This was with and without ligands.
Based on the new node features, the edge features are updated as follows:

                                               l+1        l+1
                                      el+1          l
                                       ji = Ω(hj ||eji ||hi )                                         (8)

B    D ISCUSSION
H ARMONIC F LOW has the ability to produce arbitrary bond lengths and bond angles. This distin-
guishes it from D IFF D OCK [Corso et al., 2023], which only changes torsion angles, translation, and


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Multi-ligand docking case study. A randomly picked complex with a multi-ligand from
the Binding MOAD test set with 4 molecules as multi-ligand. We show the ground truth ligand
structure (blue) and a sample of H ARMONIC F LOW (purple). We find that the predicted structure
mostly matches the ground truth for both of the large ligands, but both small ligands are placed on
the left while one of them should be on the right.


rotation of an initial seed conformer. Thus, unlike D IFF D OCK, H ARMONIC F LOW would be able
to produce unrealistic local structures. That this is not the case, as shown in Figure 12 attests to
how H ARMONIC F LOW learns physical constraints. Still, we argue that the role of deep learning
generative models should be to solve the hard problem of finding the correct coarse structure. If one
desires a conformer with low energy with respect to some energy function, this can be easily and
quickly obtained by relaxing with that energy function.

C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
C.1   M ULTI - LIGAND D OCKING C ASE S TUDIES

In this subsection we provide 4 case studies of Multi-liand docking to assess the behaviour of H AR -
MONIC F LOW for this task. For this purpose, we randomly choose 4 complexes from the Binding
MOAD test set under the condition that they contain different ligands.
Overall, we find that while the RMSDs of E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION in Table 2 are similar to those
of H ARMONIC F LOW, the complexes that H ARMONIC F LOW generates are often more physically
plausible. For instance, H ARMONIC F LOW’s rings have the appropriate shape and planar systems
are actually planar which often is not the case for E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION.

C.2   A NALYSIS OF JOINT ODE DYNAMICS

To analyze the behavior of the learned ODE over discrete and continuous data, we provide Figure 11.
This figure shows the evolution of the x1 prediction’s RMSD and the evolution of the output entropy
of the residue type probabilities. The results show how a more determined structure prediction
correlates with a decrease in uncertainty of the residue type prediction.

C.3   F LOW S ITE A BLATIONS

In Table 5 we provide additional ablations for F LOW S ITE. In N O R EFINEMENT L OSS, the loss
Lref ine is dropped from the final weighted sum of losses. in N O S IDE C HAIN T ORSION L OSS,
the loss Ltorsion is dropped from the final weighted sum of losses. In BACKBONE N OISE, we add


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Multi-ligand docking case study. A randomly picked complex with a multi-ligand from
the Binding MOAD test set for which we show the ground truth ligand structure (blue), a sample
of H ARMONIC F LOW (purple) and a sample of E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION (yellow). We find that
the rings of H ARMONIC F LOW have the correct shapes and that the bond lengths and angles are
physically plausible while E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION fails to produce planar rings.


Figure 9: Multi-ligand docking case study. A randomly picked complex with a multi-ligand from
the Binding MOAD test set for which we show the ground truth ligand structure (blue), a sample
of H ARMONIC F LOW (purple) and a sample of E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION (yellow). We find that
E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION incorrectly placed the sulfate and its second ligand prediction is further
from the ground truth while H ARMONIC F LOW almost perfectly places the sulfate.


Gaussian noise to the input protein backbone coordinates with standard deviation 0.2. In O NLY
E QUIVARIANT L AYERS, we replace the invariant graph attention layers in the F LOW S ITE architec-
ture with equivariant refinement TFN layers, showing how the invariant architecture is crucial for
predicting the discrete residue types.

C.4   D OCKING WITHOUT RESIDUE IDENITITIES

For our binding site design, it is important that the structure modeling of the ligand is accurate given
the evidence that having a good model of the (multi-)ligand structure is important for recovering
pockets and given the interlink between 3D structure and binding affinity / binding free energy. In
the main text Section 4.2, we investigated H ARMONIC F LOW’s performance for docking with known
residue identities. However, when using H ARMONIC F LOW for binding site design, the residue
identities are not known a prior, and structure reasoning abilities in this scenario are required.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Multi-ligand docking case study. A randomly picked complex with a multi-ligand
from the Binding MOAD test set for which we show the ground truth ligand structure (blue), a
sample of H ARMONIC F LOW (purple) and a sample of E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION (yellow). We can
see unrealistic bond lengths and angles for E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION’s prediction and the predicted
ion position is further from the ground truth than for H ARMONIC F LOW.

Table 5: Binding Site Recovery ablations. Results on the PDBBind sequence similarity split. Re-
covery is the percentage of correctly predicted residues, and BLOSUM score takes residue similarity
into account.

                Method                                   BLOSUM score       Recovery
               N O S IDE C HAIN T ORSION L OSS                45.9            47.7
               BACKBONE N OISE                                39.6            42.4
               N O FAKE L IGAND AUGMENTATION                  45.5            46.7
               N O R EFINEMENT L OSS                          45.7            47.6
               O NLY E QUIVARIANT L AYERS                     29.8            35.3
               F LOW S ITE discrete loss weight = 0.8         46.9            47.8
               F LOW S ITE discrete loss weight = 0.2         47.6            49.5


C.5   B LIND D OCKING

In blind docking, the binding site/pocket of the protein is unknown, and the task is to predict the
binding structure given the whole protein. While in, e.g., drug discovery efforts and in our binding
site design task, the pocket is known, many important applications exist where discovering the bind-
ing site is necessary. In these experiments, the runs take longer to converge than in the pocket-level
experiments. Thus, the DiffDock runs were trained for 500 epochs while the H ARMONIC F LOW
runs were trained for 250 epochs instead of the 150 epochs in the pocket-level experiments. Table
7, shows these preliminary blind docking results, which are promising for a deeper investigation
of H ARMONIC F LOW for blind docking and for optimizing it toward this task. This could include
training a confidence model as in D IFF D OCK [Corso et al., 2023].

C.6   P REDICTED C OMPLEX V ISUALIZATIONS

We visualize generated structures of H ARMONIC F LOW in Figure 12 from the PDBBind test set un-
der the time-based split of Stärk et al. [2022] in which there are no ligands whose SMILES string was
already in the training data. The generated complexes show very chemically plausible ligand struc-
tures even though there are no local structure constraints as in D IFF D OCK and H ARMONIC F LOW
has full flexibility in modeling bond angles and bond lengths.
In Table 6, we provide the docking results without residue identities and find that H ARMOIC F LOW
substantially outperforms D IFF D OCK’s diffusion generative process, justifying H ARMONIC F LOW’s
use in F LOW S ITE for binding site design.


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                      1.2
                                                                                       1.92
                   1.2                                                                                                                                                                 1.70
                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                       1.90
                   1.0
 Prediction RMSD                                                                                                      0.8                                                              1.68


                                                                                                    Prediction RMSD
                                                                                       1.88
                   0.8


                                                                                          Entropy


                                                                                                                                                                                          Entropy
                                                                                       1.86                           0.6                                                              1.66
                   0.6
                                                                                       1.84                           0.4
                   0.4                                                                                                                                                                 1.64
                                                                                       1.82                           0.2
                   0.2                                                                                                                                                                 1.62
                                                                                       1.80
                   0.0                                                                                                0.0
                          0.0    2.5    5.0      7.5   10.0       12.5   15.0   17.5                                        0.0   2.5   5.0      7.5   10.0       12.5   15.0   17.5
                                               Integration Step                                                                                Integration Step

                                             a PDB ID: 4a80                                                                               b PDB ID: 3hgi
                                                                                       1.84
                   2.5                                                                                                1.4
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.66
                                                                                       1.82                           1.2
                   2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.64
                                                                                                                      1.0
 Prediction RMSD


                                                                                                    Prediction RMSD
                                                                                       1.80
                   1.5

                                                                                          Entropy
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.62


                                                                                                                                                                                          Entropy
                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                       1.78
                   1.0                                                                                                0.6                                                              1.60
                                                                                       1.76                           0.4
                   0.5                                                                                                                                                                 1.58
                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                       1.74                                                                                            1.56
                   0.0                                                                                                0.0
                          0.0    2.5    5.0      7.5   10.0       12.5   15.0   17.5                                        0.0   2.5   5.0      7.5   10.0       12.5   15.0   17.5
                                               Integration Step                                                                                Integration Step

                                             c PDB ID: 6bnd                                                                               d PDB ID: 3i51
                                                                                       2.12
                   5                                                                                                  1.6
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.96
                                                                                       2.10                           1.4
                   4                                                                   2.08                                                                                            1.94
                                                                                                                      1.2
 Prediction RMSD


                                                                                       2.06
                                                                                                    Prediction RMSD


                   3                                                                                                  1.0                                                              1.92
                                                                                          Entropy


                                                                                                                                                                                          Entropy
                                                                                       2.04                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.90
                   2                                                                   2.02                           0.6
                                                                                       2.00                           0.4                                                              1.88
                   1
                                                                                       1.98                           0.2                                                              1.86
                   0                                                                   1.96                           0.0
                         0.0    2.5    5.0      7.5    10.0      12.5    15.0   17.5                                        0.0   2.5   5.0      7.5   10.0       12.5   15.0   17.5
                                              Integration Step                                                                                 Integration Step

                                             e PDB ID: 2xsu                                                                                   f PDB ID: 4p6r
                   4.0
                                                                                                                      1.0                                                              1.64
                   3.5                                                                 1.85                                                                                            1.62
                   3.0                                                                                                0.8
                                                                                       1.80                                                                                            1.60
 Prediction RMSD


                                                                                                    Prediction RMSD


                   2.5
                                                                                                                      0.6                                                              1.58
                                                                                          Entropy


                                                                                                                                                                                          Entropy


                   2.0                                                                 1.75
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.56
                   1.5                                                                 1.70                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.54
                   1.0
                                                                                       1.65                           0.2                                                              1.52
                   0.5
                   0.0                                                                 1.60                           0.0                                                              1.50
                          0.0    2.5    5.0      7.5   10.0       12.5   15.0   17.5                                        0.0   2.5   5.0      7.5   10.0       12.5   15.0   17.5
                                               Integration Step                                                                                Integration Step

                                             g PDB ID: 1pzp                                                                               h PDB ID: 3hjq

Figure 11: Analysis of joint ODE dynamics. For multiple examples, we visualize two quantities
of the trajectory of the ODE. On the x-axis is the integration step of the ODE. On the y-axis on the
left in blue, the RMSD between the step’s x1 prediction and the final x1 prediction. On the y-axis
on the right in yellow, we show the entropy of the predicted probability distribution averaged over
all residues.
                                                                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: H ARMONIC F LOW vs. P RODUCT D IFFUSION without residue idenitites. Comparison
on PDBBind splits for docking without residue identities into Distance-Pockets (residues close to
ligand) and Radius-Pockets (residues within a radius of the pocket center). The columns ”%<2”
show the fraction of predictions with an RMSD to the ground truth that is less than 2Å (higher is
better). ”Med.” is the median RMSD (lower is better).


                                Sequence Similarity Split                   Time Split
                            Distance-Pocket Radius-Pocket        Distance-Pocket Radius-Pocket
  Method                    %<2      Med.    %<2 Med.            %<2      Med.    %<2 Med.
 P RODUCT D IFFUSION        23.2       3.4      14.3     4.0      16.9      4.3       12.3     4.6
 H ARMONIC F LOW            35.5       2.8      20.8     3.5      39.3      2.8       30.7     3.3


Table 7: H ARMONIC F LOW vs. P RODUCT D IFFUSION for blind docking. Comparison on PDB-
Bind splits for blind docking where the binding pocket of the protein is not known, and the whole
protein is given as input. The columns ”%<2” show the fraction of predictions with an RMSD to
the ground truth that is less than 2Å (higher is better). ”Med.” is the median RMSD in Å (lower is
better). Top 5 and Top 10 refers to the performance when generating 5 or 10 samples and selecting
the best among them.
                                        Sequence Split                   Time Split
            Method                    %<2   %<5      Med.         %<2      %<5      Med.
           P RODUCT D IFFUSION        10.7      40.6      5.9     12.6      44.1      5.6
           H ARMONIC F LOW            11.4      40.5      5.8     25.5      52.2      4.7
                                      Top 5    Top 10            Top 5    Top 10
                                      %<2       %<2              %<2       %<2
           P RODUCT D IFFUSION        26.6      34.2              28.9      32.5
           H ARMONIC F LOW            17.1      20.0              30.9      32.6


D     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK

D.1   F LOW M ATCHING , S TOCHASTIC I NTERPOLANTS , AND S CHRODINGER B RIDGES

While our exposition of flow matching in the main text focused on the works of Lipman et al. [2022]
and Tong et al. [2023b], the innovations in this field were made by multiple papers concurrently.
Namely, Action Matching [Neklyudov et al., 2023], stochastic interpolants [Albergo & Vanden-
Eijnden, 2022], and rectified flow [Liu et al., 2022] also proposed procedures for learning flows
between arbitrary start and end distributions.
An improvement to learning such flows would be if their transport additionally performs the optimal
transport between the two distributions with respect to some cost. With shorter paths with respect to
the cost metric, even fewer integration steps can be performed, and integration errors are smaller.
Towards this, Tong et al. [2023b] and Pooladian et al. [2023] concurrently propose mini-batch OT
where they train with conditional flow matching but define the conditional paths between the optimal
transport solution within a minibatch. They show that in the limit of the batch size, the flow will
learn the optimal coupling.
This can be extended to learning Schrodinger bridges in a simulation-free manner via an iterative
flow-matching and coupling definition procedure [Shi et al., 2023] akin to rectified flows. Similarly,
Tong et al. [2023a] learn a flow and a score simultaneously to reproduce stochastic dynamics as in
a Schrodinger bridge and Somnath et al. [2023] learn a Schrodinger bridge between aligned data in
a simulation-free manner. Simulation-free here means that the learned vector fields no longer need
to be rolled out / simulated during training, which is memory and time-consuming and prohibits
learning Schrodinger bridges for larger applications. This was required for previous procedures for
learning Schrodinger bridges [Bortoli et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022a].


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: H ARMONIC F LOW generated complexes. Generated complexes of H ARMONIC F LOW
for eight randomly chosen complexes in the PDBBind test set in the Distance-Pocket setup with a
time-split where none of the ligands were seen during training.


D.2   P OCKET D ESIGN

Yeh et al. [2023] successfully designed a novel Luciferase, which is an enzyme catalyzing the re-
action of a Luciferin ligand. In their pipeline, they 1) Choose a protein with a cavity of the right
size for the reactants. 2) Keep its backbone 3D structure without amino acid identities and part


                                                23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


manually, part computationally decide the amino acids of the cavity to bind the ligands (which we
aim to do with F LOW S ITE). 3) Design the rest of the protein’s residues with existing tools such as
ProteinMPNN [Dauparas et al., 2022].
The P OCKET O PTIMIZER line of works [Malisi et al., 2012; Stiel et al., 2016; Noske et al., 2023]
develops a pipeline for pocket residue design based on physics-inspired energy functions and search
algorithms. Starting from a bound protein-ligand complex, P OCKET O PTIMIZER samples differ-
ent structures and residue types, which are scored with multiple options of energy functions and
optimized with different search algorithms for which multiple options are available. Meanwhile,
DEPACT [Chen et al., 2022b] and Dou et al. [2017] design pockets by searching databases for
bound structures of similar ligands, using their protein’s residues as proposals, and selecting the best
combinations based on scoring functions.


D.3   A NTIBODY D ESIGN

Another domain where joint sequence and structure design has already been heavily leveraged is
antibody design [Jin et al., 2022; Verma et al., 2023; Martinkus et al., 2023]. In this task, the goal
is to determine the residue types of the complementary determining regions/loops of an antibody to
bind an epitope. These epitopes are proteins, and we have the opportunity to leverage evolutionary
information. A modeling approach here only has to learn the interactions with the 20 possible amino
acids that the epitope is built out of. Meanwhile, in our design task, where we wish to bind arbitrary
small molecules, we are faced with a much wider set of possibilities for the ligand.


D.4   S MALL MOLECULE DESIGN

Another frontier where designing structure and ”2D” information simultaneously has found appli-
cation is in molecule generation. For instance, Vignac et al. [2023a] and Vignac et al. [2023b] show
how a joint diffusion process over a small molecule’s positions and its atom types can be used to
successfully generate novel realistic molecules. This task was initially tackled by EDM [Hooge-
boom et al., 2022] and recently was used to benchmark diffusion models with changing numbers of
dimensions [Campbell et al., 2023].
Often, it is relevant to generate molecules conditioned on context. In particular, a highly valuable
application, if it works well enough, would be generating molecules conditioned on a protein pocket
to bind to that pocket [Lin et al., 2022; Schneuing et al., 2023]. These applications would be most
prominent in the drug discovery industry, where the first step in many drug design campaigns is
often to find a molecule that binds to a particular target protein that is known to be relevant for a
disease. In our work with F LOW S ITE, we consider the opposite task where the small molecule is
already given, and we instead want to design a pocket to bind this molecule. Here, the applications
range from enzyme design (for which the first step of catalysis is binding the reactants [Nelson &
Cox, 2004]) over antidote design to producing new biomedical marker proteins for use in medicinal
diagnosis and biology research.


D.5   P ROTEIN -L IGAND D OCKING

Historically, docking was performed with search-based methods [Trott & Olson, 2010; Halgren
et al., 2004; Thomsen & Christensen, 2006] that have a scoring function and a search algorithm.
The search algorithm would start with an initial random conformer and explore the energy land-
scape defined by the scoring function before returning the best scoring pose as the final prediction.
Recently, such scoring functions have been parameterized with machine learning approaches [Mc-
Nutt et al., 2021; Méndez-Lucio et al., 2021]. In these traditional docking methods, to the best of
our knowledge, only extensions of Autodock Vina [Trott & Olson, 2010] support multiligand dock-
ing. However, this still requires knowledge of the complete sidechains, which is not available in our
binding site design scenario.


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP D ETAILS

In this section, we provide additional details on how our experiments were run next to the ex-
act commands and code to reproduce the results available at https://anonymous.4open.
science/r/wolf. In all of the paper, we only consider heavy atoms (no hydrogens).
Training Details. For optimization, we use the Adam optimizer [Kingma & Ba, 2014] with a
learning rate of 0.001 for all experiments. The batch size for pure structure prediction experiments is
4, while that for binding site recovery experiments is 16. To choose the best model out of all training
epochs, we run inference every epoch for experiments that do not involve structure modeling and
every 5 epochs for the ones that do. The model that is used for the test set is the one with the best
metric in terms of sequence recovery or fraction of predictions with an RMSD below 2 Å. When
training for binding site recovery, we limit the number of heavy atoms in the ligand to 60. We note
that for the structure prediction experiments for Binding MOAD in Table 2, the dataset construction
for both methods had a mistake where ligands were selected based on their residue ID, which is
incorrect because a ligand in a different chain could have the same residue ID - we will correct this
in the next version of the manuscript. All models were trained on a single A100 GPU. The models
that involve structure prediction were trained for 150 epochs, while those without structure modeling
and pure sequence prediction converge much faster in terms of their validation metrics and are only
trained for 50 epochs. On PDBBind, FlowSite took 58.6 hours to train, and on MOAD 115.6 hours,
both on an RTX A600 GPU. The D IFF D OCK models are all trained for 500 epochs.
Runtime. Averaged over 4350 generated samples, the average runtime of H ARMONIC F LOW is
0.223 seconds per generated structure and that of F LOW S ITE is 0.351 seconds per sequence.
Hyperparameters. We tuned hyperparameters on small-scale experiments in the Distance-Pocket
setup for H ARMONIC F LOW and transferred these parameters to F LOW S ITE, whose additional pa-
rameters we tested separately. The tuning for both methods was light, and we mainly stuck with
the initial settings that we already found to work well. By default, our conditional probability path
pt (x|x0 , x1 ) = N (x|tx1 + (1 − t)x0 , σ 2 ) uses σ = 0.5 for which we also tried 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.8.
The number of integration steps we use is 20 for all methods, including E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION
and D IFF D OCK D IFFUSION. The number of scalar features we use is 32, and we have 8 vector
features and 6 of our equivariant refinement TFN layers.
D IFF D OCK D IFFUSION baseline. This only uses the score model, the diffusion generative model
component of D IFF D OCK [Corso et al., 2023]. We do not use the confidence model, which is
a significant part of their docking pipeline. Such a discriminator could also be used on top of
H ARMONIC F LOW, and here, we only aim to compare the generative models. For this, we use
the code at https://github.com/gcorso/DiffDock to train D IFF D OCK with our pocket
definitions using the same number of scalar features and vector features using 5 of its default TFN
layers followed by its pseudo torque convolution and center-convolution. We train all experiments
with D IFF D OCK for 500 epochs.
E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION baseline. Here, we use an identical architecture as for H ARMONIC F LOW
and only replace the flow matching training and inference with the diffusion training and inference
approach of E IGEN F OLD [Jing et al., 2023]. The models were trained in the same settings, and most
parameters that we use in H ARMONIC F LOW were first optimized with E IGEN F OLD D IFFUSION
since we used it initially.


F     DATASET D ETAILS

Here, we lay out the details of the PDBBind and Binding MOAD datasets as we use them to evaluate
H ARMONIC F LOW’s docking abilities and F LOW S ITE’s binding site design.

F.1   PDBB IND

We use PDBBind dataset [Liu et al., 2017] with protein-ligand complexes of high binding affinity
extracted and hand curated from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [Berman et al., 2003]. For this, we
use two splits.


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Less than 50 atoms, more than 0                                              Less than 100 atoms, more than 50
                700                                                                           80
                600                                                                           70

                500                                                                           60
                                                                                              50
    Frequency


                                                                                  Frequency
                400
                                                                                              40
                300
                                                                                              30
                200
                                                                                              20
                100                                                                           10
                  0                                                                            0
                          10             20        30         40        50                         50        60         70        80          90        100
                                      Ligand heavy atoms                                                             Ligand heavy atoms

Figure 13: Number of atoms per ligand: PDBBind. Histograms showing the number of heavy
atoms for all ligands under our ligand definition. This includes many ions, which can be important
to filter out if not relevant to the desired application.



                          Ligand size less than 50 atoms, more than 0                                   Ligand size less than 100 atoms, more than 50
              1600
                                                                                          120
              1400
                                                                                          100
              1200
              1000                                                                            80
  Frequency


                                                                              Frequency


                800                                                                           60
                600
                                                                                              40
                400
                200                                                                           20

                  0                                                                            0
                      0     5       10        15    20     25      30                              0         10          20         30             40
                                  Ligand number of contacts                                                       Ligand number of contacts

Figure 14: Number of protein contacts per Ligand: PDBBind. Histograms showing the number
of contacts that each ligand has with its protein. A contact is defined as having a residue with a
heavy atom within 4A of any ligand heavy atom.



Splits. Firstly, the time split proposed by Stärk et al. [2022], which now is commonly used in the
machine learning literature when benchmarking docking approaches, although Buttenschoen et al.
[2023] among others found many shortcomings of this split, especially for blind docking. Chiefly
among them is the fact that of the 363 test complexes, only 144 are not already included in the train-
ing data if a protein is counted the same based on UniProtID. The split has 17k complexes from 2018
or earlier for training/validation, and the mentioned 363 test samples are from 2019. Additionally,
there is no ligand overlap with the training complexes based on SMILES identity. The data can be
downloaded from https://zenodo.org/record/6408497 as preprocessed by These files
were preprocessed by Stärk et al. [2022] with Open Babel before ”correcting” hydrogens and flip-
ping histidines with by running reduce https://github.com/rlabduke/reduce. For
benchmarking traditional docking software, this preprocessed data should not be employed since
the hydrogen bond lengths are incorrect. For our deep learning approaches that only consider heavy
atoms, this is not relevant.
Secondly, a sequence similarity, which Buttenschoen et al. [2023] found to be a more difficult split
than the time split for the blind docking scenario. To create this split, we cluster each chain of every
protein with 30% sequence similarity. The clusters for training, validation, and test are then chosen
such that each protein’s chains have at least 30% sequence similarity with any other chain in another
part of the split. This way, we obtain 17741 train, 688 validation, and 469 test complexes. After
filtering for complexes that have at least one contact (a protein residue with a heavy atom within
4Å), 17714 train complexes remain while no validation or test complexes are filtered out.


                                                                             26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Less than 30 ligands                                                             More than 15 Ligands
             14000
                                                                                             800
             12000

             10000                                                                           600
 Frequency


                                                                                 Frequency
              8000

              6000                                                                           400

              4000
                                                                                             200
              2000

                 0                                                                             0
                     0   5            10        15        20        25    30                        20   30          40      50    60        70   80    90     100
                                  Number of ligands per protein                                                    Number of ligands per protein

Figure 15: Number of Ligands per Protein: Binding MOAD. Histograms showing the number of
(multi-)ligands per protein in the Binding MOAD dataset under our ligand definition. Each ligand
here can be a multi-ligand. In that case, it is only counted once.


                              Less than 50 atoms, more than 0                                             Less than 100 atoms, more than 50
                                                                                           1600
             40000
                                                                                           1400
                                                                                           1200
             30000
                                                                                           1000
 Frequency


                                                                               Frequency


                                                                                             800
             20000
                                                                                             600
             10000                                                                           400
                                                                                             200
                 0                                                                             0
                     0       10            20        30        40        50                        50         60             70         80         90        100
                                      Ligand heavy atoms                                                                  Ligand heavy atoms

Figure 16: Number of atoms per ligand: Binding MOAD. Histograms showing the number of
heavy atoms for all ligands under our ligand definition. This includes many ions, which can be
important to filter out if not relevant to the desired application.


Dataset Statistics. In Figure 13, we show the number of atoms per ligand in two histograms, while
Figure 14 shows the number of contacts (a protein residue with a heavy atom within 4Å) per ligand.
These statistics are for the training data.

F.2            B INDING MOAD DATASET

Split. The sequence similarity split that we use for BindingMOAD is carried out equivalently as for
PDBBind described in Section F.1. This way, we obtain 56649 of Binding MOAD’s biounits for
training, 1136 for validation, and 1288 as the test set. We discarded some of the biounits and only
ended up with 54575 of them since 2.1k of them did not contain any other atoms besides protein
atoms and waters. From these, we only use the complexes denoted as the first biounit to reduce
redundancy and have only one biounit per PDB ID after which 38477 training complexes remain.
We further filter out all ligands that have only one contact (a protein residue with a heavy atom
within 4Å) with their protein to obtain 36203 train, 734 validation, and 756 test proteins with a
unique PDB ID for each of them.
Dataset Statistics. Here, we provide statistics for the Binding MOAD training data. In Figure 15,
we show the number of ligands per protein that is obtained under our definition of ligands and multi-
ligands. Each ligand in the depicted histogram can either be a multi-ligand or a single molecule.
Each multi-ligand is only counted once. In Figure 16, we show the number of atoms per ligand in
two histograms, while Figure 17 shows the number of contacts per ligand.



                                                                               27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Ligand size less than 50 atoms, more than 0                          Ligand size less than 100 atoms, more than 50
                                                                                   1400
             30000
                                                                                   1200
             25000
                                                                                   1000
             20000
 Frequency


                                                                       Frequency


                                                                                    800
             15000
                                                                                    600
             10000                                                                  400
              5000                                                                  200

                 0                                                                    0
                     0        10          20         30        40                         0     10      20     30     40     50      60       70
                                   Ligand number of contacts                                           Ligand number of contacts

Figure 17: Number of protein contacts per Ligand: Binding MOAD. Histograms showing the
number of contacts that each ligand has with its protein. A contact is defined as having a residue
with a heavy atom within 4A of any ligand-heavy atom.


                                                                       28
