Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


MAAD P RIVATE : M ULTI -ATTRIBUTE A DVERSARIAL
D EBIASING WITH D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT


         Balancing the trade-offs between algorithmic fairness, individual privacy, and
         model utility, is pivotal for the advancement of ethical artificial intelligence. In
         this work, we explore fair classification through the lens of differential privacy.
         We present an enhancement to the adversarial debiasing approach, enabling it
         to account for multiple sensitive attributes while upholding a privacy-conscious
         learning paradigm. Empirical results from two tabular datasets and a natural lan-
         guage dataset demonstrate our model’s ability to concurrently debias up to four
         sensitive attributes and meet various fairness criteria, within the constraints of dif-
         ferential privacy.


1   I NTRODUCTION


With the increasing application of ML in domains like healthcare and law enforcement, the pro-
cessing of sensitive data is becoming commonplace. In order to avoid exhibiting biases for specific
demographic groups Mehrabi et al. (2021) Pessach & Shmueli (2022), memorizing of sensitive data
Carlini et al. (2019), revealing of identity Hu et al. (2022); Shokri et al. (2017), or inferring per-
sonal attributes Ganju et al. (2018); Parisot et al. (2021), developing and evaluating ML models
requires not only attention to performance, but also to fairness and privacy. Ensuring fairness and
privacy in algorithms is intricate due to the varied intervention points of each. For fairness, Caton &
Haas (2020) distinguishes between pre-processing interventions, which aim to correct biases in data
before learning, in-processing interventions, which occur during learning, and post-processing inter-
ventions, which happen after learning. For differential privacy, similarly, data are protected by either
adding noise in the pre-processing phase, during learning itself, or through post-processing Dwork
(2008); Ji et al. (2014); Petti & Flaxman (2019); McSherry & Talwar (2007). To prevent one taking
precedence over the other (see below), fairness and privacy need to be considered concurrently. One
of the most promising ways doing of doing so, is by injecting differential privacy (DP) into existing
fairness algorithms Jagielski et al. (2019). One shortcoming of this approach is that it only considers
single sensitive attributes, despite real-world scenarios often involving multiple attributes. Another
limitation is that the classifier is trained without a differentially private optimizer, which can allow
inferring values for attributes which are irrelevant for fairness but that are sensitive from a privacy
perspective.
In our study, we employ an in-processing fairness method, using gradient-based learning algorithms
integrated with differential privacy Abadi et al. (2016). Gradient-driven models, which iteratively
adjust parameters based on computed gradients, become particularly cautious about revealing indi-
vidual data under differential privacy constraints. Integrating fairness and privacy during training
ensures simultaneous optimization for both, eliminating the potential tug-of-war that might occur
when trying to bolt on fairness or privacy considerations after or before the fact. In contrast, pre-
processing methods might distort data when paired with differential privacy, impacting fairness and
privacy. Meanwhile, post-processing methods only adjust outputs, leaving potential biases in the
core model, which differential privacy could further exacerbate.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   A DVERSARIAL DEBIASING

Adversarial debiasing Zhang et al. (2018) is an in-processing technique in machine learning. It aims
to mitigate the entrenchment of data biases leading to unfair classifications (see 4.3). Central to its
design is the application of gradient reversal, which involves modifying the gradients of a particular
sub-network during training. This encourages the model to learn domain-invariant features or to
mitigate bias. In other words, gradients originating from the adversarial component, which aims
to predict sensitive attributes, are systematically inverted during back-propagation. If the adversary
succeeds in its task, it indicates a biased classifier. However, by inverting these gradients, the classi-
fier’s reliance on both explicit sensitive attributes and their correlations with other features (like the
association between marital status and sex) is diminished, ensuring a more unbiased classification.
In doing so, this tactic disrupts the model’s propensity to lean on sensitive attributes, culminating in
more equitable predictions by strategically obfuscating biases.
Adversarial debiasing is a versatile framework suitable for multiple fairness definitions. By tailoring
the adversarial network’s inputs, one can target fairness metrics like demographic parity, equalized
odds, or equality of opportunity.

       • Demographic Parity: Achieved when predictions Ŷ and the protected attribute S are
         independent. For enforcement, the adversary should access only the predicted value Ŷ ,
         trying to infer S from it.

       • Equality of Odds: Satisfied when Ŷ and S are conditionally independent given Y . The
         adversary receives both the predicted label Ŷ and the actual label Y .

       • Equality of Opportunity: Met for a specific class y when Ŷ and Z are independent given
         Y = y. Here, the adversary’s data only includes instances where Y = y.

In the current work, we adopt Equality of Odds (Hardt et al., 2016) as a definition of fairness, which
conditionally assesses fairness based on ground truth and aims for error parity among sensitive
groups.

Figure 1: Enforcing equality of odds via Adversarial Debasing : X represents all non-sensitive
input features for the predictor network, S denotes all sensitive feature inputs, and y is the binary
target. Parameters of the predictor and adversary networks are denoted by W and U . The loss
function for the predictor and adversary are represented by LP (ŷ, y) and LA(ŝ, s) respectively
                     .


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2     D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY

Differential Privacy, introduced by Dwork (2006), sets a standard for measuring the disclosure of
individual data during computations. A computation in the context of differential privacy is de-
scribed as a mechanism M . This mechanism complies with (ϵ, δ)-differential privacy under specific
conditions. For any potential output and for any pair of neighboring datasets D and D′ differing by
a single entry, the mechanism’s likelihood to produce that output remains largely consistent. This
consistency is maintained irrespective of whether a particular individual’s data is included or ex-
cluded. Mechanism M satisfies ϵ differential privacy when the output probability for any two inputs
differing by a single data point and generating diverse outcomes, is constrained within a factor of
exp(ϵ).


                           P r[M (D) ∈ S] ≤ exp(ε) · P r[M (D′ ) ∈ S] + δ                               (1)

Differential privacy ensures outputs don’t reveal specific individual details, even with extra dataset
knowledge. The parameter ϵ denotes privacy level; lower values mean stronger protection. However,
strict adherence can reduce data utility, leading to ϵ-δ differential privacy. Here, a small constant,
δ, denotes the maximum breach probability for a set ϵ, indicating the risk of revealing individual
data. Typically, a δ less than 1/dataset size is sufficient Zhao et al. (2019). If δ is zero, it’s purely ϵ-
differential privacy. Both parameters determine privacy level and output noise. Differential privacy
allows combining different differentially private methods, maintaining its guarantees (composition-
ality) and remains unaffected even if the output of the mechanism undergoes further processing or
analysis that is not dependent on the original data (post-processing immunity) Dwork et al. (2014).
When training certain machine learning algorithms, differential privacy can be implemented by
adding noise to gradients each iteration, preventing over-fitting to individual data and preserving
privacy. Techniques, such as gradient clipping and noise insertion, are used to manage cumulative
noise and maintain the privacy budget. The Moments Accountant technique 1 , introduced by Abadi
et al. (2016), efficiently tracks privacy loss across iterations by evaluating the moments of the privacy
loss variable, offering precise privacy cost estimation.

2.3     D EBIASING MULTIPLE SENSITIVE ATTRIBUTES

Recent literature offers adaptations to traditional debiasing techniques for managing multiple sensi-
tive attributes. Notably, Kang et al. (2022) introduces an information-theoretic approach, InfoFair,
which enforces statistical parity for multiple attributes via a vectorized sensitive attribute. This ap-
proach first transforms multiple sensitive attributes into one multi-dimensional feature, subsequently
minimising both prediction error and sensitive attribute influence. The latter is achieved by limiting
the mutual information between learning outcomes and the vectorized attributes, via a component
in InfoFair’s loss function. While Kang et al. (2022) compared InfoFair to numerous multi-attribute
debiasing methods, their work primarily highlights two results. First, InfoFair consistently reduces
bias without significantly sacrificing base classification performance across various datasets. Sec-
ond, other methods like LFR, Adversarial Debiasing, and FCFC might completely eliminate bias but
do so with a significant performance cost, either labeling data uniformly or not surpassing InfoFair
in certain settings.

2.4     D IFFERENTIALLY PRIVATE VERSIONS OF FAIRNESS ALGORITHMS

Jagielski et al. (2019) adapted two fairness algorithms using differential privacy. The first method
is a post-processing fairness intervention based on Hardt et al. (2016). The approach begins with a
potentially unfair classifier, Yp . It refines fairness by blending Yp with classifiers trained on protected
attributes, with quantities q̂ŷay 2 acting as input to a linear program. To uphold differential privacy
regarding these attributes, Yp is first learned without considering protected attributes. Perturbation
techniques are then applied to the q̂ŷay values, ensuring differential privacy before inputting them
into the linear program.
   1
       Please see TensorFlow Privacy library, Source: https://github.com/tensorflow/privacy
   2
       This is the fraction of data points with Ŷ = ŷ, A = a, Y = y


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The second, inspired by Agarwal et al. (2018), offers a privacy-adapted take on the oracle-efficient
in-processing approach. This approach achieves optimal classification, sidestepping fairness con-
straints, often through basic learning heuristics. Central to this is a zero-sum game between a
“Learner”, who chooses classifiers, and an “Auditor” 3 overseeing fairness, a concept from Kearns
et al. (2018). Their equilibrium is reached by the Auditor using gradient descent and the Learner
employing cost-sensitive classification.

3       M ULTI -ATTRIBUTE A DVERSARIAL D EBIASING

The approach we present in this paper modifies the implementation of Zhang et al. (2018), while
building upon the work of Jagielski et al. (2019) in two important ways. First, while Jagielski et al.
(2019) approach focuses on debiasing a single attribute (race), MAAD-private allows for concurrent
debiasing of multiple sensitive features, mirroring real-world multi-bias data situations. Second,
Jagielski et al. (2019)’s choice to add noise to the Auditor’s gradient does not yet account for the
essential role of the Learner. Given that the Learner adapts to both sensitive and non-sensitive data,
noise introduction is pivotal to prevent potential privacy leaks from the Learner’s precise gradient
knowledge. Unlike the Auditor’s reactive stance, the Learner’s proactive function necessitates this
early privacy integration. In essence, while both entities are crucial, the Learner’s gradient noise is
vital for comprehensive privacy protection.
Furthermore, in addition to the multi-attribute debiasing presented by Kang et al. (2022), this work
integrates differential private training and compares performance with non-private scenarios. We
evaluate Adversarial debiasing within differential privacy, contrasting results against non-private
and biased benchmarks. Another divergence from Kang et al. (2022) is our adoption of Equality of
Odds Hardt et al. (2016) instead of Statistical Parity as a fairness metric. Equality of Odds captures
both false positive and false negative rates, which are pivotal for sectors like credit assessment or
recruitment, aligning with both legal and ethical norms. Finally, the current work expands earlier
evaluation, which was limited to the communities and crime dataset Frank (2010), to multiple new
datasets, including tabular and natural language domains.

4       M ETHODS

4.1     DATA

We use three datasets previously employed in the study of fair ML. Adult Kohavi (1996) and COM-
PAS Angwin et al. (2016) are traditional tabular datasets with race and sex as sensitive attributes.
Additionally, we use a dataset with unstructured text entries derived from the multilingual twit-
ter corpus collected by Huang et al. (2020) in the context of hate speech classification. For both
the Adult and COMPAS datasets, we used standard pre-processing approaches provided by Bel-
lamy et al. (2018). For the hate speech dataset, we tokenize the tweets and converted them into
uniform-length integer sequences using padding and truncation 4 . Following the approach of Deriu
et al. (2017); Bojanowski et al. (2017), these sequences were then transformed using the pre-trained
word embeddings, specifically Google News Word2Vec embeddings Church (2017). This results
in a dense representation for each tweet during training. For fairness evaluations, we use the de-
mographic annotations provided by Huang et al. (2020), being age, gender, ethnicity, and country.
These annotations were used to assess potential fairness violations after training the model.

4.2     M ODELS

In all tabular datasets, the predictor network consists of a standard feed-forward Multi-Layer Percep-
tron (MLP) architecture with two hidden layers of 256 neurons and an output layer with a sigmoid
activation function. This configuration allows for effective feature extraction and classification in the
tabular domain. For the hate speech dataset, we use a transformer architecture to capture contextual
    3
     Our work uses the terms “Predictor” and “Adversary” in lieu of “Learner” and “Auditor”, following the
convention termed by Zhang et al. (2018)
   4
     We use pre-processing functions provided by TensorFlow’s Keras library for this, Source: https://
github.com/keras-team/keras


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


relationships within the text Vaswani et al. (2017). Our transformer architecture has four attention
heads. Each feed-forward dimension within the transformer consists of 64 neurons, and the output
layer uses a sigmoid activation, similar to the MLP architecture, given the binary classification task.

4.3   T RAINING REGIMEN

The architecture relies on two modules, the “predictor” and the“adversary”. The predictor model
estimates the target Y from features X, refining its weights W via gradient descent to minimize the
loss LP (ŷ, y). This predictor’s output acts as the input for the adversary module, designed to predict
sensitive attributes S. This setup mirrors the discriminator in generative adversarial architectures
Goodfellow et al. (2014). The adversary has its loss function LA(Ŝ, S) and weight set, U . Note,
Ŷ here refers to the network’s output layer, not the discrete prediction—like the sigmoid layer’s
outcome in classification tasks. The psuedocode for training it is provided below.

Algorithm 1 MAAD-DP
Require: Training data Dtrain = {(xi , yi , zi )}N i=1
Require: Learning rates αc , αa
Require: Adversary loss weight γ
Require: Noise multiplier and gradient norm bound
 1: Initialize predictor P and adversary A, with weights W and U , respectively
 2: for each epoch do
 3:     for each batch in Dtrain do
 4:          P y ← P (x)
 5:          Compute loss Lp using ŷ and y
 6:          Predict sensitive attributes ẑ using ŷ and y
 7:          Compute loss La using ẑ and z
 8:          Compute gradients of La w.r.t W
 9:          Compute gradients of Lp w.r.t W
10:          for each P grad do
11:              Subtract projection onto normalized A gradients
12:              Subtract γ × A gradients
13:          end for
14:          Clip P gradients by gradient norm bound
15:          Add Gaussian noise scaled by multiplier to P gradients
16:          Update W using noised clipped gradients
17:          Compute gradient of La w.r.t U
18:          Update U using these gradients
19:     end for
20: end for
Ensure: Predictor P

Thus during training, the adversary adjusts weights U to minimize the LA loss using the gradient
∇U LA. Concurrently, the predictor’s weights W are updated as:


                             ∇W LP − proj∇W LA∇W LP − γ∇W LA                                        (2)

To understand equation 2, each term can be broken down as the following:

       • ∇W LP : represents the gradient of the loss with respect to the model parameters W for the
         primary task (e.g., the prediction task). This gradient provides the direction in which we
         need to adjust the model’s weights to minimize the prediction loss.
       • ∇W LA: represents the gradient of the loss with respect to the model parameters W for
         the adversarial task. The adversarial task aims to predict a set of sensitive attributes (e.g.,
         gender and race) from the model’s predictions, and we would like the model to perform
         poorly on this task to ensure it is not using the sensitive attribute to make its primary
         predictions.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • proj: This operation projects the gradient of the primary task onto the gradient of the
         adversarial task. This helps in ensuring that the update to the model’s weights doesn’t
         improve its performance on the adversarial task.
       • γ: This is a hyper-parameter that controls the trade-off between the primary task and the
         adversarial task. A larger value of γ puts more emphasis on the adversarial task, thereby
         pushing the model to be more debiased.

In summary, the update rule adjusts the model’s weights to optimize its main function while min-
imizing dependence on sensitive attributes, using the gradient from the adversarial task. Although
Zhang et al. (2018) focused on a single attribute, our method adapts the adversary to predict multiple
attributes simultaneously. Each binary attribute gets its own sigmoid output, and the adversary’s loss
is averaged over all these predictions. This average loss influences the gradient reversal, aiming for
a representation devoid of sensitive information.

4.4   E XPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS

Experiments were conducted under four distinct training setups: a basic classification model without
modifications; a second model with differential privacy optimization; a third model using adversarial
gradient reversal for debiasing without differential privacy; and a fourth combining both differential
privacy and adversarial debiasing. Each setup was evaluated 10 times on different dataset splits,
with means and standard deviations presented in tables 2, 3, and 4.
In adversarial setups, a specific weight (γ) (see algorithm 1), is assigned to the adversary, balancing
model accuracy with bias reduction. For private learning scenarios, a privacy budget (ε) per dataset
was chosen with a cap below 15.

                               Table 1: Privacy parameters per dataset

                     Dataset        (ε − δ)       Noise       Batch    Adversary
                                                 Multiple      Size     Weight
                      Adult        (4 , 10−6 )     0.5          16        0.2
                    COMPAS        (7.7, 10−6 )     0.5           4        0.5
                   hate Speech    (13, 10−6 )      0.5          64        0.1

Although this is an arbitrary cap, our choice was informed by considering reports that companies
such as Apple use much larger privacy budgets in practice Tang et al. (2017). In the present work,
we only considered one privacy budget per dataset. The privacy budgets applied for each dataset are
determined by adjusting mini-batch sizes and noise multipliers.

4.5   E VALUATION METRICS

Performance Assessment: To address class imbalances in the datasets, we evaluate our models
using both micro (F1-w) and macro F1 scores (F1-m), following the performance evaluation of
Kang et al. (2022).
Fairness Assessment: Equality of odds is often used in the context of fairness-aware machine learn-
ing and algorithmic fairness Dwork et al. (2012); Hardt et al. (2016); Zafar et al. (2017). By eval-
uating and enforcing Equality of Odds, we can assess whether a model is treating different groups
fairly. Significant differences between TPR and FPR across groups indicate that the model may be
unfairly favoring or penalizing certain groups. The Equality of Odds metric ensures consistent True
Positive Rates (TPR) and False Positive Rates (FPR). Assuming two groups, as A and B, Equality
of Odds can be enforced as follows:


            ∆T P R = |T P RA − T P RB |,                 ∆F P R = |F P RA − F P RB |.

                                         p
                                 EoO =       (∆T P R)2 + (∆F P R)2                                 (3)


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5    R ESULTS

All evaluation metrics are computed using test sets, which constitute 20% of the entire datasets. For
each training session, these test instances are randomly selected anew. Our results show that while
standalone DP models generally performed worse, adversarial debiasing performed robustly, often
challenging or exceeding baseline results.

                           Table 2: Evaluation metrics on Adult Dataset

    Method         Micro F1 Score      Macro F1 Score      Attribute    Equal Odds Difference
    Baseline        0.80 (± 0.002 )     0.68 (± 0.005)     Race              -0.10 (± 0.02 )
                                                           Sex               -0.28 (± 0.01 )
    DP              0.74 (± 0.03 )      0.65 (± 0.03 )     Race              -0.10 (± 0.10 )
                                                           Sex               -0.19 (± 0.15)
    Debias          0.79 (± 0.01 )      0.66 (± 0.02 )     Race               -0.02 (± 0.07)
                                                           Sex               -0.008 (± 0.17 )
    DP + Debias     0.79 (± 0.004 )     0.67 (± 0.03 )     Race              -0.04 (± 0.05 )
                                                           Sex               -0.09 (± 0.05 )


                         Table 3: Evaluation metrics on COMPAS Dataset

    Method         Micro F1 Score      Macro F1 Score      Attribute    Equal Odds Difference
    Baseline        0.66 (± 0.01 )      0.65 (± 0.02 )     Race              -0.12 (± 0.04 )
                                                           Sex               -0.11 (± 0.05 )
    DP              0.62 (± 0.02 )      0.58 (± 0.05 )     Race              -0.09 (± 0.12 )
                                                           Sex               -0.13 (± 0.08 )
    Debias          0.65 (± 0.01 )      0.65 (± 0.01 )     Race               -0.06 (± 0.1 )
                                                           Sex               -0.03 (± 0.08 )
    DP + Debias     0.64 (± 0.01 )      0.63 (± 0.02 )     Race              -0.08 (± 0.06 )
                                                           Sex               -0.04 (± 0.06 )


                        Table 4: Evaluation metrics on Hate Speech Dataset

    Method         Micro F1 Score      Macro F1 Score      Attribute    Equal Odds Difference
    Baseline        0.78 (± 0.01 )      0.75 (± 0.01 )     Gender            -0.01 (± 0.01 )
                                                           Ethnicity         0.08 (± 0.01 )
                                                           Age               -0.08 (± 0.01 )
                                                           Country           -0.04 (± 0.01 )
    DP              0.76 (± 0.007 )     0.68 (± 0.02 )     Gender            0.02 (± 0.01 )
                                                           Ethnicity         0.07 (± 0.01 )
                                                           Age               -0.14 (± 0.01 )
                                                           Country           0.04 (± 0.01 )
    Debias          0.82 (± 0.005 )     0.79 (± 0.003 )    Gender            0.006 (± 0.008 )
                                                           Ethnicity          0.06 (± 0.005 )
                                                           Age                -0.08 (± 0.01 )
                                                           Country            0.04 (± 0.008 )
    DP + Debias     0.70 (± 0.02 )      0.51 (± 0.05 )     Gender            0.003 (± 0.006 )
                                                           Ethnicity         -0.036 (± 0.01 )
                                                           Age               -0.040 (± 0.03 )
                                                           Country            0.01 (± 0.006 )


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A possible explanation for the better performance of adversarial debiasing is that the technique em-
phasizes gradient propagation that resists favoring adversaries. With multiple sensitive attributes, the
adversarial process’s complexity heightens, affecting gradient dynamics and necessitating nuanced
tuning of hyper-parameters like α to avoid unintended biases.
In situations involving both multiple attributes and DP, performance generally takes a large hit.
Noise introduced via differentially private optimization can disrupt adversarial debiasing’s balance.
This noise can confuse the adversary in discerning genuine data patterns and biases, demanding
gradient re-calibration for optimal fairness. Results for the hate speech dataset show that handling
multiple sensitive attributes coupled with differential privacy introduces considerable complexity,
which leads to large differences in performance. The Debias-only model performed best here.

6     C ONCLUSION
Our study across four datasets shows that adversarial debiasing can remove multi-attribute bias,
evident in both private and non-private contexts. This presents a tangible solution to the prominent
challenge of ensuring fairness and privacy in machine learning implementations. This research
shows the potential of concurrently using differential privacy and adversarial training in promoting
privacy and fairness within machine learning models, but also that there are limits to upholding
model performance under strict privacy conditions.

In summary, the approach provides the following advantages: reasons:

       • End-to-End Framework: Adversarial debiasing offers an integrated solution, eliminating
         the need for multiple stages of interventions, which can complicate fairness and privacy
         integration.
       • Modularity of Differential Privacy: Differential privacy is seamlessly integrated during
         training via a differentially private optimizer. This ensures both unbiased learning and
         individual data protection.
       • Handles Multiple Sensitive Attributes: The method can debias several attributes at once,
         addressing intersectional biases like race, gender, and age, making it ideal for real-world
         applications.
       • Allows Multiple Fairness Definitions: The adversary module is adaptable to various fair-
         ness metrics, such as demographic parity or equal opportunity. It’s versatile for both con-
         tinuous and discrete outputs or protected variables.
       • Model-Agnostic: Suitable for diverse data types like text or images, adversarial debiasing’s
         model-agnostic approach only requires prior knowledge of the bias variable for effective
         debiasing.

6.1   N OTES FOR FURTHER RESEARCH

Future research in adversarial debiasing and machine learning fairness should address several key
areas. First, it is essential to get a better understanding of the complex effects of debiasing multiple
attributes on performance. Second, generalizability of the approach should be tested by involving
larger and more diverse datasets. Third, a shift from analyses confined to single privacy budgets
towards a broader evaluation across varied privacy scenarios can discern performance patterns and
trade-offs between privacy and efficiency. Fourth, comparing adversarial debiasing with other fair-
ness methodologies can highlight unique strengths and potential drawbacks. Fifth, the sensitivity of
adversarial debiasing methods to hyper-parameters deserves attention, both to gauge stability and
to establish best practices. Finally, the potential of pre-training both the predictor and adversary
networks, is worth exploring further, given its positive implications in certain learning contexts ??.

6.2   R EPRODUCIBILITY

In efforts to facilitate reproducibility of our work, we provide our code as supplementary material to
this work. The code includes all data processing steps taken for each dataset, and ensures network
parameters are initialized with the same seed for random number generation.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308–318, 2016.
Alekh Agarwal, Alina Beygelzimer, Miroslav Dudı́k, John Langford, and Hanna Wallach. A reduc-
  tions approach to fair classification. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 60–69.
  PMLR, 2018.
Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. Machine bias. 2016.
Rachel K. E. Bellamy, Kuntal Dey, Michael Hind, Samuel C. Hoffman, Stephanie Houde, Kalapriya
  Kannan, Pranay Lohia, Jacquelyn Martino, Sameep Mehta, Aleksandra Mojsilovic, Seema Nagar,
  Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, John Richards, Diptikalyan Saha, Prasanna Sattigeri, Monin-
  der Singh, Kush R. Varshney, and Yunfeng Zhang. AI Fairness 360: An extensible toolkit
  for detecting, understanding, and mitigating unwanted algorithmic bias, October 2018. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.01943.
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. Enriching word vectors with
  subword information. Transactions of the association for computational linguistics, 5:135–146,
  2017.
Nicholas Carlini, Chang Liu, Úlfar Erlingsson, Jernej Kos, and Dawn Song. The secret sharer:
  Evaluating and testing unintended memorization in neural networks. In 28th USENIX Security
  Symposium (USENIX Security 19), pp. 267–284, 2019.
Simon Caton and Christian Haas. Fairness in machine learning: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys,
  2020.
Kenneth Ward Church. Word2vec. Natural Language Engineering, 23(1):155–162, 2017.
Jan Deriu, Aurelien Lucchi, Valeria De Luca, Aliaksei Severyn, Simon Müller, Mark Cieliebak,
  Thomas Hofmann, and Martin Jaggi. Leveraging large amounts of weakly supervised data for
  multi-language sentiment classification. In Proceedings of the 26th international conference on
  world wide web, pp. 1045–1052, 2017.
Cynthia Dwork. Differential privacy. In International colloquium on automata, languages, and
  programming, pp. 1–12. Springer, 2006.
Cynthia Dwork. Differential privacy: A survey of results. In International conference on theory and
  applications of models of computation, pp. 1–19. Springer, 2008.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science confer-
  ence, pp. 214–226, 2012.
Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations
  and Trends® in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.
Andrew Frank. Uci machine learning repository. http://archive. ics. uci. edu/ml, 2010.
Karan Ganju, Qi Wang, Wei Yang, Carl A Gunter, and Nikita Borisov. Property inference attacks
  on fully connected neural networks using permutation invariant representations. In Proceedings
  of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security, pp. 619–633,
  2018.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hongsheng Hu, Zoran Salcic, Lichao Sun, Gillian Dobbie, Philip S Yu, and Xuyun Zhang. Mem-
  bership inference attacks on machine learning: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54
  (11s):1–37, 2022.
Xiaolei Huang, Linzi Xing, Franck Dernoncourt, and Michael J Paul. Multilingual twitter cor-
  pus and baselines for evaluating demographic bias in hate speech recognition. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.10361, 2020.
Matthew Jagielski, Michael Kearns, Jieming Mao, Alina Oprea, Aaron Roth, Saeed Sharifi-
 Malvajerdi, and Jonathan Ullman. Differentially private fair learning. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, pp. 3000–3008. PMLR, 2019.
Zhanglong Ji, Zachary C Lipton, and Charles Elkan. Differential privacy and machine learning: a
  survey and review. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.7584, 2014.
Jian Kang, Tiankai Xie, Xintao Wu, Ross Maciejewski, and Hanghang Tong. Infofair: Information-
   theoretic intersectional fairness. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data),
   pp. 1455–1464. IEEE, 2022.
Michael Kearns, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Preventing fairness gerryman-
 dering: Auditing and learning for subgroup fairness. In International conference on machine
 learning, pp. 2564–2572. PMLR, 2018.
Ron Kohavi. Scaling up the accuracy of naive-bayes classifiers: a. In Proceedings of the Second
  International Conference on, 1996.
Frank McSherry and Kunal Talwar. Mechanism design via differential privacy. In 48th Annual IEEE
  Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’07), pp. 94–103. IEEE, 2007.
Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey
  on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–35, 2021.
Mathias PM Parisot, Balazs Pejo, and Dayana Spagnuelo. Property inference attacks on convolu-
 tional neural networks: Influence and implications of target model’s complexity. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2104.13061, 2021.
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli. A review on fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys
  (CSUR), 55(3):1–44, 2022.
Samantha Petti and Abraham Flaxman. Differential privacy in the 2020 us census: what will it do?
  quantifying the accuracy/privacy tradeoff. Gates open research, 3, 2019.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference at-
  tacks against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP),
  pp. 3–18. IEEE, 2017.
Jun Tang, Aleksandra Korolova, Xiaolong Bai, Xueqiang Wang, and Xiaofeng Wang. Privacy loss in
  apple’s implementation of differential privacy on macos 10.12. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.02753,
  2017.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rogriguez, and Krishna P Gummadi. Fair-
 ness constraints: Mechanisms for fair classification. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp.
 962–970. PMLR, 2017.
Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret Mitchell. Mitigating unwanted biases with adver-
  sarial learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp.
  335–340, 2018.
Jingwen Zhao, Yunfang Chen, and Wei Zhang. Differential privacy preservation in deep learning:
   Challenges, opportunities and solutions. IEEE Access, 7:48901–48911, 2019.

                                                 10
